D1719 W41420 [ocm]61296959 180526
DIVINE CONSOLATIONS FOR MOURNERS in SION: Being an EXTRACT of certain Choyce EPISTLES OF DYING MARTYRS To each other, and to their Fellow Prisoners for the CAUSE OF CHRIST, In the Times of Cruell and Fiery Persecution. Wherein is much Variety of suitable matter of Meditation for all such who are burthened under the Pressure of their Sins and Sorrows in these EVIL TIMES. Matth. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Psal. 126.5. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. Ver. 6. He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoycing, bringing his sheaves with him. Printed in the Year 1664.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. Good Reader, AMong all the sweet and precious fruits and graces of the Spirit of God held forth unto us in the Holy Scriptures, how much are those of Faith and Love commended unto us, as the principal and leading Graces unto all other the sweet fruits of the Spirit wrought in the hearts of the Elect of God? To instance two or three places speaking to this purpose: The Au∣thor to the Hebrews, in his Catalogue of Saints,Hebr. 11. how highly doth he advance the actings of Faith in their hearts and lives, beginning with Abel, that blessed Servant of the Lord, and Proto-Martyr of the World, whom our blessed Lord and Saviour honoureth with the same honour, placing his Name in the Front of that blessed Company (by the Name of Righteous Abel) who had laid down their lives in the Cause,Matth. 23.35. and for the Truths of God? And for the grace of Love, in that of 1 Cor. 8. the beginning; whatever Instructions the Apostle had given them before, he doth as it were recall himself, and let them un∣derstand, that all would prove as nothing, unless it proceed from Love or Charity. And further we are taught, that although the grace of Faith be first in laying hold of the blessed object, even our Lord Jesus, who came into the World to save sinners, yet this also of Love is by the gracious working of the same good Spirit of God begotten in the Soul, even at the same instant of time with that of Faith, and from
their first appearing come forth as blessed Twins never to part again, the same blessed Spirit carrying on the work of Grace in the Soul, untill perfected in Glory. To this purpose Gal. 5.6. it's said to be Faith which worketh by Love. Also to mention no more, 1 Tim. 1.14. The grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant, with Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus. A Reverend Messenger of Christ lately compared them to the two Arms that clasped Christ about, ac∣cording to that of the Spouse, Cant. 3.5. It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my Soul loveth; I held him, and would not let him go. Never do these precious gifts of the Holy Ghost so affect the hearts of the people of God, as when the Saints are drawn forth to cause this Light to shine forth in their lives and act∣ings, which usually appears in them most clearly in times of greatest Sufferings. How much are we of these times bound unto our gracious God, for the innumerable helps the Lord hath this way granted us, especially from the unwearied Labours of that man of God, of blessed memory, Mr. Iohn Fox, out of whose rich Volumes this little Trea∣tise following is taken, being a particular brief story of him whose Soul as much longed for the Crown of Martyrdome, (although he passed through the Fire to it) as any we reade of from the time of the Primi∣tive Martyrs. And notwithstanding the Lord of his Infinite wise∣dome, denyed him that which he so much thirsted for, reserving him (al∣though in Prison) yet to be an Instrument who from his great experi∣ences might Administer sweet Consolations unto others (the sweet Saints and Martyrs of Jesus) as indeed he did, to the refreshing of many a good Soul, as by the several excellently Spiritual Epistles of his doth manifestly appear; and by which it may undoubtedly be gathered, that himself was to be accounted among the blessed number of those that in his Generation loved the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity. To those who have tasted how good the Lord is, these following Epistles may through mercy prove unto them as that speaking of David did to Ionathan,1 Sam. 18.1. who no sooner heard him, but his Soul was knit with the Soul of David, and he loved him as his own Soul. To this very end is this smal thing drawn out of the aforesaid Volume, that the sorrowful Souls of such as are affected with Gods threatnings in this hour of dark∣ness and temptation, may finde some refreshing and support; to which
very end also they were first written by the Auhor. God is greatly threatning on every side, even us who have sate in peace whilest our Brethen lay bleeding; yea, were filled with plen y, wlest they were stripped of their comforts, and even brought near to desolation: surely we hav n t improved our precious opportunities, but with Iesurun, being waxed fat, have lifted up the heel; and now may justly fear, that our day of visitation is hastening, wherein we are like to drink of the Cup of Gods displeasure, of which the Nations have begun before us. Is not the Lrd now crying aloud, as sometimes to Jerusalem, Oh New-England! Oh Boston! When will thou be made clean? when will it once be? when shall thy Pride and Propha∣ness, Licentiousness, Ʋncleanness and Ʋnrighteousness, with so much cleaving to Self-interest cease to lodge within thee? Blessed be the Lord, who hath affected the hearts of thy Rulers, so as to call for seeking God by Fasting and Prayer, being the way and meanes of Gods appointment for the obtaining mercy in the day of thy distress. The Lord hear thee in the day of thy seeking,Joel 2.13, 14. and teach thee to Rent thy heart and not thy garments, and turn unto the Lord, who knoweth if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him. Oh that God would give his People an heart to hearken to his voice, and to turn unto him by unfeigned Repentance, for surely they that yet see it not, are like shortly to see,Amos 5.13.14, 15. that this time is a time for the Pru∣dent to keep silence, for it is an evil time, as the Prophet saith; therefore let us seek good and not evil, and so the Lord God of Hosts shall be with us: Let us hate evil and love good, and establish Judgement in the Gate, it may be that the Lord God of Hosts will be gracious to the remnant of Joseph.
A Table of the several Epistles and Letters contained in this Book. THe effect of John Careles his Examination before Dr. Martin, Folio 1 A Letter of Mr. Philpot to John Careles, profitable o be read of all them which mourn in Repentance for their sins, 6 A Letter of John Careles, Answering to the loving Epistle or Letter sent to him before by Mr. Philpot, 10 Mr. Bradfords Letter to Careles, 14 Careles his Letter to Mr. Bradford, 15 His Letter to his Wife, 18 His Letter to several faithful Brethren in Newgate, Condemned for the Testi∣mony of Gods Everlasting Truth, 21 His Letter to Mr. Green, Mr. Whittel, and certain other Prisoners in Newgate, Condemned and ready to be burnt for the Testimony of the Lord Jesus, 26 His Letter to W. Tyms Prisoner in Newgate, 29 His Letter to his dear Sister Mrs. Cotton, 33 His Letter to his dear Brother T. V. 34 His Letter to his dear and faithful Brother Augustine Bernher, 38 His Letter to his dear Brother Henry Aalington, Prisoner in the Lollard Tower, 42 His Letter to his dear and faithful Brother T V. 47 His Letter of Thanks to a faithful Friend of his, by whom he had received much Comfort in his inward Troubles, 51 His Letter to a certain godly faithful Sister, by the Name of E. K. 52 His Letter to Mrs Agnes Glascock, 55 His brief Admonition to Mrs Agnes Glascock, written in a book of hers when she came to the Prison to visit him, 57 His Letter to Mrs. A. G. to comfort her in her Repentance after she had been at Mass; fruitful for all them to reade, which are faln, and are to be raised up again, 58 His Letter to A. B. a frithful Minister of the Lord, containing certain fruitful Precepts of Matrimony, 61 His Letter to Elizabeth, Wife of the said A. B. containing likewise certain godly Precepts of Matrimony pertaining to her duty, 64 A Letter of Mr John Bradfords, which he wrote to a faithful Woman in her heaviness and trouble: most comfortable for all those to read that are afflicted and broken hearted for their sins, 68 A worthy Answer of a constant Martyr called Guy de Brez, Anno Dom. 1566. 75 The same Martyr in a Letter to his Wife, acquaints her with Gods Gracious dealing with him in all his Assaults, Ibid.
THE EFFECT OF JOHN CARELES EXAMINATION before Doctor Martin briefly declared. FIrst,The Effect of John Careles ex∣amination. Doctor Martin calling John Careles to him in his Chamber, demanded what was his Name. To whom when the other had answered, that his name was John Careles, then began Doct. Martin to descant at his pleasure upon that name, saying, That it would appear by his conditions by that time he had done with him, that he would be a true Careless man indeed. And so after other by-talk there spent about much needless matter, then he asked him where he was born? Careles. Forsooth, saith he, at Coventry. Martin. At Coventry? what so far man? How cam'st thou hither? who sent thee to the Kings Bench to Prison? Careles. I was brought thither by a Writ, I trow;How John Care∣les was brouht to the Kings Bench what he was I cannot tell. I think Mr. Marshall can tell you. Marsh. In good faith I cannot tell what the matter is: but in∣deed my Lord Chief Justice sent him from the Barr. Mart. Well Careles, I would wish thou should'st play the wise mans part. Thou art an handsom man; and it is pitty but that thou shouldst do well, and save that which God hath bought. Careles. I thank your good Mastership most heartily: And I put you out of doubt that I am most sure and certain of my salvation by Jesus Christ; so that my soul is safe already, whatsoever pains my body suffer here for a little time. Mart. Yea Marry, you say truth: for thou art so Predestinate to life, that thou canst not perish, in whatsoever Opinion thou doest dye. Careles. That GOD hath Predestinate me to Eternal life in Jesus Christ, I am most certain;John Careles examined upon Predestination. and even so am I sure that his Holy Spirit (wherewith I am sealed will so preserve me from all Heresies and evill Opinions, that I shall dy in none at all.
Mart. Go to, let me hear your Faith in Predestination: for that shall be written also. Carel. Your Mastership shall pardon me herein. For you said your self ere-while, that you had no Commission to examine my Conscience. I will trouble my self with answering no moe matters then I needs must, untill I come before them that shall have more authority further to examine me. Mart. Dr. Martin de∣clareth his Com∣mission.I tell thee then I have Commission; yea, and Commandement from the Council to examine thee: for they delivered me thy Articles. Carel. Yea, I think indeed that your Mastership is appointed to examine me of my Articles which you have there in writing, and I have told you the truth. I do confess them to be mine own fact & deed: but you do now examine me of Predestination, whereof my Articles speaketh nothing at all. Mart. I tell thee yet again, hat I must also examine thee of such things as be in controversie between thee and thy fellows in the Kings Bench, whereof Predestination is a part, as thy fellow N. hath confessed, and thy self dost not deny it. Carel. I do not deny it. But he that first told you that matter, might have found himself much better occupied. Mart. Why Dr. Martin would not exa∣mine him of the Sacrament.Why? what if he had not told me? thinkest thou I would not have known it? yes, or else thou shouldst have withstood my Com∣mission. For I tell thee truth, I may now examine thee of the blessed Sacrament, or any other thing that I list, but that I would shew thee favour, and not be too hasty with thee at the first. Marsh. Yea indeed Careles, Master Doctor hath Commission to examine you, or any other of your fellow Mart. Yea marry have I, I tell the truth of it. Careles. Then let your Scribe set his pen to the paper, and you shall have it roundly even as the truth is. I believe that Almighty GOD, our most dear loving Father, of his great mercy and good∣ness did Elect in Christ. Mart. Tush, What need all that long circumstance? write, I believe that God Elected; and make no more ado. Careles. No not so Mr. Doctor: it is an high Mystery, and ought reverently to be spoken of. And if my words may not be
written as I do utter them, I will not speak at all. Mart. Go to, go to, wrie what he will,  is more busines then needeth. Careles. I believe that Almghty God our most dear loving Father,Careles Opinio of Gods Ele∣ction. of his great mercy and infinite goodness (through Iesus Christ) did elect and appoint in him before the foundation of the Earth was laid, a Church or Congregation, which he doth con∣tinually guide and govern by his Grace and holy Spirit, so that not one of them shall ever finally perish. When this was written, Mr. Doctor took it in his hand and read it, saying, Mart. Why? who will deny this?D. Martin avow∣et Careles judg∣ment of Gods Election. Careles. If your Mastership do allow it, and other learned men when they shall see it, I have my hearts desire. Mart. And do you hold none otherwise then is there written? Careles. No verily, nor never did. Mart. Write that he saith otherwise he holdeth not. So that was written. It was told me also that thou dost affirm that Christ did not dye effectually for all men. Careles. Whatsoever hath been told you, it is not much material unto me. Let the tellers of such tales come before my fce, and I trust to make them answer. For indeed I do blieve that Christ did effectually dye for all those that do effectually repent and believe, and for none other. So that was written also. Mart. Now sir what is Trewes faith of Predestination? he be∣lieveth that all men be Predestinate, and that none shall be Damned: doth he not? Careles. No forsooth, that he doth not. Mart. How then? Careles Truely I think he doth believe as your Mastership and the rest of the Clergy do believe of Predestination,A wrong faith of Predestination, believing to be elected in re∣spect of Good works. that we be Elected in respect of our good works, and so long elected as we do them and no longer. Mart. Write that he saith, his fellow Trew believeth of Predesti∣nation as the Papists do believe. Careles. Ah Mr. Doctor, did I so term you? seeing that this my Confession shall come before the Council, I pray you place my terms as reverently as I spake them.
Mart. Well, well. Write that Trew is of the same Faith as the Catholicks be. Careles. I did not so call you neither,  wonder what you mean. Marsh. You said th Clergy, d  Careles? Careles Yes forsooth did I So then it was written of the Clergy. Mart. Now Sir What say you more? Careles. Forsooth I have no further to say in this matter. Mart. Dr. Martin pre∣tendeth favour to Careles.Well, Careles, I pray thee prove thy self a wise man, and do not cast away thy self wilfully. Careles. Now the Lord he knoweth, good Mr. Doctor, I would full gladly live, so that I might do the same with a safe Conscience. And your Mastership shall right well perceive that I will be no wilful man, but in all things that I stand upon, I shall have a sure ground. Mart. Now the Lord knoweth, good Careles, that I would gladly make some means to preserve thy life; but thou speakest so much of the Lord, the Lord: wilt thou be content to go with my Lord Fitzwater into Ireland? methinks thou art a goodly tall fellow to do the Queen service there. How sayest thou? Careles. Verily Mr. Doctor, whether I be in Ireland, France, or Spain, or any place else, I am ready to do her Grace the best service I can, with Body, Goods and Life, so long as it doth last. Mart. That is honestly said. I promise thee every man will not say so. How say you Mr. Marshall, this man is meet for all manner of Service. Indeed thou art worthy Careles to have the more favour. Careles. Indeed Sir I hope to be meet and ready unto all things that pertaineth unto a true Christian Subject to do. And if her Grace, or her Officers under her, do require me to any thing con∣trary unto Christs Religion, I am ready also to do my service in Smithfield for not observing it, as my bedfellow and other Brethren have done: praised be God for them. Mart. By my troth thou art a pleasant fellow as ever I talked with of all the Protestants, except it were Tomson. I am sorry that I must depart with thee so soon: but I have such business now, that I can tarry with thee no longer. Well, yet thou canst not deny, but you are at
jarre amongst your selves in the Kings Bnh, and it is so throughout all your Congregation, for you will not be a Church. Careles. No Mr. Doctor that is no so.More variety in ye Popes Church then is amongst the Protestants. There is a thousand times more variety in Opinions among your Doctors, which you call of the Catholick Chu ch, ea and that in the Sacrament, for the which there is so much bloodshed now adayes: I mean of your latter Doctors, and new Writers; as for the old, they agree wholly with us. Mart. No Careles, tht is not so: there thou art deceived. Careles. Verily it is so, Mr. Doctor. I am not deceived therein any thing at all, as it hath been, and is evidently proved by such as God ath indued with great Learning. Then he turned to the Marshal and whispered with him a while. Mart. Turning unto me again, said, Farewel Careles,Dr. Martin ta∣keth his leave gently of Careles. for I can tarry no longer with thee now my businss is suck. Careles. God be with you good Mr. Doctor. The Lord give your Mastership health of Body and Soul. Martin. God have mercy, good Careles; and God keep thee from all Errours, and give thee grace to do as well as I would wsh my self. Careles. I thank your good Mastership. I pray God I may do always that is acceptable in his sight. Whereunto they all said Amen. And so I departed with a glad heart: God onely have the whole praise. Amen. It appeareth by Examination of the foresaid John Careles, that he endured Prisoner the space of two whole years having wife and Children. In the which his captivity first being in Coventry Goal, he was there in such credit with his Keeper, that upon his word he was let out to play in the Pageant about the City with other his Companions. And that done, keeping touch with his Keeper, he returned again into Prison at his hour appointed. And after that being brought up to London, he was endued with such patience and constant fortitude,John Careles dv∣ed in Prison and ws buried in the fields. that he longed for nothing more earnestly, thn to come to that promotion to dye in the fire for the profession of his Faith: and yet it so pleased the Lord to prevent him with death, that he came not to it, but dyed in the
Prison, and after was buried in the fields in a dunghill. In the mean time while he was in Prison in the Kings Bench, it chanced he was in great heaviness, and perturbation of minde and Conscience: whereupon he wrote to M. Philpot being then in the Colehouse. Upon occasion hereof, M. Philpot sent an Epistle Consolatory unto him, as followeth. A Letter of Mr. Philpot to John Careles, profitable to be read of all them which mourn in Repentance for their Sins. THe God of all comfort, and the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, send unto thee my dear Brother Careles, the inward consolation of his holy Spirit, in all the malicious assaults and troublous temptations of our common Adversary the Devil. Amen. That GOD giveth you so contrite an heart for your sins, I can∣not but rejoyce to behold the lively mark of the children of God, whose property is to think ore lowly and vilely of themselves then of any other, and oftentimes do set their sins before them, that they might the more be stirred to bring forth the fruits of Repentance, and learn to mourn in this world, that in another they might be glad and rejoyce. Such a broken Heart is a pleasant Sacrifice unto God: Oh that I had the like contrite heart. God mollifie my stony heart, which lamenteth not in such wise my former detestable iniquities. Praised be God that he hath given you this sorrowfull heart in respect of Righteousness; and I pray you let me be partaker of these godly sorrows for sin, which be the testimony of the presence of the holy Ghost. Did not the sword of sorrow pierce the heart of the Elect and blessed Mother of our Lord? Did not Peter weep bitterly for his sins, which was so beloved of Christ? Did not Mary Magdalen wash the feet of our Saviour with her tears, and re∣ceived therewithall remission of her sevenfold sins? Be of good comfort therefore, Mine own dear heart, in this thy sorrow, for it is the Earnest-peny of Eternall Consolation. In thy sorrow laugh, for the Spirit of God is with thee. Blssed be they (saith Christ) that mourn,Matth. 15. for they shall be comforted. They went forth and wept,Psal. 126. saith the Prophet; such shall come again,
having their gripes full of gladness.Psal. 51. Luke 7. Sorrow in a Christian man ought to be mo∣derate. And alhough a sorrowfull heart in consideration of his sin, be an acceptable Sacrifice before God, whereby we are stirred up to more thankefulness unto God, knowing that much is fogven us, that we might love the more: yet the man of God must keep a measure in the same, lest he be swallowed up by too much sorrow.1 Thess. 4. S Paul would not the Thessalonians to be sorry as other men which have no hope.2 Cor. 7. Such a sorrow is not commend∣able, but worketh damnation, and is farre from the children of God, who are continually sorrowfull in God, when they look upon their own unworthiness, with hope of forgiveness. For God to this end by his Spirit setteth the sins of his Elect still before them,Rom. 3. that where they perceive Sin to abound, there they might be assured that Grace shall superabound: and bringeth them down into Hell, that he might lift them up with greater joy into Heaven. Wherefore, mine own Bowels in Christ, as long as you are not void altogether of hope, be not dismayed through your pensive heart for your sins, how huge so∣ever they have been, for God is able to forgive more then you are able to sin; yea, and he will forgive him which with hope is sorry for his sins. But know, Brother, that as oft as we do go about, by the help of Gods Spirit, to do that is good,Satans practice to bring the godly repen∣tance of a sinner to desperation. the evil spirit Satan layeth hard wait to turn the good unto evil, and goeth about to mix the detestable Drnell of Desperation, with the godly Sorrow of a pure Penitent Heart. You be not ignorant of his malicious subtilty, and how that continually he assaulteth that good which the grace of God planteth. I see the battel betwixt you and him, but the victory is yours, yea and that daily: For you have laid hold upon the Anchor of Salvation, which is hope in Christ, he which will not suffer you to be made ashamed. Be not discomforted that you have this Conflict: but be glad that God hath given you the same to try your Faith, and that you might appear daily worthy of the Kingdome of God, for the which you strive. God beholdeth your striving Faith against Satan, and is pleased with your mighty resistance. The Spirit which is in you, is mightier then all the Adversaries power. Tempt he may, and lying await at your heels, give you a fall unawares: but overcome he shall not; yea he cannot, for you are sealed up already with a lively Faith to be
the childe of God for ever: and whom God hath once sealed for his own, him he never utterly forsaketh.Gods children fall. The Devils chil∣dren lye still. The just falleth seven times, but he riseth again. It is mans frailty to fall, but it is the property of the De∣vils childe to ly still. This strife against sin is sufficient testimony that you are the childe of God,Luke 11. for if you were not, you should feel no such malice as he now troubleth you withall. When this strong Goliah hath the hold, all things be in peace which he possesseth; and because he hath you not, he will not suffer you unassaulted. But stand fst, and hold out the Buckler of Faith,Strife against sin is a token of Gods childe. and with the Sword of Gods Promises smite him on the scalp, that he may receive a deadly wound, and never be able to stand against you any more.James 4. S. James telleth you that he is but a coward, saying, Resist the Devil, and he will fly away. It is the will of God that he should thus long tempt you, and not go away as yet, or else he had done with you long ere this. He knoweth already that he shall receive the foyle at your hands, and increase the Crown of your Glory: for he that overcometh shall be crowned. Therefore gory in your temptation, since they shall turn to your felicity. Be not afraid of your continuall assults, which be occasions of your daily victory. The Word of G d abeth for ever. In what hour soever a sinner repenteth him of his sins they be for∣given.Ezek. 33. Who can lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? Do you not perceive the manifest tokens of your Election? First your voca∣tion to the Gospel, and after your vocation, the manifest gifts of the Spirit of God given unto you above many other of your condition, with godliness which believeth and yieldeth to the authority of the Scriptures, and is zealous for the same? Seeing you are Gods own dearling, who can hurt you? Be not of a deject minde for these temptations, neither make your unfeigned friends to be more sorrowfull for you, then need doth require. Since God hath willed you at your Baptism in Christ to be Careles, why do you make your self Carefull? Cast all your care on him▪ Set the Lord before your eyes alwayes, for he is on your right side that you shall not be moved.True Christians how they ought to be c reless in their carefull estate. Behold the goodness of God toward me. I am careless, being fast closed in a Pair of Stocks, which pinch me for very straitness; and will you be carefull? I will not have that unseem∣ly addition to your Name. Be as your Name pretendeth, for doubtless
you have none other cause but so to be. Pray, I beseech you, that I may be still careless in my carefull estate, as you have cause to be care∣less in your easier condition. Be thankfull, and put away all care, and then I shall be joyfull in my strait present care. Commend me to all our Brethren, and desire them to pray for me that I may overcome my tem∣ptations; for the Dvil rageth against me. I am put in the Stocks in a place alone, because I would not answer to such Articles as they would charge me withall in a corner at the Bishops appointment, and because I did not come to Mass when the Bishop sent for me. I w ll lye all the dayes of my life in the Stocks (by Gods grace) rather then I will consent to the wicked generation. Praise God and be joyfull that it hath plea∣sed him to make us worthy to suffer somewhat for his Names sake. The Devil must rage for ten dayes. Commend me to Mr. F. and thank him for his Law-books; but Law, neither Equity will take any place among these blood thirsty. I would for your sake their unjust deal∣ing were noted unto the Parliament-hous, if it might avail. God shor∣ten these evil dayes. I have answered the Bishop meetly plain already, and I said to him, If he will call me in open Judgemen, I will answer him as plainly as he will require: otherwise I have refused, because I fear me they will condemn me in hugger-mugger. The peace of God be with you my dear Brother. I can write no more for lack of light, and that I have written I cannot reade my self, and God knoweth s is writ∣ten farre uneasily. I pray God you may pick out some understanding of my minde towards you. Written in a Colehouse of dakness out of a Pair of painfull Stocks, by Thine own in Christ, John Philpot.
A Letter of John Careles answering to the loving Epistle or Letter sent to him before by Mr. Philpot. A faithfull friend is a strong defence, whoso findeth such an one, findeth a treasure. A faithfull friend hath no peer, the weight of gold and silver is not to be compared to the goodness of his Faith. A faithfull friend is a Medicine of life, and they that fear the Lord shall finde him. Ecclesiast. 6. A lettr of John Careles to Mr. Philpot.THe Father of Mercy, and God of all Consolation, comfort you with his Eternal Spirit (my most dear and faithful loving Friend good Mr. Philpot) as you have comforted me by the mighty operation of the same: The everlasting God be praised therefore for ever. Amen. Ah my dear heart, and most loving Brother, if I should do no∣thing else day and night, so long as the dayes of Heaven do endure, but kneel on my knees and reade Psalms, I can never be able to ren∣der unto God condign thanks for his mercy, fatherly kindness, and most lovng compassion extended unto me most vile, sinful, wicked and unworthy wretch. Oh that the Lord would open my mouth, and give me a thankful heart, that from the bottom of the same might flow his continual praise. Oh that my sinful flesh (which is the cause of my sorrow) were clean separated from me, that I might sing Psalms of Thanksgiving unto the Lords Name for ever: that with good Samuels Mother, I might continually record this noble Verse following, the which by good experience I have found most true, praised be my good God therefore. 1. Sam. 2. John Careles raised up by the Lord out of great heaviness.The Lord (saith that good woman) killeth, and maketh alive; he bringeth down to hell, and fetcheth up again. Praised be that Lord for ever, yea, and praised be his Name, for that he hath given me true experience and lively feeling of the same. Blessed be the Lord God, whose mercy endureth for ever, which hath not dealt with me ac∣cording to my deep deserts, nor destroyed me in his displeasure when I had justly deserved it. Oh what reward shall I give again unto
the Lord for all the great benefits that he hath done for my Soul! I will gladly receive the Cup of Salvation at his hand, and will worship his Name with Prayer and with Praise. Ah my dear heart, yea most dear unto me in the Lord think not this sudden change in me to be some fickle Phantasie of my foolish head (as indeed some other would surely suspect it to be) for doubtless it is the marvellous doing of the Lord, most merciful un∣to me his unworthy Creature God for his great mercies sake give me grace to be more thankful unto him then I heretofore have been, and keep me that I never fall forth of his favour again. And now my dear Brother, and most blessed Mssenger of the Lord whose beautiful feet have brought much glad tidings unto my Soul, what shall I do or say unto you, in the least part to re∣compence the fatherly affection and godly care that you continually keep for me? Oh that God would give me the Spirit of fervent Prayer, that I might yet that way supply some little part of my duty toward you. Ah my true loving Friend, how soon did you lay aside all other business, to make a sweet Plaister for my wounded Conscience, yea and that out of a painful Pair of Stocks, which place must needs be uneasie to write in. But God hath brought you into a strait place, that you might set my Soul at liberty. Out of your pinching and painful Seat, you have plentifully poured up∣on me your precious Nard, the sweet savour whereof hath greatly refreshed my tyred Soul. The Lord likewise refresh you both Body and Soul, by pouring the oyle of his gracious Spirit into your sweet heart. Ah good Jeremy, hath Pashur put thee in the Stocks? why,Jer. 20. now thou hast the right reward of a Prophet. Thy glory never began to appear till now. I doubt not but shortly,Jer. 26. in stead of Ahikam the the Son of Shaphan, Jesus the Son of the living God will come, and deliver thee forth of the hands of all thine Enemies, and will also make good against them and their Antichristian Synagogue, all the words that thou hast spoken in his Name. The Lord hath made thee this day a strong defenced Tower, an iron Pillar,Jer. 1. and a brazen Wall against the whole Rabble of Antichrist: and though they fight against thee never so fiercely, yet shall they not over∣come
thee, for the Lord himself is with thee to help and deliver thee;Jer. 15. and he will rid thee out of the hands of the wicked, and will deliver thee out of the hands of the Tyrants. And in that you are not busie in casting Pearls before Swine,Matth. 7. nor in giving the holy things unto Dogs, you are much to be commended in my simple judgement.The circumspect behaviour of Mr. Philpot. And sure I am, that your circumspect and modest be∣haviour hitherto hath been as much to Gods glory, and to the shame and confusion of your enemies, as any man's doings that are gone before you. John Careles his advice to him.Wherefore mine advice and most earnest desire is, with all other of your loving Friends, that you still keep that order with those Blood-thirsty Bite-sheeps, Bishops I should say, that you have be∣gun. For though in conclusion they will surely have your blood, yet shall they come by it with shame enough, and to their perpe∣tual infamy whiles the world doth endure. They would indeed condemn you in hugger-mugger, to darken Gods glory, if it might be: but Satans thoughts are not unknown to you, and the depth of his subtilty is by you well foreseen. Therefore let them do what∣soever God shall suffer them to do; for I know all things shall tun to your best. Though you lie in the dark, slurried with the Bishops black Cole-dust, yet shall you be shortly restored unto the heavenly Light, and made as white as snow in Salmon, and as the wings of a Dove,Psal. 68. tha is covered with silver wings, and her feathers like gold. You know the Vessel, before it be made bright, is soiled with Oyle and other things, that it may scoure the better. Oh happy be you, that you be now in the Scouring-house, for shortly you shall be set upn the Celstal shelf as bright as Angels. Therefore, my dear hear, I will now according to your loving re∣quest, cast away all care, and rejoyce with you, and praise God for you, and pray for you day and night,: yea, I will now, with Gods grace, sig Psalms of Praise and Thanksgiving with you: for now my Soul is turned to her old rest again, and hath taken a sweet nap in Christs lap. I have cast my care upon the Lord, which careth for me, and will be careles, according to my Name, in that respect which you would have me. I will leave out my unseemly addition as long as I live; for it can take no place where true faith and hope
is resident.Gods gracious work through M Philpots Letter. So soon as I had read your most godly and com∣fortable Letter, my sorrows vanished away as smoke in the wind, my Spirit revived, and comfort came again, whereby I am sure the Spirit of God was Author of it. Oh good Mr. Philpot, which art a principal Pot indeed, filled with most precious Liquor, as it appeareth by the plenteous pouring forth of the same. Oh Pot most happy, of the high Potter or∣dained to honour, which dost contain such heavenly treasure in the Earthen vessel! Oh Pot thrice happy, in whom Christ hath wrought a great Miracle, altering thy nature, and turning water into wine, and that of the best, whereout the Master of the Feast hath filled my cup so full,John Careles drunken with joy of the spirit. that I am become drunken in the joy of the Spirit thorow the same. When Martyrdome shall break thee (O vessel of honour) I know the fragrant savour of thy precious Nard will much rejoyce the heavy hearts of Christs true Mem∣bers, although the Judasses will grudge and murmure at the same; yea, and burst out into words of slander, saying, It is but lost and waste. Be not offended, dear heart, at my Metaphorical speech; for I am disposed to be merry,2 Kin. 6. and with David to dance before the Ark of the Lord: and though you play upon a pair of Organs not very comely or easie to the flesh, yet the sweet sound that came from the same, causeth me thus to do. O that I were with you in body, as pre∣sently as I am in spirit, that I might sing all care away in Christ; for now the time of comfort is come. I hope to be with you shortly, if all things happen aright:Careles accused to the Council by certain backe friends in Co∣ventry. for my old friends of Coventry have put the Council in remembrance of me, not six dayes ago, saying, That I am more worthy to be burned then any that was burned yet. Gods blessing on their hearts for their good report. God make me worthy of that dignity, and hasten the time, that I may set forth his Glory. Pray for me, dear heart, I beseech you, and will all your company to do the same, and I will pray God for you all so long as I live. And now farewell in Christ, thou bl ssed of Gods own mouth,Note how com∣fortable the Lord worketh in his prisoned Saints. I will for a time take my leave, but not my last farewel. Blessed be the time that ever I came into the Kings Bench, to be joyned in
love and fellowship with such dear Chldren of the Lord. My good Brother Bradford shall not be dead whiles you be alive: for verily the spirit of him doth rest on you in most ample wise. Your Letters of comfort unto me in each point do agree, as though the one were a copy of the other. He hath planted in me, and you do water, the Lord give good increase. My dear Brethren and fellow-prisoners here, have them humbly and heartily commended unto you, and your company, mourning for your misery, but yet re∣joycing for your plenteous Consolation and comfort in Christ. We are all chearful and merry under our Cross, and do lack no ne∣cessaries, Praised be God for his Providence and great mercy towards us for evermore. Amen. Mr. Bradfords Letter to Careles. ALmighty God our dear Father, through and for the Merits of his dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ, be mercifull unto us, pardon us our offences, and under the wngs of his Mercy protect us from all evil, from henceforth and for ever. Amen. Dear Brother Careles, I heartily pray you to pray to God for me, for the pardon of my manifold sins, and most grievous offences, which need none other demonstration unto you then this, namely, That I have behaved my self so negligently in answering your godly triple Letters, which are three Witnesses against me. God lay not them, nor none other thing to my charge to Condemnation, though to Correction: Not my will,Practice of the Keyes of the Gospel. but his will be done. Concerning your request of Absolution (my dearest Brother) what shall I say, but even as truth is, That the Lord of all Mercy, and Father of all Comfort, through the Merits and Mediation of his dear Son, thy onely Lord and Saviour, hath clearly re∣mitted and pardoned all thy offences whatsoever they be, that ever hitherto thou hast committed against his Majesty: and therefore he hath given to thee, as to his Childe (dear Brother John Careles) in token that thy sins are pardoned; He (I say) hath given unto thee a penitent and be∣lieving heart; that is, a heart which desireth to repent and believe: For such an one is taken of him (he accepting the will for the deed) for a penitent and believing heart indeed.
Wherefore (my good Brother) be merry, glad, and of good chear, for the Lord hath taken away thy sins; thou shalt not dye. Go thy wayes, the Lord hath put away thy sins. The East is not so farre from the West, as the Lord now hath put thy sins from thee. Look how the Heavens be in comparison of he Earth, so farre hath his Mercy pre∣vailed toward thee his dear Childe, John Careles, through Christ the Beloved. Say therefore with David, Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his holy Name: for he hath forgiven thee all thy sins, as truely he hath. And hereof I desire to be a Witness. God make me worthy to hear from you the like true Message for my self. Mine own dearly Beloved, you have great cause to thank God most heartily, that hath given you such Repentance and Faith: The Lord increase the same in you, and me a most miserable wretch, whose heart is harder then the Adamant stone, or else I could not thus long have stayed from writing unto you. If I live, and may, I purpose and promise you to make amends. Pray for me, my most dear Brother, I heartily beseech you, and forgive me my long silence. God our Fa∣ther be with us for ever. Amen. Yours in the Lord, John Bradford. John Careles his Letter to Mr. Bradford. THe Peace of God in Jesus Christ,A sweet Letter of John Careles to Mr. Bradford, a little before his Martyrdome the Eternal Comfort of his sweet Spirit, which hath surely sealed you unto Eternal Salva∣tion, be with you, and strengthen you in your joyful journey to∣wards the Celestial Jerusalem (my dear Friend, and most faithful Brother Mr. Bradford) to the setting forth of Gods glory, and to your eternal joy in Christ. Amen. Ever since that good Mr. Philpot shewed me your last Letter (my dear heart in the Lord) I have continued in great heaviness and perplexity;He mourneth for the loss and lck of Mr. Bradfor. in the Church. not for any hurt or discommodity that I can perceive coming towards you, unto whom doubtless Death is made life and great felicity: but for the great loss that Gods Church here in England shall sustain, by the taking away of so godly, worthy, and
necessary an instrument, as the Lord hath made you to be. Oh that my life, and a thousand such wretched lives moe, might go for yours! Oh why doth God suffer me, and such other Catterpillers to live, that can do nothing but consume the Alms of the Church, and take away you so worthy a Workman and Labourer in the Lords Vineyard? But woe be to our sins and great unthanfulness, which is the greatest cause of the taking away of such worthy in∣struments of God, as should set forth his Glory, and instruct his People. If we had been thankful unto God for the good Ministers of his Word, we had not been so soon deprived both of it and them. The Lord forgive our great ingratitude and sins, and give us true Repentance and Faith, and hold his hand of Mercy over us for his dear Son Christs sake. Take not away all thy tue Preachers forth of this Realm (O Lord) but leave us a Seed, lest Englnd be made like unto Sodom and Gomorrah, when thy true Lo be gone. But what go I about to mingle your mirth with my mourning, and your just joy with my deserved sorrow? If I loved you in∣deed, as I have pretended, I should surely rejoyce with you most heartily, and praise God on your bhalf from the very bottom of my heart:He rejoyceth for the honour of Mr. Bradfords Martyrdome. I should praise God day and night for your excellent Election in and through his great Mercy and should give him most humble thanks for your Vocation by his Gospel, and your true Knowledge in the same: I should earnestly praise him for your sweet justification, whereof you are most certain by Gods Gace and Spirit; and should instantly pray unto him for your Glorifica∣tion, which shall shortly ensue: I should rejoyce and be glad to see you dignified by the Crown of Martyrdome and to be ap∣pointed to that honour, to testifie his Truth, and to Seal it with your Blood: I should highly extoll the Lord, who hath given you a glorious vctory over all your enemies, visible and inv si le, and hath given you Grace and Strength to finish the Tower that you have begun to build. Finally, if I loved you, I should most hear∣tily rejoice and be glad to see you delivered from this body of sin, and vile person of the Flesh, and brought into that heavenly Tabernacle, where you shall be safely kept, and never offend him more. This and much more should I do, if I had a good heart towards
God, or you his dear childe. But (alas) I am an hypocrite, and do seek nothing but mine own commodity. I would have Gods everlasting Providence give place to my peevish will and pur∣pose, although it were to the hindrance of his glory, and your sweet commodity. God forgive me my horrible ingratitude, sins, and offences against him; and good Brother, do you forgive me my great negligence and unthankfulness towards you, and hence∣forth I promise you I will put my will to Gods will, and pray that the same may be fulfilled in you, so long as you be on this earth: and when you are taken hence, I will most heartily praise the Lord for you, so long as I have my being in this world. Ah my dear heart, now I must take my leave of you, and as I think,John Careles ta∣keth his leave of M. Bradford my Ʋltimum Vale in this life, but in the life to come I am right well assured we shall merrily meet together, and that shortly, I trust. And in taking of my leave of you (my dear heart in the Lord) I shall desire you faithfully to remember all the sweet messages that the Lord our good God, and most dear loving Father hath sent you by me his most unworthy Servant, which as they are most true, so shall they be most truly accomplished upon you eternally: and for the more assurance and certificate thereof to your godly Consci∣ence, he hath commanded me to repeat the same unto you again in his own Name and Word. Therefore now give ear, and faithful credence. Hearken,Testimony of Gods Spirit. O ye Heavens, and thou earth give ear, and bear me witness at the great Day, that I do here faithfully and truely the Lords mssge unto his dear Servant,John Careles doth Gods mes∣sage to M. Brad∣ford. his singularly beloved and elct Childe n Brad∣ford. John Bradford thou man so specially beloved of God, I pro∣nounce and testifie unto thee in the Word and Name of the Lord Jehovah, that all thy sins whatsoever they be, be they never so many, so grievous, or so great, be fully and freely pdoned, released and forgiven thee, by the mercy of God in Jesus Christ thine onely Lord and sweet Saviour, in whom thou dost undoubtedly believe.Power and pra∣ctise of the keyes of the Gospel. Christ hath cleansed thee with his Blood, and clothed thee with his Righteousness, and hath made hee in the sight of God his Father, without spot or wrinckle: so that when the fie doth his appointed office, thou shalt be received (as a sweet burnt Sacrifice) into
Heaven, where thou shalt joyfully remain in Gods presence for ever, as the true inheriter of his everlasting Kingdome, unto the which thou wast undoubtedly predestinate and ordained by the Lords in∣fallible purpose and decree, before the foundation of the World was laid. And that is most true that I have said, I call the whole Trinity, the Almighty and Eternal Majesty of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost to my Record at this present: whom I humbly beseech to confirm and stablish in thee the true and lively feeling of the same. Amen. Selah. Now with a merry heart and a joyfull spirit, something mixed with lawful tears, I take my farewel of you, mine own dear Brother in the Lord: who send us shortly a merry meeting in his King∣dome, that we may both sing praises together unto him with his holy Angels and blessed Spirits for ever and ever. Farewel thou blessed of the Lord, farewel in Christ: depart unto thy rest in the Lord; and pray for me for Gods sake. As I had made an end of this simple Letter, I heard some com∣fort both of good Mr. Philpots Servant and yours, but (alas) I do scarcely believe them. Well, I will hope in God, and pray all night that God would send me some comfort to morrow; and if the Lord give you sparing to morrow, let me hear four words of comfort from you, for Gods sake. The Blessing of God be with you now and for ever. Amen. Yours for ever in the Lord Jesus, John Careles living in Hope against Hope. John Careles his Letter to his Wife. AS by the great mercy of God, at the time of his good will and pro∣vidence appointed, (my dearly beloved Wife) you and I were joyned together in the holy and Christian state of godly Matrimony, as well to our great joy and comfort in Christ, as also to the increase of his blessed Church and faithfull Congregation, by having lawfull Children in and by the same, with the which God of his mercy hath blessed us,
praised be his Name therefore: Even so now by his mercifull will and Divine Ordinance, the time is come (so farre as I can perceive) where∣in he will, for his glory, and our eternall comfort, dissolve the same, and separate us asunder again for a time. Wherefore I thought it good, yea and my bounden duty, by this simple Letter to provoke, stir, and ad∣monish you to behave your self in all your doings, sayings and thoughts, most thankefully unto our good God for the same. And therefore (my dear Wife) as you have heartily rejoyced in the Lord, and oftentimes given God thanks for his goodness, in bringing us together in his holy Or∣dinance: Even so now I desire you, when this time of our separation shall come, to rejoyce with me in the Lord, and to give him most hearty thanks, that he hath (to his glory, and our endless commodity) separated us again for a little time, and hath mercifully taken me unto himself forth of this miserable world, into his Celestiall Kingdome;Here is a true mark of a faith∣ful Christian, forsaking wife & children for Christs sake. believing and hoping also assuredly, that God of his goodness, for his Son Christs sake, will shortly bring you and your dear children thither to me, that we may most joyfully together sing Praises unto his glorious Name for ever. And yet once again I desire you for the love of God, and as ever you loved me, to rejoyce with me, and to give God continuall thanks for doing his most mercifull will upon me. I hear say, that you do oftentimes use to repeat this godly saying, The Lords will be fulfilled.True obedience of a faithful wo∣man. Doubtless it rejoyceth my poor heart to hear that report of you; and for the Lords sake use that godly prayer continually, and teach your Children and Family to say the same day and night: and not onely say it with your tongues, but also with your heart and minde, and joyfully to submit your will to Gods will in very deed; knowing and believing assuredly, that nothing shall come to you or any of yours, otherwise then it shall be his Almighty and Fatherly good will and pleasure, and for your eternall comfort and commodity. Which thing to be most true and certain, Christ testifieth in his holy Gospel, say∣ing, Are not two little Sparrows sold for a farthing?Matth. 10. and yet not one of them shall perish without the will of your heavenly Fa∣ther. And he concludeth, saying, Fear not ye therefore, for ye are better then many Sparrows. As though he should have said, If God have such a respect and care for a poor Sparrow, which is not worth one farthing, that it shall not be taken in the Lime-twig, Net, or Pit-fall,
unsill it be his good will and pleasure; you may be well assured, that not one of you (whom he so dearly loveth, that he hath given his onely dear Son for yu) shall perish, or depart forth of this miserable life, without his Almighty good will and pleasure. Therefore, dear Wife, put your trust and confidence wholly and onely in him, and ever pray that his will be fulfilled, and not yours, except it be agreeing to his will: the which I pray God it may ever be. Amen. And as for worldly things take you no care,Good counsel given to his wife but be you well assured the Lord your dear God and Father will not see you nor yours lack, if you con∣tinue in his love and childly fear, and keep a clear Conscience from all kind of Idolatry, uperstition, and Wickedness, as my trust is that you will do, although it be with the loss and danger of this temporal life. And good Margaret, Fear not them that can but kill the body, (and yet can they not do that, untill God give them leave) but fear to dsplease him that can kill both body and Soul, and cast them into hell fire. Let not the remembrance of your Children keep you from God: The Lord himself will be a Father and a Mother,Care of children to be cast upon Lord. better then ever you or I could have been unto them. He himself will do all things necessary for them, yea as much as rock the Cradle, if need be. He hath given his holy Angels charge over them, therefore commit them unto him. But if you may live with a clear Conscience (for else I would not have you to live) and see the bringing up of your Children your self, look that you nurture them in the fear of God, and keep them farre from Idolatry, Superstition,The mothers duty in bringing up her children. and all other kinde of Wickedness: and for Gods sake help them to some Learning, if it be possible, that they may increase in virtue and gody knowledge, which shall be a better Dowry to marry them with∣all, then any worldly substance: and when they be come to age, provide them such Husbands as fear God, and love his holy Word. I charge you take heed that you match them with no Papists: and if you live and marry again your self, (which thing I would wish you to do, if need require, or else not) good Wife take heed how you bestow your self, that you and my poor Children be not compelled to wickedness. But if you sh ll be able well to live Gods true Widow, I would counsel you so to live still, for the more quietness of your self and your poor Children. Take heed, Margaret, and play the wise womans part: you have warn∣ing by other, if you will take an example. And thus I commit you and
my sweet Children unto Gods most mercifull defence. The Blessing of God be with you, and God send us a merry meeting together in Heaven. Farewell in Christ: farewell mine own dear hearts all. Pray, pray. To my most dear and fithful Brethren in Newgate, Condemned to dye for the Testimony of Gods everlasting Truth. THe everlasting pace of G d in Jesus Christ, the continual joy, strength and comfort of his most pre, holy, and mighty Spirit, with the encrease of Faith, and lvely feeling of his Eternal Mercy be with you, my most dear and faithful lov ng B other Tyms, and with all the rest of my dear hearts in the Lord, your faithful Fellow-souldiers, and most constant Companions in Bonds, yea, of men condemned most cruelly for the sincere Testimony of Gods everlasting Truth, to the full finishing of that good work, which he hath so graciously begun in you all, that the same may be to his glory, the commodity of his poor afflicted Church, and to your everlasting comfort in him. Amen. Ah my most sweet and loving Bethren, and dearest hearts in the Lord, what shall I say, or how shall I write unto you in the least point or part, to utter the great joy that my poor heart hath recei∣ved in God, through the most godly example of your Christan Constancy, and sincere Confession of Christs Verity? truely my tongue cannot declare,Example of true love and charity among the Mar∣tyrs. nor my pen express the abundance of spiri∣tual mirth and gladness, that my minde and inward man hath felt, ever since I heard of your hearty boldness, and modest behaviour before that bloody Butcher, in the time of all your crafty Examina∣tions, especially at your cruel Condemnation in their cursed Con∣sistory place. Blssed be God the Father of all mercy, and praised be his Name, for that he hath so graciously performed upon you his dear darlings, his most sweet and comfortable promises, in not only giving you the continual ayd, strength and comfort of his holy and mighty Spirit, to the faithful confession of his Christ, for whose cause (O most happy men) ye are condemned to dye: but also in giving you such a mouth and wisdome, as all your wicked
Enemies were not able to resist,The Enemies not able to withstand the w sedome of God in his Saints but compelled to bid them hold their peace. but were fain to cry, Peace, peace, and not suffer you to speak. As truly as God liveth (my dear Bre∣thren) this is not only unto you a most evident probation that God is on our side, and a sure certainty of your everlasting Salvation in him; but also to your cruel Adversaries (or rather Gods cursed Enemies) a plain demonstration of their just eternal woe and damnation, which they shall be full sure shortly to feel, when ye shall full sweetly possess the place of felicity and pleasure prepared for you from the beginning. Therefore (my dearly beloved) cease not so long as ye be in this life, to praise the Lord with a lusty courage, for that of his great mercy and infinite goodness, he hath vouched you worthy this great dignity, to suffer for his sake, not onely the loss of goods, Wife and Children, long imprisonment, and cruel oppression, &c. but also the very deprivation of this mortal life, with the dissolu∣tion of your bodies in the fire. The which in the greatest promo∣tion that God can bring you or any other unto in this vale of misery; yea, so great an honour, as the highest Angel in Heaven is not permitted to have: and yet hath the Lord (for his dear Son Christs sake) reputed you worthy of the same, yea and that before me and many other which have both long looked and longed for the same. John Careles longeth to dye a Martyr in the Gospels cause.Ah my most dear Brother Tyms, whose time resteth altogether in the hands of the Lord, in a full happy time camest thou into this troublesome world, but in a much more blessed hou shalt thou de∣part forth of the same: so that the sweet saying of Solomon, or rather of the Holy-ghost, shall be full well verified upon thee, yea and all thy faithful fellows; Better is the day of death (saith he) then the day of birth.Eccles. 7. This saying cannot be verified upon every man, but upon thee my dear Brother, and such as thou art, whose death is most precious before God, and full dear shall your blood be in his sight. Blessed be God for thee, my dear Brother Tyms, and blessed be God again that ever I knew thee, for in a most happy time I came first into thy company. Pray for me, dear Brother, pray for me, that God will once vouch me worthy of that great dignity whereunto he hath now brought you.
Ah my loving Brother Drake, whose Soul draweth now nigh un∣to God, of whom you have received the same,, full glad may you be that ever God gave you a life to leave for his sake: full well will he restore it to you again in a thousand fold more glorious wise. Praise God, good Brother, as you have great cause, and pray for me, I beseech you, which am so much unworthy (so great are my sins) of that great dignity whereunto the Lord hath cal∣led you, and the rest of your godly Brethren; whom I beseech you to comfort in the Lord, as you can full well: praised be God for his gifts, which you have heartily applied to the setting forth of his glory, and the commodity of his poor afflicted Church. Which thing shall surely redound to your everlasting joy and comfort, as you shall most effectually feel or ever it be long, though the wicked of the World judge far otherwise. Ah mine own Hearts, and most dearly beloved Brethren, Cavell, Ambrose, and both the Spurges, Blessed be the Lord on your be∣half, and praised be his Name, which hath given you such a glo∣rious victory. Full valiant have you shewed your selves in the Lords fight, and full faithfully in your painful service. Faint not, but go on forward as you have most godly begun, for great shall your reward be at the end of this your travel. Ah my good faithful Brethren all, what shall I say, or what shall I write unto you, but even the same that good Elizabeth did say to her godly kinswoman Mary, the blessed Mother of Christ,Luke 1. Happy art thou (quoth that good woman) which hast believed; for all things which the Lord hath spoken to thee shall be fulfilled. So I say to you (my dear hearts in the Lord) happy are ye all, yea thrice happy shall ye be for evermore, because ye have stedfastly believed the most sweet Promises which God the Father hath made unto you with his own mouth, in that he hath promised you (which are the faithful seed of the believing Abraham) that ye shall be blessed ever world without end. The Pro∣mises of God your sweet Father, as ye do believe, so do ye bear record that God is true. The testimony whereof ye have wor∣thily born to the world, and shortly will full surely Seal the same with your Blood, yea even to morrow, I do understand.He encourageth Gods Martyrs unto their death Oh con∣stant Christians! Oh valiant Souldiers of the high Captain Jesus
Christ, who for your sake hath conquered the Devil, Death, Sin and Hell, and hath given you full victory over them for evermore! Oh worthy Witnesses, and most glorious Martyrs, whose invincible Faith hath overcome that proud, sturdy, bragging Prince of the World, and all his wicked Army: over whom ye shall shortly tri∣umph for evermore. Ah my sweet hearts, the everlasting treasures are full surely laid up for you in Heaven. The immercessible and most glorious Crown of Victory is already made and prepared for you, to be shortly clapt upon all your happy heads. The holy Angels of your heavenly Father are already appointed to conduct your sweet Souls into Abrahams bosome: All the heavenly Host rejoyceth already, for that they shall shortly receive you with joy and felicity into their blessed Fellowship. Selah. Rejoyce with double joy, and be glad my dear Brethren, for doubtless ye have more cause then can be expressed. But (alas) I that for my sins am left behinde, may lye and lament with the holy Prophet,Psal. 119. saying, Woe is me, that the dayes of my joyfull rest are pro∣longed. Ah cursed Satan, which hath caused me so sore to offend my most dear loving Father, whereby my exile and banishment is so much prolonged! Oh Christ my Advocate, pacifie thy Fathers wrath, which I have justly deserved, that he may take me home to him in his sweet mercy! Oh that I might now come home unto thee with my blessed Brethren! Well, thy will (O Lord) be effe∣ctually fulfilled, for it is onely good, and turneth all things to the best, for such as thou in thy mercies hast chosen. And now farewell my dear Hearts, most happy in the Lord: I trust in my good God yet shortly to see you in the Celestial City, whereof undoubtedly the Lord hath already made you free Citizens. Though ye be yet with us for a little time, your very home is in Heaven, where your treasure doth remain with your sweet Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ, whose calling you have heard with the ears of your hearts, and therefore you shall never come into judgement, but pass from death to life. Your sins shall never be remembred, be they never so many, so grievous or so great; for your Saviour hath cast them all into the bottom of the Sea: he hath removed them from you as far as the East is from the West;Psal. 103. and his mercy hath
much more prevailed over you, then is distance between Heaven and Earth: and hath given you for an everlasting possession of the same, all his Holyness, Righteousness, and Justification,Triumph of Martyrs. yea and the Holy Ghost into your hearts, wherewith ye are surely sealed unto the day of Redemption, to certifie you of your eternal Election, and that ye are his true Adopted Sons, whereby ye may boldly cry unto God, Abba, dear Father, for evermore: so that now no creature in Heaven, Earth nor Hell shall be able to accuse you before the throne of the Heavenly King. Satan is now cast out from you: he himself is judged, and hath no part in you; he will once more bite you by the heel, and then he hath done,Gen. 3. for at that time you shall squeeze his head through your own good Christ: and so have you final victory for evermore. In joyful triumph whereof ye shall sweetly ascend into the place of eternal rest, whe∣ther your eldest Brother Christ is gone before you, to take possssion for you, and to prepare your place under the holy Altar, with Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, Rogers, Hooper, Saunders, Farrar, Taylor, Bradford, Philpot, with many other, who will be full glad of your coming, to see six more of their appointed number, that their blood may so much the sooner be revenged on them that dwell on the Earth. Thus I make an end, committing you all to Gods most merciful defence, whose quarrel ye have defended, whose cause ye have pro∣moted, whose glory ye have set forth, and whose name ye have constantly confessed. Farewel for a while, my dear hearts in the Lord, I will make as much hast after you as I may. All our dear Brethren salute you. They Pray for you, and praise God for you continually. Blessed be the dead that dye in the Lord, for they rest from their Labours, saith the Holy Ghost,Apoc. 11. and their works follow them. Your own John Careles, a most unprofitable Servant of the Lord. Pray, pray, pray.
To Mr. Green, Mr. Whittel, and certain other Prisoners in Newgate, Condemned and ready to be burnt for the Testi∣mony of the Lord Jesus. Another Letter of John Careles wherein he doth animate Green, Whittel, and the rest of that com∣pany unto their Martyrdome.THe everlasting peace in Jesus Christ, the continual comfort of his most pure and holy Spirit, be with you my most dear and faithful Brethren and Sisters of Newgate, the Lords appointed Sheep unto the slaughter, to the good performance of the great and notable work of the Lord, which he hath so graciously begun in you all; that the same may redound to the setting forth of his Glory, and to the commodity of his Church, and to your own everlasting comfort in him, So be it. Ah my dear hearts, and most faithful Brethren and sisters in the Lord, what high lauds and praise, yea what humble and continual thanks am I bound to give to God our Father for you and on your most happy behalf, who so mightily hath magnified himself in you thus far forth, in giving you his holy and mighty Spirit, to the constant confessing of Christs verity, even to the cruel Condemna∣tion, and I doubt not but he will do the same to the death. Oh happy and blessed are you that ever you were born, that the Lord will vouch you worthy of this great dignity, to dye for his sake. Doubtless it is the greatest honour that God can give you in this life. Yea,Apoc. 11. if they be so blessed of God that dye in the Lord, as the Holy Ghost saith they be;To dye in the Lord: and for the Lord. how much more blessed and happy then are you, that dye not onely in the Lord, but also for the Lord? Oh that it were the good will of God, that the good hour were now come, that I might go with you! ah that my sins made me not unworthy of such an excellent dignity! Be thankful dear hearts, be thankful, and rejoyce in the Lord; for mighty is his mercy towards you, and great is your reward in Heaven, the which you like faithful persons have plucked to you with a godly violence of an invincible Faith. Oh worthy warriers of the most high captain! Oh constant Confessors of the everlast∣ing verity! how glorious a Crown of victory shall you shortly receive, which is prepared for all such as do continue to the end?
Oh you sweet Saints of the Lord, how precious shall your death be in his sight? Oh how dear are your Souls to your Redeemer, in whose hands they shall most joyfully rest, and the pains of death shall never touch you? Oh how blessed shall you be, when Christ shall appear, at the which time you shall receive your bodies again full of Immortality? Oh how joyful shall you be when Christ, according to his promise shall knowledge you before his Father and his holy Angels, as you have most constantly confessed him to be your Lord and onely Saviour before men? Oh blessed Green, thou meek and loving Lamb of the Lord, how happy art thou to be appointed to dye for his sake? A full dainty dish art thou for the Lords own tooth, Fresh and Green shalt thou be in the house of the Lord, and thy fruits shall never wither nor decay. Although thou go here forth sowing thy good fruits with Tears, the time shall come that thou shalt reap with joy and glad∣ness the fruits of everlasting life, and that without ceasing. Be merry therefore, and fear not,Luk. 12. for it is thy Fathers will to give thee a King∣dome, whereunto he hath chosen thee before the foundations of the World were laid. Oh happy Minister, thou man of God, how glad mayest thou be of Gods gracious favour, which hath prevented thee in the day of thy tryal? Oh happy Peter, whose part thou hast well played; therefore thy reward and portion shall be like unto his. Now hast thou good experience of mans infirmity, but much more proof and taste, yea sense and feeling of Gods abundant bottomless mer∣cy. Although Satan desired to sift thee, yet Christ thy good Captain, prayed that thy Faith should not fail.Luk. . Gods strength is made per∣fect by thy weakness, and his grace is sufficient for thee his dear Childe. Thine Example did so incourage and strengthen thy poor Brethren, that God is every way glorified by thee, and shortly will he glorifie thee with himself, with that glory which he hath prepa∣red for thee his Elect darling before the World was made. There∣fore rejoyce and be glad, for thou hast good occasion, in finding such favour in his fight. This is most true (oh my other Brethren, whom I do not know, neither have I heard much of you) happy are you that ever you
were born, and blessed be our God which hath given you such Victory over the bloody Beast. Shortly shall you be clothed in large white garments,Apoc. 19. and fine rayness of Righteousness, and so shall you follow the Lamb on Mount Sion with new Songs of Mirth and Melody, for your delivery forth of Satans Power and tyranny. God for evermore be blessed for you, and strengthen you to the end, as I doubt not but he will: for he never failed them that put their trust in him. Oh my dear and faithful sister Joane Warner, what shall I say to thee? Thy tryal hath been great; thy Victory in Christ hath been notable, thou hast overcome many a sharp shower and storm: shortly shalt thou arrive at the Haven of quiet rest, and receive a reward due to a constant Martyr. Thou shalt go home to thy Heavenly Father, and possess for ever the inheritance which Christ hath purchased for thee, where thy earthly Parents be, still looking for thee, which have triumphed over Antichrist most victoriously. Oh blessed Parents of happy Children, which have shewed such an example, as the like hath been seldome seen. I salute thee dear Sister of like constant minde; whose constant example is worthy of continual memory. Praised be God for you mine own sweet sisters,Mat. 25. which hath made you to play such wise Virgins parts. He hath plentifully poured the oyle of his Spirit into the Lamps of your Faith, so that the light hereof shall never be extinct. You shall enter with your Bridegroom into everlasting joy, whereunto you were chosen in him from the beginning. Oh my dear Brethren and sisters, you blessed Saints of the Lord, how much and how deeply am I bound to praise God for you both day and night? Pray, pray for me (my dear hearts) for the ten∣der mercy of God, that I may be made worthy to follow your trace. Oh that I had run the race of my life as far as you have done yours,John 5. and were as nigh my journeys end as you be unto yours. But alas, I lye like the lame man at the Pooles side by Solomons Porch, and every man goeth into the place of health before me: But God will appoint me one, one day to put me in. I trust my Lord of London's Colehouse is empty, and all his Officers idle: therefore they must shortly fetch more sheep to the shambles; for
he is the common slaughter-slave of all England.B. Bonner called the slaughter slave of England But happy are you that are passed through the Pikes, and delivered out of his hands, and from all the Angels of the Darkness of this World, which long tempted you in the Wilderness of the same: but now shall the Angels of God come and minister unto you, for they are your Servants to hold you up in their hands, that you shall not hurt your foot, no nor one hair of your head shall perish. They shall carry you up to heaven in a fiery Chariot,Psal 60. 2 King 2. though you leave your Mantle behinde you for a time, till God restore the same to you again in a more ample and glorious sort. Thus in haste, (as it doth appear,) I am constrained to make an end, committing you all to Gods most merciful defence: who ever have you in his blessed keeping; desiring you all to remember me in your godly and faithful Prayers, as I will not forget you in mine, by Gods grace. The blessing of God be with you all, my dear Brethren and sisters. All our Brethren and fellow-prisoners here have them most heartily commended unto you, and pray for you without ceasing. God send us a merry meeting in his Kingdome. Amen. By your Brother and unfeigned lover, John Careles Prisoner, abiding his most merciful will and pleasure. Pray, pray, pray. To my faithful and loving Brother, W. Tyms, Prisoner in Newgate. THe Everlasting peace of God in Iesus Christ, with the continu∣all joy, comfort and strength of his sweet Spirit be multiplied, and daily more and more increased in your good heart (my most faithful and dear Brother Tyms,) to the full quieting of your Con∣science, and beating back of all the fiery darts of the wicked, that you may shortly receive the glorious Crown of Victory, and in the same triumph over all your Enemies for evermore. Amen. I cannot express the exceeding great joy and consolation of my poor heart, considering the marvellous works of God most graciously wrought upon you not onely in proving you, and trying
your Faith by his great and huge Crosses both inwardly and out∣wardly, but also in giving you so great Consolation and Constancy in the midst of the same. Faithful is God, and true of his Pro∣mises,Gods Children never tempted a∣bove their strength. who hath said, That he will never suffer his chosen children to be tempted above their strength, but in the midst of their temptation will make an out-scape for them, by such means as may make to his glory and their everlasting consolation. My dear heart, great cause have you to be of good comfort, for I see in you as lively a token of Gods everlasting love and favour in Jesus Christ, as ever I perceived in any man: in respect whereof I do even with my heart love, honour and reverence you, beseeching God for his glo∣rious Name sake, in the Bowels and Blood of our Lord and onely Saviour Jesus Christ,He confirmeth W. Tims being condemned to the day of his Martyrdome. to finish his good work in you, as I doubt not but he will do, according to his infallible Promises: yea, I am well assured thereof, forasmuh as you have so effectually received his holy Spirit into your heart, as a pledg and sure Seal of your eter∣nal Redemption, and a Testimony of your Adoption in Christ Je∣sus. For which cause Satan so sore envieth you, that he hath now bent all his fierce Ordnance against you, thinking thereby utterly to destroy the invincible Fort of your Faith, founded most firmly upon the unmoveable Rock CHRIST, against the which, the Devil, Sin, nor yet Hell gates shall never prevail. Selah. Therefore, mine own Bowels in the Lord, be not discomforted for this your Conflict, which doubtless shall greatly increase your Crown of Glory, Triumph and Victory: but take a good heart un∣to you, and buckle boldly with Satan, both in himself and in his subtile Members.It is the nature of Gods Chil∣dren to be temp∣ted. It is the very divine Ordinance of God, that all his regenerate Children shall be tempted, proved and tryed: as we see by the Example of our Saviour Christ, who as soon as he was Baptized was straightwayes led of the Holy Ghost into the Wilderness, there to be tempted of the Devil. But there got he such a glorious victory over Satan, that he could never since finally prevail against any of his poor Members, but in every assault that he maketh either inwardly or outwardly, he getteth a foyle, and taketh shame: so that now he rageth with all the spight possible, specially
because he knoweth his time is but short.James 4. St. James testifieth that he is but a very Coward, that will soon flie, if he be faithfully re∣sisted. And as for his tempting Tools, the Lord hath made them manifest unto us, so that he cannot deceive us, though he assault us;Satans tempting tools. 2 Cor. 2. for as St. Paul saith, his very thoughts are not unknown unto us, as it doth in you largely appear, praised be the Lords Name therefore. You see, dear Brother, that now to molest you and such as you are, that be even passing from this Vale of Misery, he hath but two wayes, or two pieces of Ordnance to shoot at you,Two principal pellets of Satan whereby he as∣sulteth Gods Servants. 1. Fear of sin and death, and Infidelity of Gods promises. Remedy against Fear and Infi∣delity. with the which he cannot hurt you, because you have two bulwarks to defend you. The first of these terrible Guns that Satan hath shot at you, is the very same that he continually shooteth at me, that is to say, Fear and Infidelity; for the uglysomness of death, and horrour of my sins, which be so many, grievous and great: but this Pellet is easily put away with the surer shield of Faith in the most precious death and bloodshedding of our dear Lord and onely Saviour Jesus Christ, whom the Father hath given unto us wholy to be ours for evermore, and with him hath given us all things, as Paul saith: So that though we be never so great sinners, yet Christ is made unto us Holyness, Righteousness, and justification. He hath clothed us with all his Merits, Mercies and most sweet sufferings, and hath taken unto him all our misery, wretchedness, sin and infirmity. So that if any should now be condemned for the same, it must needs be Iesus Christ, which hath taken them upon him. But indeed he hath made satisfaction for them to the uttermost jot; so that for his sake they shall never be imputed to us, if they were a Thousand times so many moe as they be. This do you most effectually feel and know, dear Brother, a great deal better then I can tell you, blessed be God therefore. And now Satan, seeing he cannot prevail with his boisterous Battery against this Bulwark of Faith, which doth so quench all his fiery darts, that they can do you no harm, but rather do you good service, to cast you down under the mighty hand of God,The second pel∣let of Satan is confidence and trust in our own good works. that he may take you up by his onely grace and power, and so you may render him all the glory by Iesus Christ (which thing the Enemy cannot abide in no wise) therefore he shooteth off his other Piece
most pestilent, to provoke you to put some part of your trust and confidence in your self, and in your own holiness and righteousness, that you might that way rob God of his glory, Christ of his honour and dignity of his death.Remedy against the second Pel∣let. But blessed be the Lord God, you have also a full strong Bulwark to beat back this pestiferous Pellet also, even the pure Law of God, which proveth the best of us all damnable sinners in the sight of God, if he would enter into judgement with us according to the severity of the same, and that even our best works are polluted and defiled in such sort,Isay. 64. as the Pro∣phet describeth them. With which manner of speaking, our free-will Pharisees are much offended, for it felleth all mans Righte∣ousness to the ground, (I had like to have said, to the bottom of Hell) and extolleth onely the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is allowed before God, and is freely given to all those that firmly believe, as blessed be God you do. Ah my good brother Tyms, Satan hath put his hand in a wrong box when he beginneth to tempt you, either to Vain-glory or mistrust: for you are an old beaten souldier, and have had good experience of these manner of Temptations, both by your self and other, whom you know well were the beloved of God.Satan overcome in Gods Saints. Be of good chear therefore, dear heart, be of good chear, for now Satan hath wrought all his malice: he hath done all that he can, and hath shot off all his last Pieces, wherewith he had thought to have done most mischief; but now he seeth he cannot prevail, (the strong Tower of your Faith being so invincible) he will pluck up all his Tents, and get him to some other place to practise the like assaults: and then will the Angels of God come and minister unto you the most sweet and heavenly Consolations of the holy Ghost. To him therefore who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that ever we can desire or think, I do most heartily commit you, with all the rest of your Godly Prison-fellows, who comfort, strengthen, and defend you with his grace, & mighty operation of his holy Spi∣rit, as he hath hitherto done, that you having a most glorious Victory over the subtile Serpent and all his wicked seed, may also receive the Crown of Glory and Immortality, prepared for you before the foundations of the World were laid, and is so surely kept for
you in the hands of him who is infallible, that the Devil, Sin, Death or Hell shall never be able to deprive you of the same. The bles∣sing of God be with you now and for evermore. Amen. Pray, pray, pray for me. Your own for ever, John Careles. To my good Sister, Mrs. Cotton. THe Peace of God in Jesus Christ, the eternall Comforts of his sweet Spirit, be with you my dear and faithfull Sister, to the full accomplishment of that good work which he hath most graciously begun in you, that the same may be effectuall to the setting forth of his glory, and to your everlasting Consolation in him. Amen. My loving and faithfull Sister in the Lord, I thank you for all your loving kindness shewed unto me, but especially for your godly re∣membrance of me in your fervent and faithfull Prayers, and for your most godly and comfortable Letter, whereby you do not onely much in∣crease my joy and comfort, but also put me in remembrance of my duty towards you. Blessed be the Lord our God,Gods great gift in women. which of his great mercy hath so beau∣tified his Church in these dayes, that even unto many godly women he hath given most excellent gifts of knowledge and understanding of his Truth, so that they are not onely well able to inform their own Conscien∣ces in all things necessary to Salvation, but also most sweetly to comfort their sorrowfull Brethren and Sisters that sustain any trouble for the Testimony of Gods Truth; yea, and that which is more, even in the middest of their great Conflicts of Conscience. Of which most happy number of godly and virtuous women, my dear heart, you are one, and that of the chiefest, being plentifully endued with the gifts of Gods most gracious Spirit, as it doth full well appear in your daily doings: God onely have the praise therefore. Forasmuch then as God hath given you the gift to write,Note how God sometime giveth comfort by wea∣ker vessels. I shall most heartily desire you to let me hear from you sometimes, be it never so little, for truly I tke great Comfort and Courage thereby, specially in
my poor Conscience, which is sore assaulted of subtile Satan, and in a manner oppressed of my sin. Pray, dear S ster, that God may give me true, hearty, and earnest Repentance, and increase my Faith, for they are both the good gifts of God onely, and farre pass the reach of my power, to take at my pleasure. Therefore, dear Sister, if you w ll help me to beg the same of our dear loving Father, I am sure that he both can and will gve them me in his good time. And as for the fear of Death, or terrour of the Fire, I most heartily thank my good God I feel it not: onely it is mine own sins and unthankefulness which holdeth hard battel, and wageth strong warre against me, which onely goeth about to separate me from my good Captain Christ, that I should not enjoy his glorious victory; but God being on my side, (as I am sure he is) that cannot continually previl against me. Though God for a time permit Satan to take his pleasure on me, as he did upon Job, yet I doubt not but in the end all shall turn to my profit, through the Merits of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, To whose most mercifull defence I commit you, dear Sister, with all the rest of the Lords Elect. Farewell in Christ. Your unfeignedly, John Careles. Pray, pray, pray, pray. To my dear Brother, T. V. THe everlasting peace of God in Jesus Christ, the continual Comforts of his most pure and holy Spirit, be with you my most dear friend and faithful Brother V. to the increase of your Faith, and comfort of your sorrowful Spirit, which is to the Father a sweet Sacrifice through Christ: for whose sake he will never despise your humble and contrite heart, but doth favourably accept the same, and will in most ample wise perform the desire thereof to his Glory, and your eternal Comfort in him. In the mids of my manifold Crosses and Troubles, wherein I am constrained to flee unto God for refuge and succour by earnest and faithful Prayer, I cannot forget you (my dear heart in the Lord)
but esteeming your state for mine own, I do pour forth my com∣plaint for yu, as I do for my self, and rather more, as I think pre∣sent need doth require, desiring most heartily to hear of the good success of the same in yu. The Lord God for his mercy sake accomplish my desi e as I doubt not but he will, when he seeth it good, and most to his glory, and to your comfort and commodity. O that I might once see you so merry in Christ,Psal. 57. as you have just cause to be, that you might say with David, Awake my glory, awake lute and harp, bring forth the psaltery with the merry song, that I might sing a new song of praise and thanksgiving unto the Lord, for the light of his fa∣vourable countenance, his help and deliverance. Oh!Psal. 45. that would re∣fresh me as a most precious Oyle, and gladden my poor heart, which is assaulted with sorrow moe wayes then one.Comfort for a sick Conscience. I doubt not but the same shall by your means receive much comfort, though for a time it doth mourn with you, that we may be made both glad together, yea and that with such gladness as shall continue for ever. But in the mean space (I say) most happy are you,Mat. 9. that so heartily mourn the absence of the Bridegroom. If you were not a wedding-childe you could never do it. Onely Christs true Disciples do mourn for his absence; therefore shall they doubtless rejoyce at his presence, which will be so much more joyful, by how much the absence is more sorrowful. Therefore, my good Brother, take a good heart unto you, and be of good chear: Say with the Prophet David, O my Soul,Psal. 42. why art thou so heavy, and why art thou so disquieted within me? O put thy trust in God, for I will yet give him thanks for the help of his loving countenance, and because he is my God. Read the 41 & 42 Psalm for your comfort, and consider that the holy King and Prophet, at the making and first saying of them, was even in the same case that you are now in; but he still comforted himself with the sweet promises of God: and so do you, my dear heart, for to you they do as well pertain, as they did to him, and as surely shall they be performed upon you, as they were upon him; for he is one God and dear Father unto you both and for his Mercy, Truth and Promise sake,Gods love goeth not by our deser¦vings, but by Faith in Jesus. he must needs make good unto you all that he hath said. If his love toward you stood in respect of your own merit and
worthiness, you might well mourn, lament and complain; yea, you had good cause to doubt, fear and mistrust: but seeing he loveth you onely for and in Jesus Christ, who is your whole Holiness, Righteousness and Redemption, lay away all mourning, lament∣ing, and complaining; banish from you all fear, mistrust and infide∣lity, and know that as long as Christ doth continue Gods Son, so long must the love of the Father continue towards you immutable, and his good will unchangeable, and cannot be altered through any of your infirmities. For this is most true, that as long as the Cause of any thing doth last, so long must the Effect remain; but Christs the whole Cause why the Father loveth you, and he also continueth for ever:Christ onely is the cause why his Father lov∣eth us. Then must I needs conclude, that the love of the Father continueth towards you for ever, and (as the Psalmist most joyful∣ly so often singeth) His mercy endureth for ever and ever. This is most true, mine own dear heart, although the Lord for a time hide it from your senses, that you might be the more earnest in Prayer to him for the feeling of it, and also the more thankfull for it when he doth give the lively taste of it,Why God some∣time hideth him∣self from us. as doubtless he will do ere ever it be long; and then shall you be well able to comfort other in the same state that you are now in, with the same comfort where∣with you are and further shall be comforted of God. Therefore lift up your hands that are now a little fallen down, and stretch forth the weak knees of your troubled minde,Heb. 12. which now mourneth with a godly mourning, and therefore shall it be full well comforted with that sweet peace of God which passeth all understanding, and you are sure already to enjoy the blessing that Christ gave unto the godly mourners of Sion upon the mount,Eccles. 7. at the first Sermon that he made. O happy V. in whose mourning company I had rather be, then in the house of mirth and banquetting of such as see not what cause they have to mourn and be sorry.Measure ought to be in mourn∣ing. But yet my good Brother, use a measure in this your godly mourning, and make not your faithful Friends too much sorry for you. Let the perswasions of such godly lovers as you do daily company withal, or rather the perswasions of the holy Ghost by them, move you to some godly mirth and rejoycing. Consider that you are commanded by the mouth of Saint PaulPhil. 4.
thereto Rejoyce in the Lord (saith he) and I say again Rejoyce. Mark how he doubleth the Sentence, that we may perceive it is a most earnest and necessary thing he requireth. Obey the Command∣ment of God in this behalf: wherein as you cannot but highly please him, so I assure you,Example of Christian Chari∣ty and compassi∣on towards his afflicted Brother you shall very much rejoyce my poor heart, and the hearts of other which pray for you with mourning tears, and make that cruel enemy Satan, and all your adversaries sorry, which will rejoyce and laugh to see you mourn. Oh my good Brother, let it manifestly appear that the Lord of his great mercy hath head our faithful and hearry requests for you. Oh how would that rejoyce me in the mids of my troubles? Therefore now to conclude, because the darkness constraineth me to make an end for this time, I say my dear and faithful Brother V. in respect of the great cause you have of your own part through Christ, and for the glory and honour of almighty God, the com∣fort, joy and rejoycing of your dear Brethren and Sisters in Chrst, also your own duety by the Commandment of God, and last of all to vex, molest and grieve Satan withal, Rejoyce in the Lord, and be most heartily glad in him, who is wholly yours, and you are his, and shall be for evermore. Selah. Farewel mine own Bowels in the Lord, and praise God with joyful lips and a merry heart, and pray for me his most unprofitable Servant, which have more cause, concerning my self, to lament then any one man living: but my good bridegroom is present, and bid∣deth me cast away my mourning garments, and therefore I must needs be merry with him; and so he biddeth you to be by my mouth, for he is present with you, although for sorrow you cannot know him, as Magdalen could not in the garden, until he spake unto her. The Lord God speak these words of comfort in your heart, and open the eyes of your minde, that you may perfectly perceive and feel his blessed presence, and so rejoyce in the same for evermore. Amen. Comfort your heart in Christ, and cast your care upon him, for he careth for you. Your Brother in the Lord, abiding his good pleasure, John Careles.
To my dear and faithful Brother, Augustine Bernher. THe peace of God in Jesus Christ, the help, comfort and assist∣ance of his eternal Spirit, be with you my dear and faithful Brother Augustine, and with all the rest of my good Brethren and Sisters of the houses of Bxterly and Manceter, (which mourn∣eth for the misery of Gods People) to your everlasting Consola∣tion in him. Amen. Right glad I am to hear my dear and faithful Brother Augustine) that God of his great mercy and infinite goodness, hath yet so graciously delivered and preserved you out of your enemies hands, beseeching Almighty God also, from the bottom of my heart, to be your continual defence unto the end as hitherto he hath most graciously been, that you may live and dye both to Gods Glory, the commodity of his Church, and to the increase of your own everlasting joy and comfort in him. Know you dear Brother, that I have received your Letter, for the which, I heartily thank you. Indeed I think it very short, al∣though it seemeth something sharply to rebuke me in the beginning for the breach of my promise, in not writing to you of this long time. Well Brother, I am content to bear it with patience, con∣sidering that you are troubled otherwise (the Lord comfort you and all heavy hearts) neither will I spend Ink and Paper for my purgation in this point. God be knoweth whether I be so mind∣less of my promise, as it appeareth in your sight I am. Your re∣quest I will truly perform to the uttermost of my power, as gladly as any poor wretch shall do in the World, and I thank God I have done no less of long time. And as my poor Prayer shall be a handmaid to wait upon you which way soever you ride or go; so I beseech you that my simple counsel may take some place in you, in this time of your pilgrimage, which you pass in no small peril: God keep and preserve you for his Names sake.He counselleth Augustine to be circumspect, & not rashly to thrust himself in danger. I do not disallow, but much praise and commend your hearty boldness in putting your self in prease, when any one of Gods People needeth your help in any point. But yet I would not have you thrust your self in danger,
when you can do them no good, or at least wise when they may well enough spare that good you would do them: for if you should then chance to be taken you shall not onely be no comfort unto them, but also a great discomfort, adding sorrow unto their sorrow. I do not perswade you to absent your self from any place here your presence of necessity is required: for in all such pla∣ces, I know, God will preserve you, as he hath hithe to wonder∣fully done, praised be his Name therefore: or if it shall please him to permit you in any such place to be taken, I know he will most sweetly comfort your Conscience with this consideration, That it is the very Providence and Appointment of God, that you should there and then be taken up for a Witness of his Truth unto the world: But I cannot allow, nor be contented that you should rashly or negligently thrust your self into that place where your wicked enemies do continually haunt, yea and lay wait for you, when no necessity of your self, nor of any other of Gods people, doth re∣quire your company. If they need any of your godly counsel you may write unto them that thing that you think good; which (I dare say) will be sufficient unto them. For (continuall thanks and praises be given unto the Everlasting God) there is none of those that be cruelly condemnd for Gods Truth, that now be weaklings: for they have manfully passd through the Pikes, and they have boldly abidden the brunt of the Battel, and therefore I reckon the worst is past with them already: So that now and then a godly Letter from you to them shall do as much good as your company shall do, and perchance more too; for writing sticketh longer in the memory then word do: yea, though your Letters were as short to them, as your last was to me, so that the same be something sweeter, and not all thing so sharp. This (dear Brother) is the simple counsel which I would gladly have you observe, partly for that I heartily pray for your preser∣vation to the commodity of Christs Church, and partly for that I unfeignedly wsh the peace, comfort and tranquility of your own Conscience, which I know will be quickly ready to accuse you,A good Consci∣ence is soon troubled. if you do any thing wherein you have not the Word of God for your
warrant. For in a glass that is clear, a small mote will soon ap∣pear: even so the good Conscience of Gods chosen children be∣ing more clear then Chrystal, will quickly accuse them at the least fault they do commit, whereas the wicked worldlings have their Conscience so clogged and corrupted through the custome of sin, that they cannot see nor perceive their own shameful deeds and wic∣ked works, until God set the same before them for their utter ¦struction, and then despair they immediately. But seeing that God hath given you a clear Conscience, and a pure, sharp, quick, and lively sight in your Soul, I would wish you to beware that you do nothing unadvisedly,Conscience of sin is sometimes taken where none is commit∣ted. but upon a good ground: for an accusing Conscience is a sore thing when death doth approach, and then Sa∣tan will not stick to tell you that you have too much tempted God, when peradventure you have done nothing so at all For this cause (I say) partly I have thought it good to admonish you (as I have done often) to be circumspect, according to the counsel of Christ, which biddeth you to beware of men.Matth. 10. Other things I have not to write, for I know this Bearer can certifie you of all things at large, better then I can declare it by writing. I beseech you, good Augustine, help me forward by your hearty Prayers, for I trust I have but a small time in this troublesome World: Dr. Story told our Marshal, that we should all be dis∣patched so soon as he came from Oxford, whither he and other bloody Butchers be gone to make slaughter of Christs sheep that lye there appointed to be slain. God for Christs sake put them and such like besides their cruel purpose, if it be his good wll and plea∣sure; Amen good Lord. I pray you do my most hearty commenda∣tions to my good Sister and faithful Friend, good Mris. Mary Glover: I beseech God be her comfort, as I doubt not but he is. I am very glad to hear that she doth so joyfully and so patiently bear this great Cross that God hath laid upon her. I pray God streng∣then her, and all other his dear Saints unto the end. Amen. Com∣mend me unto my dear and faithful Sister Elizabeth B. I thank her most heartily for her Napkin, and so I do you dear Brother for my shirt. Truly that day that we were appointed to come to our An∣swer before the Commissioners (which had sent word the same
morning, that they would come to the Kings Bench by eight of the clock, and the house, and all things were trimmed and made ready for them) I got that Shirt on my back and that Napkin in my hand,The Christian courage of Jhn Careles. and me thought that they did help to harness me and weapon me well, to go fight against that Bloody Beast of Babylon. And trust me truly, if they had come, I would have stricken three strokes the more for your two sakes, as well as God would have abled me to have set them on, as by Gods grace I will not fail to do at the next Skirmish that I come to: wherefore I pray you pray for me, that I may be strong and hardy to lay on good load. Oh that I might so strike him down, that he should never be able for to rise again. But that stroke belongeth onely to the Lord, to stike at his coming, the which I trust will be shortly? Oh hasten it good Lord, and shorten these sorrowful and sinful dayes, for thy great mercies sake. Farewel my dear and faithful loving Brother: The Lod defend, keep and preserve you from the power of your Enemies v sible and invisible, and send us a most joyful and merry meeting here or elswhere, as it shall please his goodness to appoint us. In the mean space I shall most earnesty desire you to pray for me, for I never had more need in my life: and doubtless you shall never want my poor prayer, if it shall please God to accept the Prayer of so sin∣ful a wretch as I am The Lord impute not my sins to me, for Iesus Christs sake, unto whose most merciful defence, I do most heartily commit you. The blssing of God be with you now and ever. Amen. I pray you do my most hearty commendations to Mr. John Glover: I do not forget him in my daily Prayers, and I trust he doth Remember me. Your poor Brother, alwayes mindful of you in my Prayer, John Careles, Prisoner, abiding Gods pleasure.
To my dear Brother Henry Adlington, Prisoner in the Lollards Tower. THe everlasting peace of God in Iesus Christ, the continual ayd, strength, joy and comfort of his most pure, holy and mighty Spirit with the increase of Faith and lively feeling of his Mercies, be most effctuously wrought in your heart, my dear and faithful loving Brother Aingto, and in the hearts of all your other godly Prison fellows, to the full finishing of that good work which the Lord hath most graciously begun in you, that the same may be to the setting forth of his glory, the commodity of his poor affli∣cted Church, and to your own eternal joy and comfort in him. Amen. My most dear and faithful loving Brother in our Lord, I with all the rest of my loving Brethren here with me, do most humbly and heartily commend us unto you, with all faithful Remembrance of you in our daily prayers, giving God earnest thanks on your most happy behalf, for that he hath given you such hearty boldness and Christian constancy in the faithful confession of his everlasting Verity. Blessed be God for thee, my dearly beloved Brother, which hath vouched thee worthy of so great a dignity, as to suffer for his sake, and the setting forth of his glory. Oh glad in heart mayest thou be, to whom it is given, not onely to believe in thy Lord and Christ most lively; but also to suffer for his sake, as one of his silly sheep appointed to the slaughter. Be of good com∣fort therefore my good Brother, for your Calling unto the Cross of Christ, was after a marvellous sort: surely it was onely the Lords appointment, and therefore he will well perform his own work in and upon you to the great magnifying of his glory, and comfort of your Brethren, whose hearts are mightily refreshd, to hear how heartily you have behaved your self hitherto. This present day I received a letter from you, at the reading whereof my Brethren and I were not a little comforted, to see your Conscience so quieted in Christ, and your continuance so stedfast in him: which things be the special gifts of God, not given unto every man, but to you his
dear darling, Elect, and chosen in Christ, and such as you be. And whereas you do require to know my simple minde concerning your answer unto Dr. Story and the Chancellor: Truly I say you did answer them very well; for there are but two Sacraments indeed, that is to say, the Sacrament of Baptism, and the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, as you have full well answered them: Praised be God for his good gifts, who chuseth the weak, to confound the strong, and the foolish to confound the worldly wise. If when you come before them again, they do ask you what a Sacrament is; say you, That a Sacrament, being ministred accor∣ding to Christs Institution, is a visible Sign of an invisible Grace,What a Sacra∣ment is. and hath the promise of Gods Mercy annexed unto it, available to all such as do worthily receive it, and not unworthily worship it: as they would have us to do, contrary to Gods Commandment. And these properties belonging to Christs true Sacraments, cannot be applyed to any one of those five Sacraments which they have invented of their own brain, since Antichrist began to reign, to blinde the people withal. I perceive dear heart, that upon Friday they do intend to Con∣demn you, and to give you your Judgement. Therefore I think they wll have no great reasoning with you, but bid you answer them directly, either Yea, or Nay, to all such things as they have to charge you withal, which they have gathered of you since you came into their cruel hands. But if they will needs make many words with you, because you are but a simple man, and therefore perchance they will be the busier with you to trouble you with many questions, to cumber your knowledge, and then seem to triumph over you, and that truth that you do hold: if (I say) they do this (as perhaps for some evil purpose they will) then be you so plain and short as you can, saying roundly unto them these or such like words, as nigh as you can. Be it known unto you, that I in all points do believe as it becometh a true Christian,He instructeth him how, and what to Answer to the adversa∣ries. and as I have been truly taught in the dayes of that good King Edward, of such godly Preachers and Prophets sent of God, as have sealed their Doctrine with their Blood; from whom I will dissent in no point: for I am a poor man without learning, but am commanded
of God to follow the counsel of his constant Preachers, and so do I in∣tend to do, God giving me grace and assistance thereto. As for you, I know you to be none of Christs Shepherds, but ravening Wolves, which come to kill and scatter the Flock of Christ, as the Lord said you should; and doh will us to beware of you and your poisoned Doctrine, bidding us to judge you according to your fruits, whereby all men may see and know what you be,We are bound to follow ur true Preachers. that will not be wilfully blinde. But the good Shepherds have given their lives for the defence of Christs Flock; and I am commanded to follow their faithful and godly example, and to confess with them one Truth, even to the fire, if God shall see it good: and this as a true Christian I have hitherto done, and henceforth by Gods grace intend for to do. And if for the same, God shall suffer you to take away my life, as you have done theirs, I am contented therewith: His will be done,God wil require accoūt of blood. for that onely is good. But of this be you sure, the Lord will shortly call you to account for all the innocent blood that is shed with∣in this Realm; which you have brought into a most woful case, and made many a heavy heart in the same, and moe I perceive you will make, so long as the Lord for our sins will suffer you to prosper, and untill the time that your own iniquity be full ripe. But then be you sure the Lord will sit in Judgement upon you, as well as you do now upon his Saints, and will reward you according to your deservings: To whom with my whole heart I commit my cause, and he will make answer for me, when the full time of my refreshing cometh. In the mean space I will keep silence with this that I have said, trusting that I have sufficiently discharged my conscience in confessing my Faith and Religion to you, declaring of what Church I am, even of the Catholick Church of Jesus Christ, which was well known to be here in England in our late good Kings dayes, by two special to∣kens which cannot deceive me, nor suffer me to be deceived; that is to say, The pure Preaching of his holy Word, and the due administration of the holy Sacraments, which is not to be seen in your Romish Church, and therefore cannot be called the Church and Spouse of Christ. I believe in the holy Trinity, and all the other Articles of the Christian Faith con∣tained in the three Creeds, and finally all the Canonicall Scripture to be true in every sentence: and I detest all Sects both of Arrians and Ana∣baptists, or any other that divide themselves from the true Church of Christ, which is his Mysticall Body, the Ground and Pillar of Truth,
and the very House of the living God. And if for these things you take away my life, and make your selves guilty of my Blood, you may: for I am in your hands, as the Sheep brought to the Shambles, abiding the grace of the Butcher. And be you sure, your judgement sleepeth not, but when you cry Peace, peace, and all is safe, then shall your plagues be∣gin like the sorrows of a woman travelling with childe,1 Thes. 5. according to Christs infallible Pomise. This kinde of answer, my dear heart, it shall be best for you to make, and by Gods grace I do intend to take the same order my self in time to come, when the Lord shall vouch me worthy of that great dignity, whereunto he hath called you. And if they shall laugh you to scorn, as I know they will, saying thou art a Fool, and an unlearned Ass-head, and art able to make answer to nothing. &c. care not you for it, but still commit your Cause unto God, who will make answer for you; & tell them that they have bin answered again and again of divers godly and learned men: but all will not help, for you have one solution for all manner of que∣stions, even a fair Fire and Fagots: this will be the end of your disputations. Therefore I pray you to trouble me no more, but do that which you are appointed, when God shall permit the time. I am no better then Christ, his Apostles, and other of my good Brethren that are gone before me. This kinde of answer will cut their combs most, and edifie the people that stand by, so that the same be done coldly with sobrie∣ty, meekness and patience; as I heard say our sweet Brethren Tho∣mas Harland and John Oswald did at Lewes in Sussex, to the great rejoycing of the children of God that were in those parts: and I heard say, that they were dissolved from this earthly tabernacle at Lewes on Saturday last, and were condemned but the Wednesday before: so that we may perceive the Papists have quick work in hand,2 Chron. 2. that they make such haste to have us home to our heavenly Father. Therefore let us make our selves ready to ride in the fiery Chariot, leaving these sorry Mantles and old Clokes behinde us for a little time, which God shall restore unto us again in a more glorious wise. My good Brother Harry, you shall understand that bragging
John T. hath beguiled his Keepers (who trusted him too well) and is run away from them, and hath brought the poor men into great danger by the same. The one of them is cast by the Councils Commandment into the Gate-house at Westminster; the other is fled forth of the Country for fear. Thus you may see the fruits of our Free-will men, that made so much boast of their own strength. But that house which is not builded surely upon the unmoveable Rock, will not long stand against the boisterous winds and storms, that blow so strongly in these dayes of Trouble. But my dearly beloved Brother, blessed be God for you, and such as you be, which have played the parts of wise Builders. You have digged down past the sand of your own natural strength, and beneath the earth of your own worldly wisdome, and are now come to the hard Stone and unmoveable Rock Christ, who is your onely Keeper; and upon him alone you have builded your Faith most firmly, without doubting mistrust or wavering There∣fore neither the storms nor tempests, winds nor weathers that Satan and all his wily workmen can bring against you, with the very Gates of Hell to help them, shall ever be able once to move your House, much less to overthrow it: for the Lord God himself, and no man, is the Builder thereof, and hath promised to preserve and keep the same safe for ever. Unto his most merciful defence therefore, I do heartily commit you and all your good company, desiring him for his sweet Son Jesus Christs sake, to confirm and strengthen you all, that you may be constant unto the very end; that after the final victory is once gotten, you may receive the immercessible Crown of Glory, of Gods free gift, through his great mercy in Jesus Christ our alone Saviour. To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honour, glory praise, thanks, power, rule and domi∣nion, for ever and evermore. Amen. The Blessing of God be with you all. John Careles.
To my most dear and faithfull Brother T. V. THe everlasting peace of God in Iesus Christ, the continual joy and comfort of his most pure holy, and mighty Spirit, with the increase of Faith and lively feel ng of his mercy, be with you my dear heart in the Lord, and faithful lovng brother T. V. to the full accomplishing of that good work whch e ath so graciously be∣gun in you, that the same, by all means may be to the setting forth of his glory, to the commodity of his poor afflicted Congregation, and to the sweet comfort and quietness of your Conscience in him now and evermore. Amen. With such due honour, love and reverence as it becometh me to bear unto the sweet Saints, & dearly beloved children of God I have me most heartily commended unto you, my dear Brother V. with all earnest and faithfull remembrance of you in my daily Prayers, thank∣ing God right heartily that you do likewise remember me in yours, assuring you that my poor heart doth daily feel great Consolation thereby, God onely have the praise for the same, and all other his Benefits. Ah my dear heart in the Lord, well is me that ever I was born, that God of his great mercy and infinite goodness hath used me most miserable wretch at any time, as his instrument, to minister any thing unto you, either by word or writing, that might be an occasion of your joy and comfort in the Lord, and a provoking of you to praise and thanksgiv ng unto God for the same, as your most loving and godly Letter seemeth to import. Oh happy am I that the Lord hath appointed me unto so good a ground to sow his seed upon; but much more happy are you, whose heart the Lord hath prepared and made so meet to receive the same so effectuously, gving thereto the sweet showers and heavenly dews of his grace and holy Spirit, that it may bring forth fruit in due season ac∣cordingly; the increase whereof we shall shortly reap together, with perfect joy and gladness, and that continually. Therefore (my dear Brother) I say unto you, as good Elizabeth did to her Cousin Mary, Happy are you,Luke 1. and happy shall you be for evermore, because you have believed. The most sweet and faithful
Promises of your Redeemer Jesus Christ, you have surely laid up in the treasury of your heart: his comfortable Callings you have faith∣fully heard: his loving Admonitions you have humbly obeyed, and therefore you shall never come into judgement:Remission of sins your sins shll never be remembred, for your Saviour hath cast them all into he bottom of the Sea:Micah 7. he hath removed them from you as far as the East is from the West,Psal. 103. and hath given you for an everlasting posss∣sion his Justification and Holiness: So that now no Creature, nei∣ther in heaven nor in earth, shall be able to accuse you before the Throne of the heavenly King. Satan is now judged: he is now cast out from you, he hath no part in you: you are wholly given unto Christ, which will not lose you: your stedfast Faith in him hath overcome that sturdy and bragging Prince of the World. Christ hath given you the final victory over him and all his Army, that they shall never hurt you. What would you have more? Oh my dear heart, how great treasures are laid up in store for you, and how glorious a Crown is already made and prepared for you? And albeit the holy Ghost doth bear witness of all these things in your heart,Testimony of Gods Spirit. and maketh you more sure and certain thereof, then if you had all the outward Oracles in the world; yet I being cer∣tainly perswaded, and fully assured by the testimony of Gods Spi∣rit in my Conscience, of your eternal and sure Salvation in our sweet Saviour Jesus Christ, have thought it good yea and my bounden duty, not onely at this time to write unto you, and to shew my joyful heart in that behalf; but also by the Word and Commandment of Christ, to pronounce and affirm in the Name and Word of the heavenly King Jehovah, and in the behalf of his sweet Son Iesus Christ our Lord, to whom all knees shll bow, whom all creatures shall worship, and also by the impulsion of the holy Ghost by whose power and strength all the faithful be regenerate: I do I say p onounce to thee my dear B o her T. V. that thou art already a Cit zen of Heaven. The Lord thy God, in whom thou dost put all thy trust, for his dear Sons sake, in whom thou dost also undoubtedly believe, a h freely forgiven thee all thy sins, clearly released all thine in quties, and fully pardoned all thine offences, be they never so many, so grievous, or so great, and
will never remember them any more to Condemnation. As truly as he liveth, he will not have thee dye the death, but hath verily de∣termined, purposed, and eternally decreed, that thou shalt live with him for ever. Thy Sore shall be healed, and thy Wounds bound up even of himself for his own Names sake. He doth not, nor will not look upon thy sins in thee, but he respecteth and beholdeth thee in Christ, in whom thou art lively graffed by Faith in his blood, and in whom thou art most assuredly elected and chosen to be a sweet vessel of his Mercy and Salvation, and wast thereto pre∣destinate in him before the foundation of the world was laid. In testimony and earnest whereof, he hath given thee his good and holy Spirit, which worketh in thee Faith, Love, and unfeigned Repen∣tance, with other godly Vertues, contrary to the Corruption of thy Nature. Also he hath commanded me this day (although a most unworthy wretch) to be a witness hereof by the Ministry of his holy Word,Experience of Christ working in his Church. grounded upon the truth of his most faithful Promises, the which thou believing, shalt live for ever. Believest thou this, my dear heart? I know well thou dost believe. The Lord increase thy Faith, and give thee a lively feeling of all his mercies, whereof thou art war∣ranted and assured by the testimony of the holy Ghost, who con∣firm in thy Conscience (to the utter overthrowing of Satan, and those his most hurtful dubitations, whereby he is accustomed to molest and vex the true Children of God) all that I have said: and by Gods grace I will, as a witness thereof, confirm and seal the same with my blood, for a most certain truth. Wherefore (my good Brother) praise the Lord with a joyful heart, and give him thanks for this his exceeding great mercy, cast∣ing away all dubitation and wavering, yea all sorrow of heart and pensiveness of mind; for this the Lord your God, and most dear and loving Father, commandeth you to do by me, nay rather by his own Mouth and Word pronounced by me. But now my dear Brother, after that I have done my message, or rather the Lords message indeed, I could finde in my heart to write two or three sheets of paper, declaring the joy I bear in my heart for you, mine own bowels in the Lord: yet the time being so short (as you do well know) I
am here constrained to make an end, desiring you to pardon my slackness, and to forgive my great negligence towards you, pro∣mising you still, that so long as my poor life doth last, my prayer shall supply that my pen doth want; as knoweth the Almighty God, to whose most merciful defence I do heartily commit you, and all other his dear children, as well as though I had rehearsed them by Name, desiring them most heartily to remember me in their hearty and daily Prayers as I know right well they do: for I feel the daily comfort and commodity thereof and therefore I neither will nor can forget them nor you, or any such like. The blessing of God be with you all. Amen. Yours for ever unfeignedly, John Careles. A Letter of Thanks to a faithfull Friend of his, by whom he had received much comfort in his inward troubles. BLessed be God the Father of all mercy, for the great comfort and Christian consolation which he hath so mercifully ministred unto my poor afflcted heart by your means, my most dear and faith∣ful Brother. Truly me thinketh your words, or rather Gods words by you uttered, have a wonderful power and efficacy working in my heart at the hearing or reading of them. Rejoyce therefore, my dear Brother, and be thankful unto God, for verily he both is and will be mightily magnified in you, and that divers and many wayes, both to the strengthning of them that stand in his Truth, and also to the raising up of such as are faln from the same. God make me thankful for you, and on your behalf, for verily great is the goodness of God towards me, in giving me acquaintance in faithful love and amity with you: Gods Name for ever be prai∣sed therefore, and he perform all his merciful Promises upon you, as I doubt not but he will, for his sake in whom you trust. I thank my God most heartily, and also you my good Brother, for that you are careful for me in your faithful Prayers, remembring my just deserved sorrows, as though they were your own, and la∣bouring
so much to solace the same. Ah my gracious good God, what am I, for whom thou and thy dear Children should be so careful? Oh sweet Lord, forgive me my great ingratitude and sin, and grant that I never abuse thy great benefits. Oh let the love of thine Elect, which love me for thy sake, be a sure sign and to∣ken, yea a most firm testimony and a seal to my sinful Conscience, of thine everlasting love and mercy towards me in Christ; as verily it would and ought to be, if mine infidelity did not let it. Oh cir∣cumcise therefore the fore-skin of my heart, that I may with live∣ly Faith behold thy great love towards me in all thine Elect, that I may alwayes be thankful for the same, and love thee and them a∣gain most heartily and unfeignedly. Ah my dear heart, how sweetly and how truly, yea how godly and how comfortably have yov rehearsed the sweet saying of Solo∣mon concerning prosperity with true and godly friends?What a treasure a trusty friend is I will joyn with it the Sentence which goeth a little before, for doubtless it may be well verified on you: A sure friend (saith the Wise-man) will be unto thee even as thine own Soul, and deal faithfully with thy houshold folk. If thou suffer trouble and adversity, he is with thee, and hideth not his face from thee. A faithfull friend is a strong defence, whose findeth such an one, findeth a treasure. A faithfull friend hath no peer, the weight of gold is not to be compared to the goodness of his faith. A faithfull friend is a medicine of life, and they that fear the Lord shall finde him, &c. Lo (my dear heart in the Lord) here is a lively image or description of you; for verily such an one have I alwayes found you unto me, not onely sorrowing for my great sorrow, but also oftentimes making me merry and joyful, with such joyes as the world cannot feel.There is no true friendship but amongst the godly. Now let the world brag of his feigned friend∣ship, but I will boast of this true friendship in God, and esteem it a more treasure then all transitory things. And as for my mourn∣ing, dear Brother, God hath made you to turn it unto mirth: for God hath put you in the stead of them to be my Comfort, whom he hath in his great mercy taken away. I trust henceforth to leave the mourning for my great loss, and to praise God for gaining unto himself so great glory by his chosen children. God make me a true mourner of Sion, both for mine own sin and wickedness, and
also to see his honour defaced, that I may be made meet and apt to hear the joyful and comfortable message that your beautiful feet shall bring me. God bless thee my dear heart, and faithful loving Brother, and increase his good gifts of grace in thee, as he hath most happily begun, that you may daily more effectually feel, and lively perceive the certainty of Gods grace wherein you stand, and firmly to testifie the same, to the Conversion or Confounding of all gainsayers, and to the comfort and confirmation of all Gods dear children. Amen. Farewel mine own sweet Brother: farewel as mine own heart. Your own in Christ, John Careles. Another Letter of John Careles to a certain godly faithful Sister, by the Name of E. K. THe grace and free mercy of God in Jesus Christ, the sweet Consolations of the holy Ghost the guide of all Gods dear Children, be with you, strengthen and comfort you, my dearly be∣loved sweet Sister, E. K. now and ever. Amen. Albeit, my dearly beloved Sister in Christ, that as yet we did never see one another personally to any knowledge, yet by the virtuous report that I have heard of you, and also by the large loving Token that I have received from you, methink that I do even presently see you, and behold your person, faithfully walking in the fear and love of God, joying and rejoycing with you in the Spirit, as though we were sweetly talking together of Christs Verity. The Lord God do I humbly beseech in the bowels and blood of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, that he will strengthen us both with his holy and mighty Spirit, that we may constantly continue in the confession of his Truth unto the end: that like as we now see one another presently in Spirit, we may also see one another personally in the glorious presence of God and his holy Angels, where undoubtedly we shall know one anothers personage, to our great joy, felicity and endless Comfort. Preparation to the Cross.And now therefore, dear Sister K. be strong in the Lord our
God, for doubtless the time of triall is at hand; a great persecution, with cruel Murthering of Gods dear Saints, is like to be very short∣ly in this woful wicked Realm of England. Therefore dear Sister, for the love of God prepare you to the Cross with all diligence, and make your self ready to dye with Christ, that you may also live with him for ever. There is no remedy, if you will be Christs disciple, you must needs take up your Cross and follow him, for the Disciple must not look to be above his Master, nor the Servant to be better intreated then his Lord. If we were of the World (good Sister) no doubt the world would love us: But forasmuch as Christ hath chosen us out of the world, to serve God in Spirit & Verity, let us be well assured the World will hate us and persecute us, as it hath done our Lord and Master Christ. But yet let us be of good chear, for Christ hath overcome the World. The pain is but short that we can feel here, but the pleasure is perpetual that we shall feel else∣where. Let us set before us the Example of Christ, which abode the Cross, and despised the shame,Consolation un¦der the Cross. in respect of the joy that was set before him: even so let us consider for whose sake we suffer, whose Cause we defend, and what glorious Reward we shall have at the day of our victory, and then doubtless the consolation of these things will make sweet all our sufferings, and soon swallow up all the sorrows that we are sowled in for Gods sake. I could recite divers Texts of the Scriptures to confirm this point: but I need not, for I am well assured that you do know them most perfectly already. The Lord give you strength, and assist you with his holy Spirit, that you may continually walk in all points according to your godly knowledge: And then shall you do not as the most part of your Gospellers do now adayes the more is the pity. There are a great many in England that do perfectly know, that the Idolatrous Mass is abominable, devillish, and detestable in the sight of God; and yet, alas they be not afraid to pollute and defile their bo∣dies, which ought to be the Temples of the holy Ghost, with being present at it, so sinning against God and their own Con∣science. But dear Sister K. do you fly from it both in body and Soul, as
you would fly from the very Devil himself; Drink not of the Whore of Babylons Cup by no means, for it will infect the Body, and poison the Soul. Be not partakers of her sins (saith the An∣gel) lest you be partakers of the Plagues that shortly shall be pou∣red upon her. O what an array is this? that so many that know Gods Truth, will now turn again and defile themselves in the filthy Puddle of Antichrists stinking Religion! They go about to save their lives with their double dissimulation; but doubtless they shall lose everlasting life by it, if they do not Repent in time, and turn unto the Lord. But dear sister, my trust is that you do utterly ab∣horre the coming to any such thing. I hope that you will not by any means turn back into Egypt now, but that you will boldly venture through the Wilderness of Trouble and Persecution, that you may come into the Land that floweth with all kinde of Heavenly pleasures and joyful delectations, and possess the same for ever. Let us consider, how that every one of us doth owe unto God a death by nature, and how soon the Lord will require it of us, we know not. Oh how happy are we then, if God of his goodness appoint us to pay Natures debt with suffering for his Truth and Gospel sake, and so making us his faithful Witnesses with the Pro∣phets, Apostles, Martyrs and Confessors, yea with his dearly be∣loved Son Jesus Christ, to whom he doth here begin to fashion us like in suffering, that we might be like him also in glory. Thus, my dearly beloved Sister, I have been bold to trouble you a little with my rude and simple Letter, being made in haste as it doth appear. Yet I desire you to take it in good worth, as a token of my poor zeal unto you, and do accept my good will: And if it please God to spare me life and liberty, I trust hereafter to write unto you more largely. Fare ye well dear Sister E. K. the Lord bless you and all yours, and pour upon you the heavenly dew of his Grace. The Lord indue you with plentiful knowledge of his Verity, and fill you with his holy and mighty Spirit, that you may continually rejoyce in the Comforts of the same now and ever. Amen. Pray, pray, pray with stedfast Faith. Your daily Oratour, John Careles, Prisoner of the Lord.
A Letter of John Careles to Mrs. Agnes Glascock. THe everlasting peace of God in Jesus Christ, the continuall ayd, strength and comforts of his most pure, holy and mighty Spirit, be with you my dear and faithfull Sister Glascock, to the good performance of that good work which God hath so graciously begun in you, to his glory, and the commodity of his poor afflicted Church, and to your own eternal comfort in him. Amen. In our Lord I have most humble and hearty commendations unto you, my dear Sister, and most faithful Mother Glascock, with all remem∣brance of you in my daily Prayers, giving God most hearty land, praise and thanks for you, and on your behalf, in that he of his great mercy hath hitherto so mightily strengthned you, constantly to cleave unto your Captain Christ, notwithstanding the great assaults and manifold tempta∣tions that you have had to the contrary. Doubtless, dear heart, it can∣not be expressed what joy and comfort it is unto my very Soul, to see how mightily the Lord hath magnified himself in you, and other his dear elect darlings, whom he will shortly glorifie with himself, as he hath done other of his sweet Saints that are gone before you. Rejoyce therefore and be glad, for verily you have good cause, if you diligently consider the great dignity that God hath called you unto even in your old age, to be one of his worthy Witnesses unto the World, and I think you shall with me and other your Brethren in Bonds, seal the Lords Verity with the Testimony of your Blood. Surely, sweet Sister,What an high honour it is to suffer for Christ. this is the greatest pro∣motion that God can bring you or any other unto in this life, and an ho∣nour that the highest Angel in Heaven is not permitted to have. Therefore happy are you, Oh faithful daughter of Abraham, that the Lord will now preferre you before many other, yea or any other of your age, that I do know in England. Oh faithful and virtuous Matron, which wilt not be moved from the sure Rock Christ, upon whom you have so firmly built your house, that neither storms nor tempests, neither yet Hell gates, or any other temptations, shall ever be able once to prevail against it. Full well doth it appear by your constant continuance, that you have played the part of a wise builder, in counting the Cost afore∣hand belonging to the finishing of your Tower, and I doubt not but
(through Gods gift) you have sufficient to the performance thereof, that the Hypocrites of their part shall have no just cause to triumph against you, or to mock you, saying, Lo, this woman began to build, but is not able to make an end. Therefore go on boldly, and fear not; for God is faithfull (as S. Paul saith) which will not suffer you to be tempted above your strength, but either will he give you grace and strength to stand unto the death, (which is the gate and entrance into life) or else he will make such an out-scape for you, as shall be to the setting forth of his glory; the which above all other things, we that are his chosen chil∣dren ought for to seek, yea even with the loss of our own lives, being yet well assured that the same shall not be shortned one minute of an hour before the time that God hath appointed. Cast therefore (dear Sister) all your care upon the Lord, which (as S. Peter saith) careth for you. Great is his Providence for you, and mighty is his love and mercy towards you: with his grace he will defend you, and with his holy Spirit he will evermore guide you, wherewith he hath surely sealed you unto the day of Redemption: He hath also given you the same in earnest for the recovery of the purchased Posses∣sion, which he hath prepared for you before the foundation of the world was laid. Be strong therefore, and take a good heart, as I hear say you be. God for ever be blessed for you, which hath graft his love in your good heart, that nothing is able to separate you from the same, but will rather chuse to suffer adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a little season. Oh happy woman, that canst finde in thine heart to esteem the rebukes of Christ to be greater riches then all the treasures of the world, as good Moses did. Doubtless great is your reward in Heaven, which you shall shortly receive of his free gift, and not of any deserving. Thus dear Mother Glascock, I have been bold to trouble you with my rude and simple Letters, desiring you to take them in good worth, being done in great haste, as it doth appear; but yet proceeding from a poor heart, which floweth over in love towards you, as my daily prayers for you can testifie, which I trust shall supply that part of my duty to∣wards you, that my Pen now wanteth. I thank you, dear heart, for all your loving Tokens, and for the great kindness you have hitherto shewed unto my poor Brother Tyms, and his Wife and Children, with
all other of Gods people to whom you daily do good: the Lord recom∣pence the same sevenfold into your bosome, as I doubt not but he will, according to his infallible Promises. I pray you have my hearty com∣mendations unto your Husband. I beseech the Lord strengthen him in the Confession of his Truth (as my trust is that he will) that we may all joyfully rest with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdome of God; unto the which he bring us, that with his most precious blood hath bought us. The Blessing of God be with you now and ever. Amen. Your daily Orator and unfeigned Lover, John Careles, Prisoner of the Lord, Pray, pray, pray. A brief Admonition written by John Careles to Mrs. Agnes Glascock, in a Book of hers when she came to the Prison to visit him. THere is nothing that the holy Scripture throughout doth so much commend unto us, as true Faith, and stedfast trust in the Pro∣mises of Gods eternal mercies towards us in Jesus Christ. For from the same, as forth of the chief Fountain and Well-spring of life, do flow all kindes of virtues and godly fruits, specially true love towards God, in the which we ought purely to serve him all the dayes of our life: and also Christian Charity towards our Neighbours, as well to help them at all needs, as also not to hurt them by any means. Therefore pray ear∣nestly for the increase of faith, and lively feeling of Gods mercy: for all things are possible to him that can undoubtedly believe.The effects of Faith. Faith is that thing which assureth us of Gods mercy, and whereby we vanquish all the fiery darts of the Devil: Our victory that overcometh the world: The knife that killeth and mortifieth the flesh: and finally, that which set∣teth us at peace with God, and quieteth our Consciences alwayes before him, and maketh us merry and joyfull under the Cross, with many moe things then I can now express. Pray therefore for faith, in faith. And for the Lords sake, beware of Popery, and Popish Idolatry, the Idol of the wicked Mass, and other Idolatrous Service. Make not
your body, which is a member of Christ, a member of Antichrist. Re∣member that we shall receive of God according to that we do in the body, be it good or evil. Therefore glorifie God in your body, which is dearly bought. Betray not the Truth, lest the Lord deny you. If God be God, follow him. You cannot serve two Masters. I write not this as doubt∣ing you, but by the way of Admonition. God keep you from all evil. My Sister dear, God give you grace With stedfast Faith in Christ his Name, His Gospel still for to embrace, And live according to the same. To dye therefore, think it no shame, But hope in God with faithfull trust: And he will give you praise with fame, When you shall rise out of the dust. For which most sweet and joyfull day, To God with faith your Prayer make; And think on me I do you pray, The which did write this for your sake. And thus to God I you betake, Who is your Castle and strong Rock: He keep you whether you sleep or wake. Farewell dear Mistris A. Glascock. An other Letter of John Careles to Mrs. A. G. to comfort her in her repentance, after she had been at Mass, fruitful for all them to be read, which have fallen, and are to be raised up again. THe peace of God in Jesus Christ, the eternal comforts of his sweet Spirit be with you, and strengthen and comfort you my dear and faitful Sister. Amen. Although the perillous dayes be come, whereof Christ prophe∣sied, that if it were possible the very elect should be deceived; yet let the true faithful Christians rejoyce and be glad, knowing that the
Lord himself is their keeper, who will not suffer one hair of their heads to perish without his almighty good will and pleasure, nei∣ther will suffer them to be further tempte then he will give them strength to bear: but will in the midst of their temptations make a way for them to escape out. So good and gracious a God is he to all his chosen Children. And though sometimes he do let his elect stumble and fall, yet (no doubt) he will raise them up again to the further increase of their comfort, and to the setting forth of his glory and praise. Which thing (my dear and faithful loving Sister) I trust shall be well verified on you: for I do hear say that by the manifold allurements, inticements, procurements, yea and inforcements that you dear heart have had, your foot hath chanced to slip forth of the way, to the great discomfort of your Soul, and the heaviness of your heart. But my good Sister, be of good chear, for the Lord will not so leave you, but he will raise you up again, and make you stronger then ever you were; so that your fall shall turn to his glory & your profit. For if you had not by this proved the experience of your own strength, or rather your own weakness, you would have stood too much in your own Conceit, or perchance have gloried in your self, and have despised and condemned other weak persons that have committed the like offence. Therefore now you may see what the best of us all can do, if God leave us to our selves. Which thing ought to move you to be diligent to call earnestly upon God for his grace, and the strength of his Holy Spirit (without the which we are not able to stand one hour) and to be most thankful for the same when you have it, and then to be more circumspect in time to come. Therefore dear Sister, seeing that you have done otherwise then the word of God and your own Conscience would allow, yet dear heart, do you not think that God therefore will cast you clean away; but know, that he hath mercy enough in store for all them that truly repent and believe in him, although the sins of them were as many in number as the sands in the Sea, and as great as the sins of the whole world. It is a greater sin to mistrust the mercy & promises of God, then to commit the greatest offence in the World. Therefore, (good Sister) beware in any wise,To trust to Gods Promises. that you do not once mistrust
the promises of Gods mercy towards you; but know for a very surety, that all your sins be utterly forgiven you for Christs sake, be they never so many, so grivous, or so great. But now (dear heart) take eed and beware that you do not cloke that sin, and increase the same daily, in communicating with the wicked in their Idolatry, and devilish doings at their den of Thieves.Custome of sin a perilous matter. Do not (I say) dear Sister, come at any of their Anti∣christian service, lest by little and little you utterly lose a good Con∣science, and at length esteem it for none offence; as (alas) a great number doth at this day, to the great peril of their Souls. The Lord be merciful unto them, and give them grace to repent in time, and turn to the Lord, and then they shall be sure to finde mercy at the Lords hand, as doubtless you have done, praised be his Name therefore. Ah my dear Sister, you may now see the words of Christ verified up∣on your self, that a mans greatest foes shall be they of his own hous∣hold:A. G. entisd by her husband to go to the Mass. for your Husband hath gotten you to do that, which all the tyrants in the World could never have made you to do. Doubt∣less he may be sorry for it: God give him grace to repent, or else, without doubt, it will be laid to his charge one day, when he would not by his will hear it for all the goods of the World. Well, I think my Brother Tyms will write him a letter shortly that shall touch his Conscience, if he have any Conscience at all. But now again to you dear Sister. The thing that is done cannot be undone, and you are not the first that have offended, neither are you so good and so holy, as hath at a time slipt forth of the way. Therefore I would not have you to be so much discomforted as I hear say you be,The raising up of a troubled Conscience after his fall. as though God were not as able to forgive you your offence as he was to forgive his dear Saints that offended him in times past; or as though God were not as merciful now as ever he was: whereas in very deed, there is with the Lord as the Prophet saith) mercy and plentiful redemption; and his mercy farre sur∣mounteth all his works;God turneth all things to the best to them that be hi. and he never faileth any that put their whole trust and confidence in him, how great an offender, or how wicked a trespasser soever he be. No, he maketh their falls and backslidings many times to turn to their profit and commodity, and
to the setting forth of his glory: as doubtless dear Sister, yours shall do, if you put your whole Faith, hope, and trust onely in his infinite and eternal sweet mercies. Oh what a subtile, crafty, lying Serpent is that Satan our old Enemy,Satan when he cannot bring a man to his ser∣vo, he presseth him wth di∣strust of Gods mercy. that when he seeth that he cannot make us to continue in our wickedness to do him service, would then bring us into a doubt∣ing and mistrusting of the mercy of God, which is the greatest offence that can be; yea, infidelity is the root and original of all other sins. Therefore (my sweet Sister) give no place to that cruel adversary of mankinde, who hath been a lyer and a mutherer from the beginning, but stedfastly believe the Lord, who hath sent you word by me his most unworthy Servant, that all your sins be pardoned, forgiven, and clean released for Jesus Christs sake our onely Lord and Saviour. To whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honour, glory, praise, thanks, power, rule, and dominion for ever and for ever. Amen. Farewel my dear Sister, and be of good chear. Believe in the Lord and you shall live for ever. The Lord increase your Faith. Amen, Amen. Your poor Brother and daily faithful Orator, John Careles, Prisoner of the Lord. Pray for me. Another Letter of John Careles to A. B. a faithfull Minister of the Lord, containing certain fruitfull Precepts of Matrimony. I Beseech the same everlasting Lord (my dear and faithful Brother) that blessed young Tobias with his Wife Sarah, and brought them together in due time with reverence and fear, preserve and bless you both, and your seed after you, that they may increase the number of the faithful by thousands and thousands. And as the Lord of his great mercy and fatherly Providence hath been alwayes careful for you, and now hath for your comfort accomplished his good work in coupling you with a faithful Mate: so see that you
be thankful for his Providence towards you, that it may every way in you be an increase of love and godliness, yea of Christian joy and gladness in these sorrowful dayes: but yet so, that you mourn with the true mourners of Sion, and be sorry (yet in measure) for the hurt of the same. Pray also in faith for her pro∣sperity, that the Lord may build up the walls of Jerusalem a∣gain. Psal. 146.Oh that the Lord would turn Sions. Captivity as the river, into the South; then should our hearts be made glad, and our mouthes filled with laughter. Then would the Heathen Hypocrites say, The Lord hath done much for them. Oh, the Lord hath done great things for us already, whereof let us heartily rejoyce, and praise his Name therefore. For though we now sow with tears, yet shall we be sure to reap with gladness: and as we now go forth weeping, bearing forth good seed, so shall we come again with joy,The death of the Martyrs is the life of the Gos∣pel. and bring our sheaves full of Corn. Yea, the death of the Martyrs (which is most precious in his sight) shall be the life of the Gospel, spight of the Papists hearts. Pray for me (dear heart) that I may be counted worthy to sowe some seed amongst the sweet Saints of the Lord, that I may reap the same again without ceasing,A sowing time is Christs Church. at the Harvest. It is now sowing time of the year, men say in the Country, and I think I shall make an end of sowing before all March be past: for I hear say that I shall prove how my Plough will enter into the stony ground of the hard hearted Papists, within these four dayes. I hope to hold fast, and not to look back, neither for fear nor flattery, until I have made an end of sowing, and then will I set me down and rest me, and ask them all no leave, and look for the lively fruit and increase thereof with joy and gladness. My dear Brother, the time approacheth near (I praise God there∣fore) that I must put off this siful tabernacle and go home to my heavenly Father, where divers of my dear Brethren are already, looking and wishing for me. I beseech you therefore that you will help me forward with your faithful Prayers, as I know you doe, for I do feel the comfort and commodity thereof.
That you have observed my simple Counsell, I am right glad,This counsel was that he should marry, notwith∣standing certain lets, whereby Satan sought to hinder his Mar∣riage. and I trust in the Lord God, you shall finde comfort in the same. And that you may so doe indeed, I have been so bold to write these few words unto you, because I shall see you no more in this corruptible life: therefore mark them well. First and above all things you must be very circumspect to keep the band of love, and beware that there never spring up the root of bitterness between you. If at any time there happen to rise any cause of unkindness between you (as it is unpossible alwayes to be free from it) see that you weed up the same with all lenity, gentleness and patience,The root of bit∣terness to be weeded out with the Spade of Patience. and never suffer your self, nor your wife to sleep in displeasure. If you have cause to speak sharply, and sometimes to reprove,How and when the husband ought to re∣prove. beware that you do not the same in the presence of other: but keep your words until a convenient time (which is the point of a wise man, saith Solomon) and then utter them in the spirit of meekness, and the groaning spirit of perfect love: which you must also let sometimes to cover faults, and wink at them if they be not intolle∣rable. Whatsoever loss and mischance shall happen unto you,Faults somtime must be covered with love. take it patiently, and bear it merrily: and though the same should come partly through your wifes negligence, yet let it rather be a loving warning to take heed in time to come, then a cause of sorrow for that which is past and cannot be holpen. I know by mine own experience that we are in this life subjct to many inconveniences, and that of nature we are prone to displeasure,Not to take un∣kindness for e∣very trifle. and ready to think unkindeness for every little trifle, and specially with our best friends, yea soonest with our loving wives, which be most lothest to dis∣please us. But let us beware of this cankered corruption, and consider that wrought most of all, in love to bear with them, according to Christs example towards his Congregation, for whom he gave himself to cleanse it, &c. I had thought to have treated this matter at large, but even now I am interrupted and otherwise letted. I doubt not but you know your duty therein a great deal better then I can declare it unto you; and as you know it, so will do it: but I love to be bold with you. I intend also to write to your wife very shortly, and so take my last farewel of you forever in this World
And thus in great haste I am now constrained to make an end. The blessing of God be alwayes with you. Your own forever, John Careles. Pray, pray, pray with Faith. Another Letter of John Careles to Elizabeth, Wife of the said A. B. containing likewise certain godly Precepts of Matrimony pertaining to her duty. THe everlasting peace of God in Iesus Christ, the continual ayd, strength and comfort of his most holy and mighty Spi∣rit, with increase of knowledge, faith, and perfect feeling of Gods eternal mercy, be with you my dear and faithful loving Sister, E. B. and with your godly loving husband, and my dear and faithful Brother, to the full performance of that good which he hath so graciously begun in you, that in all things you may be mad rich and blessed in him, and your seed after you, now and ever Amen. As I have been long desirous to write unto you (my dear heart i the Lord) not onely being thereto bound of duty, but also ofte provoked of him, to whom I owe my self, and all that I am able to do (I mean, even that blessed of the Lords own mouth, whom God hath joyned with you in that holy and Christian state of Ma∣trimony) even so at the last I have obtained time and occasion, in some part to perform that which I have long purposed. And for∣asmuch as the Lord of his great mercy and fatherly Care and Pro∣vidence over you his dear childe, hath now graciously accomplish∣ed that good work among many other, which I (as a friend of the Bridegroom) have full heartily wished, and often prayed for: I think it good, yea and my bounden duty, to treat of such things as may be profitable to preserve mutual love and faithful amity be∣tween you;Satan an enemy to all godly af∣fairs. which I know Satan will chiefly labour to diminish, if he cannot altogether destroy the same, lest by many joyful occa∣sions you should be provoked continually to praise God for his
good gft, which that enemy hath by all means sought to hinder from you. As for all other things, I know you are sufficiently instructed, and also have a most godly learned Companion, who is well able further to teach you, if need do require. But in this thing I know my Experience is more then his. Therefore, my good Sister, first and before all things, see that you do diligently consider, that as every good and perfect gift pertaining to Soul and Body, is given from above, and cometh from the Father of Light: Even so to whomsoever the Lord dealeth any of his benefits, of them he doth chiefly require alwayes a thankful heart for the same; for else he will either take away his good gifts again, or turn the same to their great discommodity, and in the end to the increase of their con∣demnation: So detestable in his sight is the Sin of Ingratitude.The sin of in∣gratitude. But to such as be thankful for his benefits, he doth not onely to the old, ever adde new, but also maketh the commodity of his for∣mer gifts ever more and more to increase, untill by them they are fully perswaded, and throughly certified of his everlasting love in Christ Jesus, which is eternal life it self: so much doth he of his great mercy delight in a thankful heart. Therefore I do yet once again earnestly require you, that above all things you be thankful to God for his benefits;God loveth a thankful hoart. not onely for your Election, Creation, Redemption, and Preservation, but also for his other temporal gifts wherewith he hath endued you: amongst the which, the chief and most excellent is (as testifieth the holy Ghost) your good, godly, and faithful loving Husband. For (as the Wise∣man saith) Goods and possessions may come to a man by the death of his friends, but a good Wife is the gift of God,A good wi∣te gift of Go which the Lord will give for a good portion to such as fear him. And the like is of a good Husband, as the Lord hath now given you, praised be his Name therefore. He hath not given you an ignorant, froward, churlish, brawling, wastful, rioting, drunken Husband, wherewith he hath plagued many other (as he might also have done you) but he hath given you a most godly, leaned, gentle, loving, quiet, patient, thrifty, diligent, and sober Husband, by whom he will nourish, cherish, keep and defend you, instruct and teach
you, yea care and provide for you and your Children (the which he will also by him give you) such things as be necessary for you. He hath not dealt so with every body; and yet he hath done this and much more for you my dear Sister, and will thereto increase joy and love between you:God delighteth in the agreement between Man & Wife. for as he delighteth in the love & godly agree∣ment of man & wife together, so is it he only that maketh them and all the whole houshold to be of one mind. Unto the which his gra∣cious work he requireth your diligence, and will use you as his in∣strument and mean, the more effectuously to accomplsh the same. And therefore I now require you to observe this my simple counsel, the which I have here written as a testimonial of my good will towards you, because I think in this life I shall never more see you. Now, as I have shewed you how you should be thankful unto God for his good gifts: so I exhort you, and (as much as in me lieth) charge you to be evermore thankful unto your dear loving husband who hath given himself unto you; which is a more pre∣cious jewel in the Church of God, then perchance you are yet aware of.The duty of Wives toward their Husbands. Think your self unworthy to be matched with such an Instrument of God; and also reverence evermore the gifts of God in him, and seek with true obedience and love to serve him▪ in recompence of his true and painful heart towards you. Be loth in any wise to offend him; yea, rather be careful and diligent to please him, that his Soul may bless you. If at any time you shall chance to anger him, or to do or speak any thing that shall grieve him, see that you never rest until you have pacified him, and made him merry again. If at any time he shall chance to blame you without a cause, or for that you cannnot do therewith (which thing happeneth some∣times of the best men living) see that you bear it patiently, and give him no uncomely or unkinde word for it; but ever more look upon him with a loving and chearful countenance, and rather take the fault upon you, then seem to be displeased. A chearful coun∣tenance.Be alwayes merry and chearful in his company, but not with too much lightness. Beware in any wise of swelling, powting, or lowring, for that is a token of a cruel and unloving heart; except
it be in respect of sin, or in the time of sickness. Be not sorrowful for any adversity that God sendeth: but be∣ware that nothing be spilt or go to waste through your negligence. In any wise see rhat you be quick and cleanly about his meat and drink, and prepare him the same according to his diet in due season.Temperance in apparrel. Go cleanly and well favouredly in your Apparel, but beware of of Pride in any wise. Finally, in word and deed shew your self wise, humble, merry, and loving towards him, and also towards such as he doth love, and then shall you lead a blessed life. I could speak of many other things, the which I have learned and proved true by experience: but I know that you will do in all things much better then I can teach you, because you have that anointing that teacheth you all things; who hath also given you an heart to obey and serve him. Yet I trust you will not be offended for this which I have written, but ra∣ther accept my good will towards you, whom I love in the Lord, as well as I do my daughter Judith. Thus as mine own Soul, I commend you both to God, desiring him to bless you with all manner of Spiritual blessings in heavenly things, and also with the dew of Heaven, and fatness of the Earth, that in all things you may be made rich in Jesus Christ our Lord and onely Saviour. The Lord increase and bless the fruit of your bodyes, that your Children may stand round about your Table, thick, fresh, and lusty, like the Olive branches. God give you both a long life, that you may see and bless your Childrens Children, unto the third and fourth Generation, and teach them the true fear and love of God, and that Faith for the which they shall be accepted in his sight. God let you see the prosperity of Sion; for whose lying in the dust let your hearts mourn. The Lord make perfect your love together in him, and alwayes increase the same,Note, that both these departed in quiet peace, the one 1565. the other 1568. and bring you both in peace to your graves, at a good age. And now I bid you both most heartily farewel: and I think I shall now take my leave of you for ever in this life. I beseech you both to aid me with your continual Prayers (as I will not forget you in mine) that I may have a joyful victory through Jesus Christ: To whose most merci∣full
defence, I do most heartily for ever commend you to be kept unblameable untill his coming. The which I beseech him to hasten for his Mercies sake. Your own unfeignedly, John Careles, Prisoner of the Lord. Here endeth the Letters of John Careles. A Letter of Mr. John Bradfords, which he wrote to a faithfull Woman in her heaviness and trouble: most comfortable for all those to reade that are afflicted and broken∣hearted for their sins. GOd our good Father for his mercies sake in Christ, with his E∣ternal Consolation so comfort you, as I desire to be comforted of him in my most need: yea, he will comfort you, my dear Sister; onely cast your care upon him, and he never can nor will forsake you For his calling and gifts be such, that he can never repent him of them.Rom. 11. Whom he loveth, he loveth to the end: none of his cho∣sen can perish. Of which number I know you are, my dearly be∣loved Sister: God increase the faith thereof daily more and more in you: he give unto you to hang wholly on him and on his Pro∣vidence and Protection.Gods Providence and Protection. For who so dwelleth under that Secret thing, and help of the Lord, he shall be cock-sure for evermore. He that dwelleth,Psal. 31.90. I say: for if we be flitters, and not dwellers, as was Lo a flitter from Segor,Gen. 19. where God promised him protection, if he had dwelled there still; we shall remove to our loss, as he did into the Mountains. Dwell therefore, that is, trust, and that finally unto the end, in the Lord my dear Sister) and you shall be as Mount Sion. As Moun∣tains compass Jerusalem, so doth the Lord all his people. How then can he forget you, which are as the apple of his eye, for his dear Sons sake. Ah dear heart, that I were now but one half hour with you, to be a Simon to help to carry your Cross with you. God
send you some good Simon to be with you, and help you. You complain in your Letters of the blindness of your minde; and the troubles you feel. My dearly beloved, God make you thankful for that which he hath given unto you: he open your eyes to see what and how great benefits you have received, that you may be less covetous, or rather impatient, for so (I fear me) it should be called, and more thankful. Have not you received at his hands, sight to see your blindeness, and thereto a desirous and seeking heart to see where he lyeth in the mid-day, as his dear Spouse speaketh of her self in the Canticles? Oh Joyce, my good Joyce, what a gift is this? Many have some sight, but none this sobbing and sighing, none this seeking which you have I know, but such as he hath mar∣ried unto him in his mercies. You are nor content to kiss his feet with the Magdalen, but you would be kssed even with the kisses of his mouth, Can. 1. You would see his face, with Moses, for∣getting how he biddeth us seek his face, Psal. 27. yea, and that for ever, Psal. 10. which signifieth no such si ht as you desire, to be in this present life, which would see God now face to face,God cannot be se n, but cover∣ed under some∣thing. How faith seeth God, where flesh seeth Hell. whereas he cannot be seen but covered under something: yea some∣time in that which is (as you would say) clean contrary to God; as to see his Mercy in his Anger. In bringing us to Hell, Faith seeth him bring us to Heaven; in darkness, it beholdeth brightness; in hiding his face from us, it beholdeth his merry countenance. How did Job see God, but as you would say under Satans cloke? for who cast the fire from Heaven upon his goods? who overthrew his house, and stirred up men to take away his Cattel, but Satan? And yet Job pierced through all these, and saw Gods work, saying, The Lord hath give, he Lord hath taken away, &c. In reading of the Psalms, how often do you see that David in the shadow of death, saw Gods sweet love? And so (my dearly beloved) I see that you in your darkness and dimness, by Faith to see clarity and brightness: by Faith (I say) because Faith is of things absent, of things hoped for, of things which I appeal to your Conscience, whether you desire not. And can you desire any thing which you know not? And is there of heavenly things any other true knowledge then by Faith?
Therefore, my dear heart, be thankful, for (before God I write it) you have great cause. Ah my Joyce, how happy is the state wherein you are?The state of Gods Children described. Verily you are even in the blessed state of Gods Children: for they mourn, and do not you so? and that not for worldly weal, but for spiritual riches, Faith, Hope, Charity, &c. Do you not hunger and thirst for righteousness? And I pray you, saith not Christ,Matth. 5. who cannot lye, that happy are such? How should God wipe away the tears from your eyes in Heaven, if now on earth you shed no tears? How could Heaven be a place of rest, if on Earth you did finde it? How could you desire to be at home, if in your journey you found no grief? How could you so often call upon God, and talk with him, as I know you do, if your enemy should sleep all day long? How should you elswhere be made like unto Christ, I mean in joy, if in sorrow you sobbed not with him? If you will have joy and felicity, you must first needs feel sor∣row and misery.The way to hea∣ven is to go through hell. If you will go to Heaven, you must sayle by Hell. If you will embrace Christ in his robes, you must not think scorn of him in his rags. If you will sit at Christs Table in his Kingdome, you must first abide with him in his Temptations. If you will drink of his cup of glory, forsake not his cup of Ignominy. Can the head Corner-stone be rejected, and the other more base stone in Gods building be in this World set by? you are one of his lively stones: be content therefore to be hewn and snagged at, that you might be made the more meet to be joyned to your fel∣lows which suffer with you Satans snatches, the Worlds wounds, contempt of Conscience,Frets of the flesh and frets of the flesh, where-through they are enforced to cry: Oh wretches that we are, who shall de∣liver us?Rom. 6. You are of Gods Corn, fear not therefore the Flayle, the Fan, Milstone, nor Oven. You are one of Christs Lambs, look therefore to be fleeced, hayled at, and even slain. If you were a Market sheep, you should go in more fat and grassy Pasture.Gods sheep must feed on the bare Common, where the devils ctatel are st d. If you were for the Fair, you should be stalfed, and want no weal: but because you are for Gods own occupying, therefore you must pasture on the bare Common, abiding the storms and tempests that will fall. Happy, and twice happy are you (my dear Sister) that God now haileth you whither you would not,John 21.
that you might come whither you would. Suffer a little, and be still. Let Satan rage against you, let the World cry out, let your Conscience accuse you, let the Law load you and press you down; yet shall they not prevail for Christ is Emanuel, that is, God with us. I God be with us, who can be against us?Rom. 8. The Lord is with you; your Father cannot forget you; your Spouse loveth you. If the waves and surges arise, cry with Peter, Lord I perish,Matth. 8. and he will put out his hand and help you. Cast out your Anchor of Hope, and it will not cease for all the stormy surges, till it take hold on the Rock of Gods Truth and Mercy. Think not that he which hath given you so many things corpo∣rally, as inductions of spiritual and heavenly Mercies,Philip. 1. Desire of spiri∣tual comfort, though it be lacking, is a great gift of God and that without your deserts or desire, can deny you any spiritual com∣fort desiring it. For if he give to desire, he will give you to have and enjoy the thing desired. To desire to have, and the going a∣bout to ask, ought to certifie your Conscience, that they be his earnest of the thing which you asking he will give you, yea before you ask, and whilest you are about to ask he will grant the same (as Esay saith) to his glory, and your eternal consolation. He that spared not his own Son for you, will not nor cannot think any thing too good for you, my heartily beloved. If he had not chosen you, (as most certainly he hath) he would not have so called you: he would never have justified you:Rom. 8. he would never have so glorified you with his gracious gifts, which I know, praised be his Name therefore: he would never have so ex∣ercised your Faith with temptations, as he hath done and doth, if (I say) he had not chosen you.Exercise of ten∣tations a great token of election I have chosen you (as doubtless dear heart, he hath done in Christ, for in you I have seen his earnest, and before me, and to me you could not deny it, I know both where and when) if I say, he hath chosen you, then neither can you, nor ever shall you perish. For if you fall, he putteth under his hand; you shall not lie still: so careful is Christ your keeper over you. Never was Mother so mindful over her childe, as he is over you. And hath not he alwayes been so? Speak woman when did he finally forget you? And will he now, trow you, in your most need do otherwise, you calling upon
him, and desiring to please him? Ah my Joyce, think you God to be mutable?Rom. 11. Is he a changeling? Doth not he love to the end, them whom he loveth? Are not his gifts and calling such, that he cannot repent him of them? for else were he no God. If you should perish, then wanted he power: for I am certain his will towards you is not to be doubted of. Hath not the Spirit, which is the Spi∣rit of truth,Every lying spi∣rit not to be hearkned unto Satan seeketh to bring tender consciences to doubting: but Gods promise in Christ standeth sure for ever. told you so? And will you now hearken, with Eve, to the lying spirit, which would have you not to despair (no, he goeth more craftily to work, howbeit to that end, if you should give ear unto it, which God forbid) but to doubt and stand in a mammering, and so should you never truly love God, but serve him of a servile fear, lest he should cast you off for your unworthiness and unthankfulness; as though your thankfulness or worthiness were any causes with God, why he hath chosen you, or will final∣ly keep you. Ah mine own dear heart, Christ onely, Christ onely, and his mer∣cy and truth.All our election is in and for Christ only. In him is the cause of your election. This Christ, this Mercy, this Truth of God remaineth for ever, is certain for ever, and so is your Election certain for ever, for ever, for ever; I say for ever. If an Angel of heaven should tell you contrary, accursed be he, accursed be he. Your thankfulness and worthiness are fruits and effects of your election, they are no causes. These fruits and effects shall be so much more fruitful and effectual, by how much you waver not. Therefore (my dearly beloved) arise, and remember from whence you are fallen.Psl. 120. You have a Shepherd which neither slumbereth nor sleepeth. No man nor devil can pull you out of his hands. Night and day he commandeth his Angels to keep you. Have you forgotten what I read to you out of the Psalm, The Lord is my Shepherd,Psal. 25. I can want nothing? Do you not know that God sparred Noah in the Ark on the outside, so that he could not get out? So hath he done to you, my good Sister, so hath he done to you. Ten thousand shall fall on your right hand,Psal 90. and twenty thousand on your left hand, yet no evil shall touch you. Say boldly there∣fore,Psal. 125. Many a time from my youth up they have fought against me, but they have not prevailed: no, nor never shall prevail, for the
Lord is round about his people. And who are the people of God, but such as hope in him? Happy are they that hope in the Lord: and you are one of those, my dear heart, for I am assured you have hoped in the Lord: I have your words to shew most manifestly, and I know they were written unfeignedly. I need not to say, that even before God you have simply confessed to me, and that oftentimes, no less. And once if you had this hope,Though feeling fail, yet let hope hold fast. as you doubt∣less had it, though now you feel it not, yet shall you feel it again: for the anger of the Lord lasteth but a moment, but his mercy last∣eth for ever. Tell me, my dear heart, who hath so weakned you? Surely not a perswasion which came from him that called you. For why should you waver? Why should you waver,The eye of faith must look upon nothing else but onely Christ crucified. and be so heavy hearted? Whom look you on? On your self? on your worthiness? on your thankfulness? on that which God requireth of you, as faith, hope, love, fear, joy, &c. Then can you not but waver in∣deed: for what have you as God requireth? Believe you, hope you, love you, &c. as much as you should do? No, no, nor never can in this life. Ah my dearly beloved, have you so soon forgot∣ten that which ever should be had in memory? namely, that when you would and should be certain and quiet in Conscience, then should your Faith burst throughout all things, not onely that you have in you, or else are in heaven, earth or hell, untill it come to Christ crucified, and the eternal sweet mercies and goodness of God in Christ? Here, here is the resting place, here is your Spouses bed: creep into it, and in your arms of Faith embrace him: bewail your weakness, your unworthiness, your diffidence, &c. and you shall see he will turn to you. What said I, You shall see? Nay, I should have said, You shall feel he will turn to you. You know that Moses, when he went into the Mount to talk with God, he entred into a dark Cloud; and Elias had his face covered when God passed by. Both these dear friends of God, heard God, but they saw him not: but you would be preferred before them. See now, my dear heart, how covetous you are. Ah be thankful, be thankful. But God be praised that your covetousness is Moses covetousness. Well, with him you shall be satisfied. But when? Forsooth when he shall appear. Here is not the time of seeing,Psal. 16.
but as it were in a glass. Isaac was deceived, because he was not content with hearing onely. Therefore to make an end of these many words, wherewith I fear me I do but trouble you from better exercises: inasmuch as you are indeed the childe of God, elect in Christ before the be∣ginning of all times: inasmuch as you are given to the custody of Christ, as one of Gods most precious jewels: inasmuch as Christ is faithful, and hitherto hath all power, so that you shall never perish no, one hair of your head shall not be lost. I beseech you,Learn here to put away doubt∣ing, all tender hearts that seek after Christ. I pray you, I desire you I crave at you hands with all my very heart, I ask of you with hand, pen, tongue, and minde, in Christ, through Christ, for Christ, for his Name, Blood, Mercies, Power, and Truths sake (my most entirely beloved Sister) that you admit no doubting of Gods finall Mercies towards you, howsoever you feel your self: but complain to God, and crave of him as of your tender and dear Father, all things; and in that time which shall be most opportune, you shall finde and feel far above that your heart, or the heart of any creature can conceive, to your eternal joy. Amen, Amen, Amen. The good Spirit of God alwayes keep us as his dear children: he comfort you, as I desire to be comforted (my dearly beloved) for evermore. Amen. This 8. of August, by him that in the Lord desireth to you as well and as much felicity, as to his own heart. John Bradford.
A worthy Answer of a constant Martyr called Guy de Brez, Anno Dom. 1566. GƲy de BreZ, a minister of the Gospel, being committed Pri∣soner into the Castle of Tournay, was visited by many Ladies and Gentlewomen, only out of a desire to see him, in regard he was a man so highly esteemed. Some at the first view scoffed; others railed on him; but others were moved to take pitty and compassion on him. Amongst the rest, the Countess of Ren, ac∣companied with certain Gentlewomen, coming into the Prison, and at her first entrance beholding the Iron chain to which was fastned; Mr. Guy, said she, I wonder how you can either eat, drink, or sleep in quiet, for wer I in your case, the very terrour thereof would goe nigh to kill me? O Madam, said he, the good cause for which I suffer, and that inward peace of Conscience with which God hath endued mee, makes me eat and drink with greater contentment then my enemies can which seek my life: yea so far off is it that my bonds or chain do any way terrifie me, or break off my sleep, that on the contrary I glory and take delight therein, esteeming them at a higher rate then chains and rings of Gold, or any other Jewels of price whatsoever; for they yield me much more profit. Yea when I hear the ratling of my chains, me thinks I hear as it were some sweet instrument of musick sounding in mine ears: not that such an effect comes meerly from my chains, but in regard I am bound therewith for maintaining the truth of the Gospel. The same Martyr in a letter to his wife, acquaints her with Gods gracius dealing with him in all his assaults. SPeaking of his apprehension, he shews how carnal reason be∣gan to play its part against the Providence of God; for saith he, these thoughts came thronging into my head; what meant we to go so many in company together as we did? had it not been for
such and such we had never been discovered or taken. Under such like cogitations I lay for a while, saith he, even in a manner over∣whelmed, till by the assistance of Gods holy Spirit my minde was raised up to meditate on Gods Providence. After which my heart began to feel wonderful rest and contentment; saying thus in my self, O my God, the day and hour of my birth was before ordained by thee, & ever since thou hast preserved and kept me in great perils and dangers, and hitherto delivered me out of them all. And if now the hour be come wherein I must pass out of this life into thy king∣dome, thy holy will be done; I cannot escape out of ty hands; yea, though I could, yet Lord thou knowest I would not, seeing all my felicity depends upon conforming my Will unto thine. From these considerations I received no small consolation, and therefore, dear wife, rejoyce with mee, I pray you, and bless our good God for these his mercies towards me; for he doh nothing but that which is equal and right. You have been privy to, and acquainted with all the travels, crosses and persecutions which have befallen me, yea, and have your self been partaker with me therein, when you accompanied me in my voyages during the time of my exile: and now after all these you see, my welbeloved in the Lord, how he holdeth forth to mee his hand of Providence, to drive me home to himself into his blessed Kingdome. I now lead you the way, and when his will is you shall follow me thither. Our separation shall not be for ever: it will not be long ere we be gathered under one head Jesus Christ. This World is not the place of our rest: no, Heaven is our home, this is but the place of our banishment. Let us therefore aspire after our true Country, namely Heaven, and long to be received into the mansions of our heavenly Father, where we shall see our Head and Brother, our Husband and Saviour Jesus Christ, with the noble triumphant assemblies of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and so many millions of Martyrs, to whom I hope shortly to be gathered, having finished the course of that ad∣ministration which I have received of the Lord Jesus. Wherefore dear wife, be you comforted in the meditation of these things. Take into consideration the honour the Lord doth you, in giving you a Husband who is not only called to be a Minister of Christs
Gospel, but also so highly advanced of God, as to be ac∣counted worthy to partake of the Crown of Martyrdome. It is an honour which the Angels in Heaven are not capable of.Angels not ca∣pable of Mr∣tyrdome. I now rejoyce in my sufferings, my heart leapeth within me; in my Afflictions I finde nothing wanting unto mee; I am filled with the abundant riches of my God; yea so farre am I comforted therewith, that I have sufficient store not only for my self, but to impart thereof also to as many as I have opportunity to speak unto: which bounty and favour I beseech my eternal Lord God to con∣tinue unto me his poor Prisoner: yea,Gods goodness to his afflicted children is oft above and be∣yond their ex∣pectation. I am perswaded that he will perform it unto the end; For by good expeience I feel, that be never forsakes them that trust in him. I could never have imagin∣ed that God would have been so gracious as he hath been to me his poor creature. I now taste of the fidelity and bounty of Christ my Saviour: I am here taught to practise what I have preached unto others. Yea, let me not be ashamed to confess, that when I heretofore preached I spake but as a Parrat, in regard of that which I have now better lear∣ned by proof and experience.Prisons prove Gods School∣houses to the faithful. I have profited more in the Schoolhouse of this prison, then ever I did in all my life before: for I have the Holy Ghost, who is my constant instrcter and Schoolmaster, teaching me how to handle my weapons in this fight of afflictions. Satan on the other side, who is the sworn enemy of all Gods Elect, compasseth me about on every side as a roaring Lyon thinking to devour me. But he who hath said, Fear not,John 16.33. I have overcome the World, puts as it were new courage into me; and then I see the Lord bruising Satan under my feet;Rom. 16.20. feeling the power of God perfected in my weakness:2 Cor. 12.9. and that the Lord causeth me one while to feel my infirmity and weakness,It is profitable for the godly so cies to feel their infir∣mities. that so I may take knowledge how I am but a poor earthen vessel (even weakness it self,) to hum∣ble me, that God may have all the glory; and then by and by he fortifies and comforts me, (I may truly say) incredibly above all I could ask or think. For I would not change my condition with theirs who perse∣cute me. I take my rest, eat and drink with more hearts case then they. I am indeed lodged in the strongest and vilest Prison they
have, dark and obscure, which for the darkness thereof is called Bruna;Brunain a Pri∣son of the Va∣lencians. where I have no ayre to breathe at, but a little stinking hole, where they lay all their rubbish and where the drunkards commonly vent their Urine. I am laden with Irons both on my hands and feet,By reason wher∣of he complains he wrote with uch difficulty, and therefore could not write as otherwise he would have done which are a continual torment unto me; the irons eating through the flesh, even to the bare bones. The Provost-Marshal comes to view my Fetters twice or thrice  day, fearing lest I should make an escape: for preventing where∣of, he hath placed three Guards of Fourty men before the Prison door, &c. And thus having given to his Wife his Advice, how to behave her self during her Widowhood, and how to train up her Chil∣dren, with his loving Salutations remembred to her self, and other his special Friends, he closeth up his Letter. FINIS.
