A4099G 551.a.32[233] R223025 R232784 R232816 99889106 196224
At the Heart and Star, over against the Black-Bull, in the Great Old-Baily, lives a PHYSICIAN. WHO by the Blessing of God on his great Study, Pains, Travels, and daily Experience, hath ever had wonderful Success in Cu∣ring the following Diseases, viz. Cancers, Ulcers, and Cankers of all kinds; Consumptions, and Coughs, the King's-Evil, Joynt Evil, and all scrophulous Humours: The Stone, or Gravel in the Reins or Blad∣der, he perfectly dissolves, and brings away with ease; the which is not known to be perform'd by any Person but himself: And gives great Ease in the violent Pains of the Gout, perfecting the Cure, if Curable. He Cures all Pains in the Limbs, Cramps, Pleuresies, Rheumatisms, or Wind-Gout; the Dropsie, Itch, Scurvey, Lousie-Evil, Falling-sickness, Fits, Faintings, Vapours, and Jaundice of all sorts: All the different kinds of Fevers and Agues, Imposthumes; and all unnatural Swellings; Worms, Cholick, Head-ach, Madness, Forgetfullness; Deafness; and all Infirmities of the Eyes; Stinking-breath, Ptysick, or shortness of Breath, Green-sickness, Barrenness, and prevents Mis∣carriages; with many secret Infirmities, relating to the Female-Sex: Also the Rickets in Children he Cures in three Weeks, or a Months time at farthest: Crookedness in Children, from two to sixteen Years of Age: Ruptures, or broken Bellies, and such as cannot hold their Water; Leprosies, or scald Heads. He Cureth the Venereal Disease, with all its Symptoms, after a new, pleasant, speedy, and safe Method, without Fluxing, Confinement, loss of Business, or Dangerous and Poysonous Merourial Preparations: And has also an incomparable Anti-venereal Pill, that Cures the running of the Reins, Heat of Urine, and all other Symptoms of the Venereal Di∣sease in a short time, price from 2 s. 6 d. to 5 s. the Box. He hath a most excellent Elixir Proprietatis, far exceeding all vul∣gar Preparations, price from 2 s. 6 d. to 5 s. the Bottle, with its ex∣traordinary Vertues, and Directions how to use it. He also prepareth a most admirable Chymical Balsamic Spirit, which speedily Cureth all green Wounds, and old invetrate Ulcers to admiration, price from 2 s. 6 d. to 5 s. the Bottle. He hath also a singular Cathartick Family-Pill, Strengthening and Restorative far beyond any yet known, and most admirable in the Re∣lief of many of the above mentioned Distempers; they may be safely taken at all Times and Seasons, and keep good many Years, as well by Sea as Land, tho' carried into hot Countries: He hath sold great Quan∣tities to the East-Indies, and to Jamaica, and Barbadoes, and to other Parts of the West-Indies; they most effectually Cure the Distempers of those Countries; and now for the Publick good, are sold for 2 s. 6 d. and 5 s. the Box. He likewise hath the most excellent Anti-Febrifick, with which he hath Cured many Hundreds, when other Means have failed, and have
been thought past Cure by others: It never fails (if curable) to take off the height of the Fever in six Hours, reviving and chearing the Spirits to admiration. The like no other can produce. Those that by way of prevention would secure themselves against the Distempers that usually afflict Mankind, may take 2 or 3 Doses of his Pills and Elixir, than which, nothing is better. He gives Judgment on Urines, and all Distempers, and Candidly deals with the Patients in Resolving them, whether Cureable or not. And for the satisfaction of those that think any Season of the Year improper to take Physick in; it may be adviseable to assure them, that when ever a Distemper seizes, it's then time to seek Relief. It would be tedious to insert the many Cures he hath performed, and therefore shall trouble the Reader only with these few following, viz. The Wife of Mr. Parker, Ribbon-Weaver, in Nicholas-street in Shore-ditch, who was in a languishing Condition for 2 Years, with a conti∣nual Pain and Tumor in the Womb, and was persuaded for a long time that she was with Child; and given over by many Physicians, some affirming that she had a Devil in her; and by the Blessing of God, she was perfectly restored to Health by him in 3 Months. The Wife of Mr. John Seal, Weaver, in Cock-Alley, in the same Street, that had been tormented with an Ulcer in the Womb 12 Months, he cured in a little less than 2 Months. Also Mrs. Jones, near the Cock, in the same Street, had a Quartane Ague 9 Months, and finding no benefit by se∣veral Physicians, was cured by him in a Week. Mr. Roger Combs in Salisbury-Court, who was afflicted with the Dropsy, Yellow-jaundice, and Cholick, he cured in 6 Weeks. Mr. Green in Salisbury-Court, he cured of a Dropsy in 3 Weeks, being given over by others. He cured John Wooton of Puddle-Dock, Carman, of the Dropsy, in 3 Weeks. The Wife of Mr. Bradley Emmery-man in Salisbury-Court, he cured of a Fever, Vomiting, and the Obstruction of Urine, in 12 Days, after gi∣n over by others. Mrs. Jones, at the Cloth-workers Arms in Plow∣Street in White-Chappel, he cured of a virulent Flux, in a Month. Mr. Fausters Wife of Ratclif, against School-lane End, was cured of a Deaf∣ness by him in 3 Months. The Son of Mr. Hunt, a Tobacco-pipe Maker over against the Sugar-loaf in Salisbury-Court, had the Rickets and Consumption at 4 Years old, wherewith he became a Cripple, and was perfectly Cured by him in 2 Months. He could name many Hundred more, (were it proper) that he hath Cured of all the Distempers that afflict Mankind. He hath convenient Lodgings for any Patient that desires to be pri∣vate. And is to be spoken with from 8 in the Morning 'till 11, and from 2 'till 6 at Night
