B2530 [ocm]18528118 205227
THE PSALMS OF DAVID In Meeter. Newly translated, and diligently compared with the Original Text, and former Translations. More plain, smooth, and agreeable to the Text then any heretofore. Allowed by the Authority of the General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, and appointed to be sung in Congregations and Families. EDINBURGH, Printed by Thomas Brown, one of His MAJESTIES Printers: Anno DOM. 1678.
The PSALMS of DAVID In Meeter. PSAL. I. THat man hath perfect blessedness who walketh not astray In counsel of ungodly men, nor stands in sinners way, Nor sitteth in the scorners chair. But placeth his delight Vpon Gods Law, and meditates on his Law day and night. He shall be like a tree that grows near planted by a river, Which in his season yeelds his fruit, and his leaf fadeth never. And all be doth shall prosper well. The wicked are not so: But like they are unto the chaff which wind drives to and fro. In judgement therefore shall not stand such as ungodly are: Nor in th'assembly of the just shall wicked men appear. For why? the way of godly men unto the Lord is known: Whereas the way of wicked men shall quite be overthrown. PSAL. II. VVHy rage the heathen? and vain things why do the people mind? Kings of the earth do set themselves, and Princes are combin'd To plot against the Lord, and his
Anointed, saying thus, Let us asunder break their bands, and cast their cords from us. He that in heaven sits, shall laugh: the Lord shall scorn them all: Then shall he speak to them in wrath, in rage be vex them shall. Yet notwithstanding I have him to be my King appointed: And over Sion my holy hill, I have him King anointed. The sure decrée I will declare: the Lord hath said to me, Thou art mine only Son, this day I have begotten thee. Ask of me, and for heritage the heathen I'le make thine; And, for possession, I to thée will give earths utmost line. Thou shalt, as with a weighty rod of iron break them all, And as a potters sheard, thou shalt them dash in pieces small. Now therefore Kings be wise, be taught ye Iudges of the earth. Serve God in fear, and sée that ye joyn trembling with your mirth. Kiss ye the Son, lest in his ire ye perish from the way, If once his wrath begin to burn: blest all that on him stay. PSAL. III. O Lord, how are my foes increas'd? against me many rise. Many say of my soul, for him in God  succour lies. Yet thou my shield and glory art,
th'uplifter of mine head. I cry'd, and from his holy hill the Lord me answer made. I laid me down and slept, I wak'd, for God sustained me. I will not fear though thousands ten set round against me be. Arise, O Lord, save me, my God; for thou my foes hast stroke All on the chéek-bone: and the téeth of wicked men hast broke. Salvation doth appertain unto the Lord alone: Thy blessing, Lord, for evermore thy people is upon. PSAL. IV. GIve ear unto me when I call, God of my righteousness, Have mercy, hear my pray'r, thou hast enlarg'd me in distress. O ye the sons of men, how long will ye love vanities? How long my glory turn to shame, and will ye follow lies? But know that for himself, the Lord, the godly man doth chuse: The Lord, when I on him do call, to hear will not refuse. Fear, and sin not, talk with your heart on bed, and, silent be: Offrings present of righteousness: and in the Lord trust ye. O who will shew us any good? is that which many say: But of thy countenance the light Lord, lift on us alway.
Vpon my heart, bestow'd by thee, more gladness I have found, Then they, ev'n then when corn and wine did most with them abound. I will both lay me down in peace, and quiet sleep will take: Because thou only me to dwell in safety, Lord, dost make. PSAL. V. GIve ear unto my words, O Lord, my meditation weigh. Hear my loud cry, my King, my God; for I to thee will pray. Lord, thou shalt early hear my voice; I early will direct My pray'r to thee, and looking up an answer will expect. For thou art not a God that doth in wickednesse delight: Neither shall evil dwell with thee. Nr fools stand in thy sight. All that ill doers are thou hat'st. Cur'st off that liare be: The bloudy and deceitful man abhorred is by thee. But I into thy house will come, in hine abundant grace: And I will worship in thy fear toward thy holy place. Because of those mine enemies, Lord, in thy righteousness Do thou me lead, do thou thy way make straight before my face. For in their mouth there is no truth, their inward part is ill; Their throat's an open sepulchre, their tongue doth flatter still.
O God, destroy them; let them be by their own counsel quell'd: Them for their many sins cast out, for they 'gainst thee rebell'd. But let all joy that trust in thee; and still make shouting noise: For them thou sav'st: Let all that love thy Name, in thée rejoyce. For, Lord, unto the righteous man, thou wilt thy blessing yeeld; With favour thou wilt compass him about, as with a shield. PSAL. VI. LOrd, in thy wrath rebuke me not, Nor in thy hot rage chasten me, Lord, pity me, for I am weak: Heal me, for my bones vexed be. My soul is also vexed sore: But, Lord, how long stay wilt thou make? Return, O Lord, my soul set free: O save me for thy mercies sake. Because those that deceased are, Of thee shall no remembrance have: And who is he that will to thee Give praises lying in the grave? I with my groaning weary am, I also all the night my bed Have caused for to swim, and I With tears my couch have watered. Mine eye consum'd with grief, grows old, Because of all mine enemies. Hence from me wicked workers all. For God hath heard my weeping cryes. God hath my supplication heard; My pray'r received graciousl: Sham'd, and sore vex'd be all my foes, Sham'd, and back turned suddenly.
Another of the same. In thy great indignation, O Lord rebuke me not; Nor on me lay thy chastning hand in thy displeasure hot. Lord, I am weak, therefore on me have mercy, and me spare: Heal me, O Lord, because thou know'st my bones much vexed are. My soul is vexed sore; but, Lord, how long stay wilt thou make? Return, Lord, frée my soul, and save me for thy mercies sake. Because of thée in death, there shall no more remembrance be: Of those that in the grave do ly, who shall give thanks to thee? I with my groaning weary am, and all the night my bed I caused for to swim: with tears my couch I watered. By reason of my vexing grief, mine eye consumed is; It waxeth old because of all that be mine enemies. But now depart from me, all ye that work iniquity; For why, the Lord hath heard my voice, when I did mourn and cry. Vnto my supplication, the Lord did hearing give; When I to him my prayer make the Lord will it receive. Let all be sham'd and troubled sore, that enemies are to me; Let them turn back, & suddenly ashamed let them be.
PSALM. VII. O Lord my God, in thee do I my confidence repose: Save and deliver me from all me persecuting foes. Lest that the enemy my soul should like a lion tear. In pieces renting it, while there is no deliverer. O Lord my God if it be so that I committed this: If it be so that in my hands. iniquity there is. If I rewarded ill to him that was at peace with me (Yea, even the man that without cause my foe was, I did free) Then let the foe pursue and take my soul, and my life thrust Down to the earth, and let him lay mine honour in the dust. Rise in thy wrath, Lord, raise thy self. for my foes raging be. And to the judgement which thou hast commanded, wake for me. So shall th'assembly of thy folk about encompasse thee: Thou therefore, for their sakes return unto thy place on hie. The Lord he shall the people judge: my Iudge Iehova be, After my righteousness, and mine integrity in me. O let the wicked's malice end, but stablish stedfastly The righteous: for the righteous God the hearts and reins doth try.
In God, who saves th'upright in heart is my defence and stay. God just men judgeth, God is wroth with ill men every day. If he do not return again, then he his sword will whet; His bow he hath already bent, and hath it ready set. He also hath for him prepar'd the instruments of death; Against the persecuters he his shafts ordained hath. Behold he with iniquity doth travel as in birth; A mischief he conceived hath, and falshood shall bring forth. He made a pit and dig'd it deep, another there to take: But he is fallen into the ditch which he himself did make. Vpon his own head, his mischief shall be returned home; His violent dealing also down on his own pate shall come. According to his righteousness the Lord I'le magnifie: And will sing praise unto the Name of God that is most hie. PSAL. VIII. HOw excellent in all the earth, Lord our Lord is thy Name! Who hast thy glory far advanc'd above the starry frame. From infants and from sucklings mou thou didest strength ordain, For thy foes cause, that so thou might'st
th'avenging foe restrain. When I look up unto the heav'ns which thine own fingers fram'd, Vnto the moon, and to the stars, which were by thée ordain'd; Then say I, What is man, that he remembred is by thée? Or what the son of man, that thou so kind to him shouldst be? For thou a little lower hast him then the angels made, With glory and with dignity thou crowned hast his head. Of thy hand-works thou mad'st him lord; all under's féet didst lay: All shéep and oxen, yea and beasts that in the fields do stray. Fowls of the air, fish of the sea, all that pass through the same: How excellent in all the earth, Lord, our Lord, is thy Name! PSAL. IX. LOrd thee I'le praise with all my heart, thy wonders all proclaim: In thee most high I'le greatly joy, and sing unto thy Name. When back my foes were turn'd, they sell and perisht at thy sight: For thou maintaind'st my right and cause, on throne sat'st judging right. The heathen thou rebuked hast, the wicked overthrown; Thou hast put out their names, that they may never more be known. O enemy! now destructions have an end perpetual; Thou cities red, perish with them▪
is their memorial. God shall endure for ay, he doth for judgement set his throne: In righteousness to judge the world, justice to give each one. God also will a refuge be for those that are opprest, A refuge will he be in times of trouble, to distrest, And they that know thy Name, in thee their confidence will place: For thou hast not forsaken them that truly seek thy face. O sing ye praises to the Lord, that dwells in Zion hill: And, all the nations among, his deeds record ye still. When he enquireth after blood, he then remembreth them; The humble folk he not forgets, that call upon his Name. Lord, pity me, behold the grief which I from foes sustain. Ev'n thou who from the gates of death dost raise me up again. That I in Sions daughters gates, may all thy praise advance: And that I may reioice alwayes in thy deliverance. The heathen are sunk in the pit which they themselves prepar'd, And in the net which they have hid, their own feet fast are snar'd. The Lord is by the judgement known which he himself hath wrought; The sinners hands do make the snares
wherewith themselves are caught. They who are wicked, into hell, each one shall turned be; And all the nations that forget to seek the Lord most hie. For they that needy are, shall not forgotten be alway. The expectation of the poor shall not be lost for ay. Arise, Lord, let not man prevail; judge heathens in thy sight, That they may know themselves but men the nations, Lord, affright. PSAL. X. VVHerefore is it that thou, O Lord, doth stand from us a far? And wherefore hidest thou thy self, when times so troublous are? The wicked in his loftiness doth persecute the poor: In these devices they have fram'd, let them be taken sure. The wicked of his hearts desire, doth talk with boasting great; He blesseth him that's codetous, whom yet the Lord doth hate. The wicked through his pride of face. on God he doth not call: And in the counsels of his heart, the Lord is not at all. His wayes at all times grieveous are; thy judgements from his sight Removed are; at all his foes he puffeth with despight. Within his heart he thus hath said, I shall not moved be:
And no adversitie at all shall ever come to me. His mouth with cursing, fraud, deceit, is fill'd abundantly: And underneath his tongue, there is mischief and vanitie. He closely sits in villages: he slayes the innocent: Against the poor that passe him by, his cruel eyes are bent. He lion-like lurks in his den; he waits the poor to take: And when he drawes him in his net, his prey he doth him make. Himself he humbleth very low, he croucheth down withal, That so a multitude of poor may by his strong ones fail. He this hath said within his heart, the Lord hath quite forgot; He hides his countenance, and he for ever sees it not. O Lord, do thou arise; O God, lift up thine hand on hie Put on the meek afflicted ones out of thy memory. Why is it that the wicked man thus doth the Lord despise? Because that God will it require, he in his heart denies. Thou hast it seen, for their mischief and spite thou wilt repay: The poor commits himself to thee, thou art the orphans stay. The arm break of the wicked man, and of the evil one:
Do thou seek out his wickedness until thou findest none. The Lord is King through ages all: ev'n to eternity: The heathen people from his land are perisht utterly. O Lord, of those that humble are, thou the desire didst hear: Thou wilt prepare their heart; and thou to hear wilt bend thine ear. To judge the fatherlesse, and those that are oppressed sore, That man that is but sprung of earth, may them oppresse no more. PSAL. XI. I In the Lord do put my trust; how is it then that ye Say to my soul, Flee as a bird unto your mountain hie? For lo, the wicked bend their bow, their shafts on string they fit, That those who upright are in heart, they privily may hit. If the foundations be destroy'd, what hath the righteous done? God in his holy Temple is, in heaven is His Throne. His eyes do see, His eye lids try mens sons. The just be proves: But his soul hates the wicked man, and him that violence loves. Snares, fire & brimstone, furious storms on sinners He shall rain: This, as the portion of their cup, doth unto them pertain: Because the Lord most righteous doth in righteousnesse delight.
And with a pleasant countenance beholdeth the upright. PSAL. XII. HElp, Lord, because the godly man doth daily fade away; And from among the sons of men the faithful do decay. Vnto his neighbours every one doth utter vanity: They with a double heart do speak, and lips of flatterie. God shall cut off all flattering lips, tongues that speak proudly thus, Wee'l with our tongue prevail, our lips are ours: whose Lord ov'r us? For poor opprest, and for the sighs of needy, rise will I, Saith God, and him in safely set from such as him dee. The words of God are words most pure▪ they be like silver try'd In earthen furnace, seven times. that hath been purify'd. Lord, thou shalt them preserve and keep for ever, from this race: On each side walk the wicked, when vile men are high in place. PSAL. XIII. HOw long wilt thou forget me, Lord, shall it for ever be? O! how long shall it be, that thou wilt hide thy face from me? How long take counsel in my soul, still sad in heart shall I? How long exalted over me shall be mine enemy?
O Lord, my God, consider well, and answer to me make: Mine eyes enlighten, lest the sleep of death me overtake. Lest that mine enemies should say, against him I prevail'd: And those that trouble me, rejoyce when I am mov'd and fail'd. But I have all my confidence thy mercy set upon: My heart within me shall rejoyce in thy salvation. I will unto the Lord my God sing praises thearfully: Because he hath his bounty shown to me abundantly. PSAL. XIV. THat there is not a God the fool doth in his heart conclude: They are corrupt, their works are vile, not one of them doth good. Vpon mens sons the Lord from heav'n did cast his eyes abroad; To sée if any understood, and did séek after God. Vhey altogether filthy are, they all aside are gone: And there is none that doeth good; yea, sure there is not one. These workers of iniquity, do they not know at all, That they my people eat as bread, And on God do not call? There fear'd they much: for God is with the whole race of the just: You shame the counsel of the poor,
because God is his trust. Let Isral's help from Sion come; when back the Lord shall bring His captives, Iacob shall rejoyce, And Israel shall sing. PSAL. XV. WIthin thy tabernacle, Lord, who shall abide with thee? And in thy high and holy hill, who shall a dweller be? The man that walketh uprightly and worketh righteousnesse, And as he thinketh in his heart, so doth he truth expresse. Who doth not slander with his tongue, nor to his friend doth hurt, Nor yet against his neighbour doth take up an ill report. In whose eyes vile men are despis'd: but those that God do fear He honoureth, and changeth not, though to his heart he swear. His coin puts not to usury, nor take reward will he Against the guiltless. Who doth thus shall never moved be. PSAL. XVI. LOrd, keep me, for I trust in thee. To God thus was my speech, Thu art my Lord, and unto thee my goodness doth not reach: To sains on earth, to th'excellent where my delights all plac'd. Their sorrows shall be multiply'd, to oter gods that haste. Of their drink offerings of blood
I will no offering make; Yea, neither I their very names up in my lips will take. God is of mine inheritance. and cup the portion: The lot that fallen is to me, thou dost maintain alone. Vnto me happily the lines in pleasant places fell: Yea, the inheritance I got, in beauty doth excel. I blesse the Lord because he doth by counsell me conduct: And in the seasons of the night, my reins do me instruct. Before me still the Lord I set: sith it is so, that he Doth ever stand at my right hand, I shall not moved be. Because of this my heart is glad, and joy shall be exprest Ev'n by my glory: and my flesh in confidence shall rest. Because my soul in grave to dwell shall not be left by thee. Nor wilt thou give thine holy One corruption to see. Thou wilt me shew the path of life: of joyes there is full store Before thy face; at thy right hand are pleasures evermore. PSAL. XVII. LOrd, hear the right, attend my cry: unto my prayer give heed, That doth not in hypocrisie from feigned lips proceed.
And from before thy presence forth my sentence do thou send: Toward these things that equal are, do thou thine eyes intend. Thou prov'dst mine heart, thou visit'st m by night thou didst me try, Yet nothing foundst: for that my mouth shall not sin, purpos'd I. As for mens works, I by the word that from thy lips do flow. Did me preserve out of the paths wherein destroyers go. Hold up my goings. Lord; me guide in those thy paths divine, So that my footsteps may not slide out of these wayes of thine. I called have on thee, O God, because thou wilt me hear: That thou mayst hearken to my spéech, to me incline thine ear. Thy wondrous loving kindness show, thou that by thy right hand Sav'st them that in thee trust, from those that up against them stand. As th'apple of the eye me keep; in thy wings shade me close. From lewd oppressors compassing me round, as deadly foes. In their own fat they are inclos'd: their mouth speaks lostily; Our steps they compast, and to ground down bowing set their eye. He like unto a lion is, that's greedy of his prey, Or lion young, which lurking doth in secret places stay.
Arise, and disappoint my foe, and cast him down, O Lord: My soul save from the wicked man; the man which is thy sword. From men which are thy hand, O Lord, from worldly men me save, Which only in this present life their part and portion have: Whose belly with thy treasure hid thou fill'st, they children have n plenty, of their goods the rest they to their children leave. But as for me, I thine own face in righteousness will see: And with thy likeness, when I wake, I satisfi'd shall be. PSAL. XVIII. THée will I love, O Lord, my strength. My fortress is the Lord, My rock, and he that doth to me deliverance afford: My God, my strength, whom I will trust, a buckler unto me, The horn of my salvation, and my high tow'r is be. Vpon the Lord, who worthy is of praises, will I cry; And then shall I preserved be safe from mine enemy, Floods of ill men affrighted me, deaths pangs about me went. Hells sorrows me invironed: deaths snares did me prevent. In my distress I call'd on God, cry to my God did I: He from his temple heard my voice,
to his ears came my cry. Th'earth as affrighted then did shake, trembling upon it seised; The hills foundations moved were, because he was displeased. Vp from his nostrils came a smoak, and from his mouth there came Devouring fire, and coals by it were turned into flame. He also bowed down the heavens, and thence he did descend, And thickest clouds of darkness did under his feet attend: And he upon a cherub rode, and thereon he did fl: Yea, on the swift wings of the winde. his flight was from on hie, He darkness made his secret place: about him for his tent Dark waters were, and thickest clouds of th'airie firmament. And at the brightnesse of that light which was before his eye, His thick clouds past away, hail-stones and coals of fire did fly. The Lord God also in the heav'ns did thunder in his ire, And there the highest gave his voice, hall-stones and coals of fire. Yea, he his arrows sent abroad, and them he scattered; His lightnings also he shot out, and them discomfited. The waters channels then were seen, the worlds foundations vast, At thy rebuke discovered were,
and at thy nostrils blast. And from above the Lord sent down, and took me from below: From many waters he me drew, which would me overflow. He me reliev'd from my strong foes, and such as did me hate: Because he saw that they for me too strong were, and too great. They me prevented in the day of my calamitie, But even then the Lord himself a stay was unto me. He, to a place where liberty and room was, hath me brought; Because he took delight in me, He me deliverance wrought. According to my righteousness He did me recompense: He me repay'd according to my hands pure innocence: For I Gods wayes kept, from my God did not turn wickedly, His judgements were before me, I His laws put not from me. Sincere before him was my heart, with him upright was I; And watchfully I kept my self from mine iniquity. After my righteousnesse, the Lord hath recompensed me, After the cleanness of my hands appearing in his eye. Thou gracious to the gracious art, to upright men upright. Pure to the pure froward thou kyhes unto the froward wight.
For thou wilt the afflicted save, in grief that low do ly; But wilt bring down the countenance of them whose looks are by. The Lord will light my candle so, that it shall shine full bright; The Lord my God will also make my darkness to be light. By thée, through troups of men I brea and them discomfit all: And, by my God assisting me, I over-leap a wall. As for God, perfect is his way: the word of God is try'd; He is a buckler to all those who do on him confide. Who but the Lord is God; but he who is a rock and stay? It's God that girdeth me with strengt and perfect makes my way. He made my seet swift as the hindes, set me on my high places. Mine hands to war he taught, my arm brake bows of steel in pieces. The shield of thy salvation thou didst on me bestow; Thy right hand held me up, and great thy kindness made me grow. And in my way my steps thou hast enlarged under me, That I go safely and my feet are kept from sliding free. Mine enemies I pursued have, and did them overtake: Nor did I turn again, till I an end of them did make.
I wounded them, they could not rise: they at my feet did fall. Thou girdest me with strength for war: my foes thou broughtst down all. And thou hast giv'n to me the necks of all mine enemies: That I might them destroy and slay who did against me rise. They cryed out, but there was none that would or could them save: Yea, they did cry unto the Lord, but he no answer gave. Then did I beat them small as dust before the wind that flyes: And I did cast them out like dirt upon the street that lyes. Thou mad'st me free from peoples strife, and heathens head to be: A people whom I have not known, shall set vice do to me. At hearing they shall me obey, to me they shall submit. Strangers for fear shall fade away, who in closs places sit. God lives, blest be my rock: the God of my health praised be. God doth avenge me, and subdues the people under me. He saves me from mine enemies: yea, thou hast lifted me bove my foes: and from the man of violence, setst me free. Therefore to thee will I give thanks the heathen folk among: nd to thy name, O Lord, I will sing praises in a song.
He great deliverance gives his King, He mercy doth extend To David his anointed one, and his seed without end. PSAL. XIX. THe heavn's Gods glory do declare, the skyes his hand-works preach. Day utters speech to day, and night to night doth knowledge teach. There is no speech nor tongue, to whic their voice doth not extend. Their line is gone through all the ear their words to th'worlds end: In them he set the sun a tent: Who bride-groom like forth goes From's chamber, as a strong man doth, to run his race, reioyce. From heav'ns end is his going forth, circling to th'end again: And there is nothing from his heat that hidden doth remain. Gods Law is perfect, and converts the soul in sin that lyes: Gods testimony is most sure and makes the simple wise. The statutes of the Lord are right, and do reioyce the heart: The Lords command is pure, and doth light to the eyes impart. Vnspotted is the fear of God, and doth endure for ever: The iudgements of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether. They more then gold; yea, much fine to be desired are:
Then honey, from the honey comb that droppeth, sweeter far. Moreover, they thy servant warn how he his life should frame: great reward provided is for them that keep the same. Who can his errours understand? O cleanse thou me within, From secret faults. Thy servant keep from all presumptuous sin, nd do not suffer them to have dominion over me: Then righteous and innocent I from much sin shall be. The words which from my mouth procéed the thoughts sent from my heart ccept, O Lord, for thou my strength and my Redeemer art. PSAL. XX. Ehovah hear thee in the day when trouble he doth send. nd let the name of Iacobs God thee from all ill defend. O le him help send from above out of his sanctuarie: From Sion his own holy hill, let him give strength to thee. Let him remember all thy gifts, accept thy sacrifice. Grant thée thine hearts wish, and fulfil thy thoughts and counsel wise. In thy salvation we will ioy; in our Gods Name we will Display our banners, & the Lord thy prayers all fulfil. Now know I, God his King doth save;
He from His holy Heaven Will hear him with the saving strength by His own right hand given. In chariots some put confidence some horses trust upon: But we remember will the Name of our Lord God alone. We rise, and upright stand, when they are bowed down and fall. Deliver, Lord, and let the King us hear when we do call. PSAL. XXI. THe King in thy great strength, O Lo shall very joyful be, In thy salvation rejoyce how vehemently shall he; Thou hast bestowed upon him all that his heart would have, And thou from him didst not withhold what e're his lips did crave. For thou with blessings him prevent'st of goodness manifold; And thou hast set upon his head a crown of purest gold. When he desired life of thee, thou life to him didst give: Ev'n such a length of dayes, that he for evermore should live. In that salvation wrought by thee, his glory is made great, Honour and comly majesty thou hast upon him set. Because that then for evermore most blessed hast him made. And thou hast with thy countenance made him exceeding glad.
Because the King upon the Lord his confidence doth lay, And through the grace of the most high, shall not be mov'd away. Thine hand shall all those men find out that enemies are to thee. Ev'n thy right hand shall find out those of thee that haters be. Like fiery ov'n thou shalt them make when kindled is thine tre: God shall them swallow in his wrath, devour them shall the fire. Their fruit from earth thou shalt destroy, their seed men from among. For they beyond their might, 'gainst thée did plot mischief and wrong. Thou therefore shalt make them turn back when thou thy shafts shalt place Vpon thy strings, made ready all to fly against their face. In thy great pow'r and strength, O Lord, be thou exalted hie: o shall we sing with joyful hearts, thy power praise shall we. PSAL. XXII. MY God, my God, why hast thou me forsaken? why so far rt thou from helping me, and from my words that roaring are? All day, my God, to thee I cry, yet am not heard by thee; nd in the season of the night I cannot silent be. But thou art holy, thou that dost inhabite Isra'ls praise. Our fathers hop'd in thée, they hop'd,
and thou didst them release. When unto thee they sent their cry, to them deliverance came: Because they put their trust in thée they were not put to shame. But as for me, a worm I am, and as no man am pris'd: Reproach of men I am, and by, the people am despis'd. All that me see laugh me to scorn: shoot out the lip do they, They nod and shake their heads at me, and mocking, thus do say, This man did trust in God, that he would free him by his might: Let him deliver him, sith he had in him such delight. But thou art be▪ out of the womb that didst me safely take, When I was on my mothers breasts, thou me to hope didst make. And I was cast upon thy care, ev'n from the womb till now: And from my mothers belly, Lord, my God and guide art thou. Be not far off for grief is near; and one to help is found. Bulls many compass me, strong bu of Bashan me surround. Their mouths they op'ned wide on upon me gape did they, Like to a lion ravening and roaring for his prey. Like water I'm pour'd out, by bone all out of joynt do part: Amidst my bowels as the wax, so melted is my heart.
My strength is like a potsheard dry'd: my tongue it cleaveth fast Vnto my jaws; and to the dust of death thou brought me hast. For dogs have compast me about; the wicked that did meet, In their assembly me inclos'd, they pierc'd my hands and feet. I all my bones may tell, they do upon me look and stare. Vpon my vesture lots they cast, and cloaths among them share. But be not far▪ O Lord, my strength; haste to give help to me; From sword my soul, from pow'r of dogs my darling set thou free. Out of the roaring lions mouth do thou me shield and save: For from the horns of Vnicorns, an ear to me thou gave. I will shew forth thy Name unto those that my brethren are: Amidst the congregation thy praise I will declare. Praise ye the Lord who do him fear; him glorifie, all ye The seed of Iacob: fear him all that Isra'ls children be. For he despis d not, nor abhor'd th'afflicted's misery, Nor from him hid his face, but heard when he to him did cry. Within the congregation great, my praise shall be of thee; My vows before them that him fear, shall be perform'd by me.
The meek shall eat, and shall be fill'd: they also praise shall give Vnto the Lord, that do him seek; your heart shall ever live. All ends of th'earth remember shall, and turn the Lord unto: All kindreds of the nations to him shall homage do. Because the Kingdom to the Lord doth appertain, as his: Likewise among the nations the Governour he is. Earths fat ones eat, and worship shall: all who to dust descend Shall bow to him: none of them can his soul from death defend. A séed shall service do to him, unto the Lord it shall Be for a generation reck'ned in ages all. They shall come, and they shall declar his truth and righteousness, Vnto a people yet unborn, and that he hath done this. PSAL. XXIII. THe Lord's my shepherd, I'le not want He makes me down to ly In pastures gréen: he leadeth me the quiet waters by. My soul he doth restore again; and me to walk doth make Within the paths of righteousness, ev'n for his own names sake. Yea, though I walk in deaths dark vale yet will I fear none ill: For thou art with me, and thy rod and staff me comfort still.
My table thou hast furnished in presence of my foes: My head thou dost with oyl anoint, and my cup overflowes. Goodness and mercy all my life shall surely follow me: And in Gods house for evermore my dwelling place shall be. PSAL. XXIV. THe earth belongs unto the Lord, and all that it contains: The world that is inhabited. and all that there remains. For, the foundation thereof he on the seas did lay, And he hath it established, upon the flouds to stay. Who is the man that shall ascend unto the hill of God? Or, who within his holy place shall have a firm abode? Whose hands are clean, whose heart is pure and unto vanity Who hath not lifted up his soul, nor sworn deceitfully. He from th'Eternal shall receive the blessing him upon: And righteousness, ev'n from the God of his salvation. This is the generation that after him enquire, O Iacob, who do seek thy face with their whole hearts desire. Ye gates lift up your heads on high ye doors that last for ay Be lifted up, that so the King
of glory enter may. But who of glory is the King the mighty Lord is this; Ev'n that same Lord that great in might, and strong in battel is. Ye gates lift up your heads, ye doors, doors that do last for ay, Be lifted up, that so the King of glory enter may. But, who is he that is the King of glory? Who is this? The Lord of hosts, and none but he the King of glory is. PSAL. XXV. TO thee I lift my soul: O Lord, I trust in thee: My God, let me not be asham'd, nor foes triumph ov'r me. Let none that wait on thee be put to shame at all; But those that without cause transgress, let shame upon them fall. Shew me thy wayes, O Lord, thy paths. O teach thou me: And do thou lead me in thy truth, therein my teacher be: For thou art God that dost to me salvation send: And I upon thee all the day expecting do attend. Thy tender mercies, Lord, I pray thee to remember, And loving kinnesses; for they have been of old for ever. Mystus and fauls of youth, do thou, O Lord, forget;
After thy mercy think on me: and for thy goodness great. God good and upright is, the way hée'l sinners show: The méek in judgement he will guide, and make his path to know. The whole paths of the Lord are truth and mercy sure, To those that do his cov'nant keep, and testimonies pure. Now for thine own names sake, O Lord, I thee intreat To pardon mine iniquity: for it is very great. What man is he that fears the Lord, and doth him serve? Him shal he teach the way that he shall choose and still observe. His soul shall dwell at ease; and his posteritie Shall flourish still▪ and of the earth inheritours shall be. With those that fear him, is the secret of the Lord: The knowledge of his covenant he will to them afford. Mine eyes upon the Lord continually are set: For he it is that shall bring forth my feet out of the net. Turn unto me thy face, and to me mercy show: Because that I am desolate, and am brought very low. My hearts griefs are increas'd: me from distress relieve.
See mine affliction and my pain, and all my sins forgive. Consider thou my foes, because they many are: And it a cruel hatred is, which they against me bear. O do thou keep my soul, do thou deliver me: And let me never be asham'd because I trust in thee. Let uprightness and truth keep me, who thee attend. Redemption, Lord▪ to Israel, from all his troubles send. Another of the same. TO thée I lift my soul, O Lord: My God, I trust in thée: Let me not be asham'd, let not my foes triumph ov'r me. Yea, let thou none ashamed be, that do on thee attend; Ashamed let them be, O Lord, who without cause offend. The wayes, Lord, shew: teach me thy paths. Lead me in truth, teach me: For of my safety thou art God all day I wait on thée. Thy mercies that most tender are do thou, O Lord, remember, And loving kindnesses; for they have been of old for ever. Let not the errours of my youth, nor sins remembred be: In mercy for thy goodnesse sake, O Lord remember me: The Lord is good and gracious, He upright is also:
He therefore sinners will instruct in wayes that they should go. The méek and lowly he will guide, in judgement iust alway: To meek and poor afflicted ones hée'l clearly teach his way. The whole paths of the Lord our God, are truth and mercy sure, To such as kéep his covenant and testimonies pure. Now for thine own names sake, O Lord, I humbly thee intreat To pardon mine iniquity, for it is very great. What man fears God? him shall he teach the way that he shall chuse. His soul shall dwell at ease, his seed the earth, as heirs, shall use. The secret of the Lord is with such as do fear his Name, And he his holy covenant will manifest to them. Towards the Lord my waiting eyes continually are set: For he it is that shall bring forth my feet out of the net. O turn thée unto me, O God, have mercy me upon: Because I solitary am, and in affliction. Enlarg'd the griefs are of my heart: me from distress relieve. See mine affliction, and my pain, and all my sins forgive. Consider thou mine enemies, because they many are, And it a cruel hatred is,
which they against me bear. O do thou keep my soul, O God, do thou deliver me: Let me not be asham'd, for I do put my trust in thee. O let integrity and truth keep me, who thee attend. Redemption, Lord, to Israel, from all his troubles send. PSAL. XXVI. IUdge me, O Lord, for I have walkt in mine integrity; I trusted also in the Lord, slide therefore shall not I. Examine me, and do me prove, try heart and reins, O God. For thy love is before mine eyes, thy truths paths I have trod. With persons vain I have not sat, nor with dissemblers gone, Th' assembly of ill men I hate: to sit with such I shun. Mine hands in innocence, O Lord, I'le wash and purity: So to thine holy altar go and compass it will I. That I with voice of thanksgiving, may publish and declare, And tell of all thy mighty works, that great and wondrous are. The habitation of thy house, Lord, I have loved well; Yea, in that place I do delight, where doth thine honour dwell. With sinners gather not my soul, and such as blood would spill:
Whose hands mischievous plots, right hand corrupting bribes do fill. But as for me, I will walk on in mine integritie: Do thou redéem me, and, O Lord, be merciful to me. My foot upon an even place doth stand with stedfastnesse: Within the congregations th'Eternal I will bless. PSAL. XXVII. THe Lord's my light and saving health, who shall make me dismaid? My lifes strength is the Lord, of whom then shall I be afraid? When as mine enemies and foes, most wicked persons all, To eat my flesh against me rose, they stumbled and did fall. Against me though an host encamp, my heart yet fearless is: Though war against me rise, I will be confident in this. One thing I of the Lord desir'd, and will seek to obtain, That all dayes of my life I may within Gods house remain: That I the beauty of the Lord behold may, and admire, And that I in his holy place may reverently enquire. For he, in his pavilion, shall me hide in evil dayes: In secret of his tent me hide, and on a rock me raise. And now, ev'n at this present time,
mine head shall lifted be bove all those that are my foes, and round encompass me: Therefore unto his tabernacle I'le sacrifices bring Of joyfulness; I'le sing, yea, I to God will praises sing. O Lord, give ear unto my voice, when I do cry to thee: Vpon me also mercy have, and do thou answer me. When thou didst say, Seek ye my face, then unto thee reply Thus did my heart, above all things, thy face, Lord, seek will I. Far from me hide not thou thy face, put not away from thee, Thy servant in thy wrath: thou hast an helper been to me: O God of my salvation, leave me not, nor forsake. Thogh me my parents both should leav the Lord will me up take. O Lord instruct me in thy way, to me a leader he In a plain path, because of those that hatred bear to me. Give me not to mine enemies will: for witnesses that lie, Against me risen are, and such as breath out crueltie. I fainted had, unless that I believed had, to see The Lords own goodness in the land of them that living be. Wait on the Lord: and be thou strong and he shall strength afford
Vnto thine heart: yea, do thou wait, I say, upon the Lord. PSAL. XXVIII. TO thée I'le cry, O Lord, my rock, hold not thy peace to me: Lest like those that to pit descend, I by thy silence be. The voice hear of my humble pray'rs; when unto thee I cry: When to thy holy oracle I lift mine hands on hy. With ill men draw me not away, that work iniquity: That speak peace to their friends, while in their hearts doth mischiefly. Give them according to their deeds, and ills endeavoured; And, as their handy-works deserve, to them be rendered. God shall not build, but them destroy, who would not understand The Lords own works, nor did regard the doings of his hand. For ever blessed be the Lord, for graciously he heard The voice of my petitions, and prayers did regard. The Lord's my strength & shield, my heart upon him did rely, And I am helped; hence my heart doth joy exceedingly. And with my song I wil him praise. Their strength is God alone; He also is the saving strength of his anointed one. O thine own people do thou save, bless thine inheritance:
Them also wilt thou feed, and them for evermore advance. PSAL. XXIX. GIve ye unto the Lord, ye sons that of the mighty be, All strength and glory to the Lord, with cheerfulness give ye. Vnto the Lord the glory give, that to his Name is due; And in the beauty of holiness, unto Iehovah bow. The Lord's voice on the waters is, the God of Majesty. Doth thunder, and on multitudes of waters sitteth he. A pow'rful voice it is, that comes out from the Lord most hie; The voice of that great Lord is full of glorious Majestie The voice of the Eternal doth asunder cedars tear: Yea, God the Lord doth cedars break that Lebanon doth bear. He makes them like a calf to skip; ev'n tha great Lebanon, And like to a young unicorn, the mountain Sirion. Gods voice divides the flames of fire: The desar it doth shake: The Lord doth make the wilderness of Kadesh all to quake. Gods voice doth make the hinds to cal it makes the forrests bare: And in his Temple every one his glory doth declare. The Lord sits on the flouds: the Lor sits King, and ever shall.
The Lord will give his people strength, and with peace bless them all. PSAL. XXX. LOrd, I will thee exol, for thou hath lifted me on hie, And over me, thou to rejoyce mad'st not mine enemie. O thou who art the Lord my God, I in distress to thee With loud cryes lifted up my voice, and thou hast healed me. O Lord, my soul thou hast brought up, and rescu'd from the grave: That I to pit should not go down, alive thou didst me save. O ye that are his holy Ones, sing praise unto the Lord: And give unto him thanks, when you his holiness record. For, but a moment lasts his wrath; life in his favour lyes: Weeping may for a night endure, at morn doth joy arise. In my prosperity, I said, that nothing shall me move. O Lord, thou hast my mountain made to stand strong by thy love: But when that thou, O gracious God, didst hide thy face from me, Then quickly was my prosperous state turn'd into miserie. Wherefore unto the Lord, my cry I caused to ascend: My humble supplication I to the Lord did send. What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to pit?
Shall unto thee the dust give praise? thy truth declare shall it? Hear, Lord, have mercy, help me, Lord Thou turned hast my sadness To dancing; yea, my sackcloth loos'd, and girded me with gladness. That sing thy praise my glory may, and never silent be: O Lord my God, for evermore I will give thanks to thee. PSAL. XXXI. IN thée, O Lord, I put my trust, sham'd let me never be: According to thy righteousness do thou deliver me. Bow down thine ear to me with speed send me deliverance: To save me, my strong Rock be Thou, and my house of defence. Because thou art my Rock, and thee, I for my fortresse take: Therefore do thou me lead and guide, ev'n for thine own Names sake. And sith thou art my strength, therefore pull me out of the net, Which they in subtilty for me so privily have set. Into thine hands I do commit my sp'rit; for thou art he, O thou, Iehovah, God of truth, that hast redeemed me. Those that do lying vanities regard, I have abhor'd: But as for me my confidence is fixed on the Lord. I'le in thy mercy gladly ioy;
for thou, my miseries Considered hast; thou hast my soul known in adversities; And thou hast not inclosed me within the enemies hand; And by thee have my feet been made in a large room to stard. O Lord, upon me mercy have, for trouble is on me; Mine eye, my belly, and my soul, with grief consumed be. Because my life with grief is spent, my years with sighs and groans: My strength doth fail; and for my sin consumed are my bones. I was a scorn to all my foes, and to my friends a fear; And specially reproacht of those that were my neighbours near: When they me saw, they from me fled, Ev'n so I am forgot, As men are out of mind, when dead; I'm like a broken pot. For slanders I of many heard, fear compast me while they Against me did consult and plot, to take my life away. But as for me, O Lord, my trust upon thee I did lay, And I to thee, Thou art my God, did confidently say. My times are wholly in thine hand; do thou deliver me From their hands, that mine enemies and persecutors be. Thy countenance to shine, o thou upon thy servant make;
Vnto me give salvation for thy great mercies sake. Let me not be asham'd, O Lord, for on thee call'd I have: Let wicked men be sham'd. let them be silent in the grave. To silence put the lying lips, that grievous things do say, And hard reports, in pride and scorn, on righteous men do lay. How great's the goodness thou for the that fear thee, keepst in store; And wrought'st for them that trust in thee, the sons of men before! In secret of thy presence, thou shalt hide them from mans pride, From strife of tongues, thou closely shalt, as in a tent, them hide. All praise and thanks be to the Lord; for he hath magnifi'd His wondrous love to me, within a city fortifi'd. For, from thine eyes cut off I am, (I in my haste had said) My voice yet heardst thou, when to thee with cryes my moan I made. O love the Lord, all ye his saints; because the Lord doth guard The faithful, and be plenteously proud doers doth reward. Be of good courage, and he strength unto your heart shall send, All ye whose hope and confidence doth on the Lord depend. PSAL. XXXII. O Blessed is the man, to whom is freely pardoned,
All the transgressions he hath done, whose sin is covered. Blest is the man to whom the Lord impueth not his sin, And in whose sp'rit there is no guile, nor fraud is found therein. When as I did refrain my spéech, and silent was my tongue, My bones then waxed old because I roared all day long. For, upon me both day and night, thine hand did heavy ly; So that my moisture turned is in summers drought thereby. I thereupon have unto thee my sin acknowledged, And likewise mine iniquity I have not covered: I will confess unto the Lord my trespasses said I; And of my sin thou freely didst forgive th'iniquity. For this shal every godly one his prayer make to thee, In such a time he shall thee seek, as found thou mayest be. Surely, when floods of waters great, do swell up to the brim, They shall not overwhelm his soul, nor once come near to him. Thou art my hiding-place, thou shalt from trouble keep me free; Thou, with songs of deliverance, about shalt compass me. I will instruct thee, and thee teach, the way that thou shalt go, And with mine eye upon thee set,
I will direction show. Then be not like the horse or mule, which do not understand: Whose mouth, lest they come near to thee a bridle must command. Vnto the man that wicked is, his sorrows shall abound: But him that trusteth in the Lord, mercy shall compass round. Ye righteous in the Lord be glad, in him do ye rejoyce: All ye that upright are in heart, for joy lift up your voice. PSAL. XXXIII. YE righteous in the Lord rejoyce, it comely is, and right, That upright men with thankful voice, should praise the Lord of might. Praise God with harp: and unto him sing with the psaltery: Vpon a ten string'd instrument make ye sweet melody. A new song will I sing, and play with loud noise skilfully. For right is Gods word, all his works are done in verity. To judgement, and to righteousness, a love he beareth still: The loving kindness of the Lord the earth throughout doth fill. The heavens by the word of God, did their beginning take; And by the breathing of his mouth, he all their hosts did make. The waters of the seas he brings together as an heap, And in store-houses, as it were,
He layeth up the depth. Let earth and all that live therein, with reverence fear the Lord; Let all the worlds inhabitants dread him with one accord. For He did speak the word, and done it was without delay: Established, it firmly stood, what ever He did say. God doth the counsell bring to nought, which heathen folk do take: And what the people do devise, of none effect doth make. O! but the counsel of the Lord, doth stand for ever sure, And of His heart the purposes from age to age endure. That nation blessed is, whose God Iehovah is: and those A blessed people are, whom for His heritage he chose. The Lord from heav'n sees and beholds, all sons of men full well. He views all from his dwelling place that on the earth do dwell, He forms their hearts alike: and all their doings he observes. Great hosts save not a King: much strength, no mighty man preserves. An horse for preservation, is a deceitful thing: And by the greatnesse of his strength, can no deliverance bring. Behold, on those that do him fear, the Lord doth set his eye: Ev'n those who on his mercy do
with confidence rely. From death to free their soul, in deat life unto them to yield. Our sould doth wait upon the Lord, he is our help and shield. Sith in his holy Name we trust, our heart shall joyful be. Lord, let thy mercy be on us, as we do hope in thee. PSAL. XXXIV. GOd will I blesse all times: Hjs pra my mouth shall still expresse: My soul shall boast in God: the meek shall hear with joyfulnesse. Extoll the Lord with me, let us exalt his name together. I sought the Lord, he heard, and did me from all fears deliver. They look'd to him, and lightned were not shamed were their faces, This poor man cry'd, God heard, and s him from all his distresses. The Angel of the Lord incamps, and round incompasseth All those about that do Him fear, and them delivereth. O taste and see, that God is good: who trusts in him is blest. Fear God his saints: none that him shall be with want opprest. The lions young may hungry be, and they may lack their food: But they that truly seek the Lord, shall not lack any good. O children, hither do ye come, and unto me give ear: I shall you teach to understand
how ye the Lord should fear. What man is he that life destres, o see good would live long? Thy lips refrain from speaking guile, nd from ill words thy tongue. Depart from ill, do good, seek peace, pursue it earnestly; Gods eyes are on the just, his ears ce open to their cry. The face of God is set against hose that do wickedly; at He may quite out from the earth ut off their memory. The righteous cry unto the Lord, He unto them gives ear; d they, out of their troubles all, y Him delivered are. The Lord is ever nigh to them, hat be of broken sp'rit, them be lafety doth afford, at are in heart contrite: The troubles that afflict the just, number many bee: t yet at length out of them all, he Lord doth set them free. He carefully his bones doth keep. hat ever can befall: at not so much as one of them n broken be at all. ll shall the wicked slay: laid waste all be, who hate the just. The Lord redeems his servants souls: one perish that him trust. PSAL. XXXV. ead, Lord, with those that plead, & fight with those that fight with me.
Of shield and buckler take thou hold, stand up mine help to be. Draw also out the spear, and do against them stop the way. That me pursue: unto my soul, I'm thy salvation, say. Let them confounded be, and sham'd, that for my soul have sought: Who plot my hurt, turn'd back be they, and to confusion brought. Let them be like unto the chaff, that flyes before the winde, And let the Angel of the Lord pursue them hard behinde. With darknesse cover thou their w and let it stippery prove. And let the Angel of the Lord, pursue them from above. For, without cause have they for me their net hid in a pit; They also have without cause, for my soul digged it. Let ruine selfe him unawares, his net he hid withal Himself let catch: and in the same destruction let him fall. My soul in God shall joy, and glad in his salvation be. And all my bones shall say, O Lor who is like unto thee, Which dost the poor set free from him that is for him too strong; The poor and needy from the man that spoils and does him wrong? False witnesse rose; to my char things  not knew they laid. Thy o  of my sul,
me ill for good repaid. But as for me, when they were sick, n sackcloth sad I mourn'd: y humbled soul did fast, my pray'r unto my bosome turn'd. My self I did behave, as he had been my friend or brother, heavily bow'd down as one that mourneth for his mother. But in my trouble they rejoyc'd, gathering themselves together; a, abjects vile, together did themselves against me gather; knew it not, they did me fear, and quiet would not be. With mocking hypocrites, at feasts they gnaht their feeth at me. How long Lord, lookst thou on? from those destructions they intend: escue my soul, from lions young, my cariing do defend, I will give thanks to thee, O Lord, within th' assembly great; d, where much people gathered are, thy praises forth will set. Let not my wrongful enemies proudly rejoyce ov'r me; or who me hate without a cause, let them wink with the eye. For peace they do not speak at all: but crafty plots prepare gainst all those within the land that meek and quiet are. With mouths set wide, they 'gainst me said, Ha, ha, our eye doth see. Lord, thou hast seen, hold not thy peace,
Lord be not far from me. Stir up thy self, wake that thou may judgement to me afford: Ev'n to my cause, O thou that art my only God and Lord. O Lord my God, do thou me judge after thy righteousness, And let them not their joy 'gainst me triumphantly express. Nor let them say within their hearts Ah we would have it thus; Nor suffer them to say, that he is swallowed up by us. Sham'd and confounded be they all that at my hurt are glad: Let those against me that do boast, with shame and scorn be clad. Let them that love my righteous can be glad, shout, and not cease To say, The Lord be magnifi'd who loves his servants peace. Thy righteousness shall also be declared by my tongue: The praises that belong to thee, speak shall it all day long. PSAL. XXXVI. THe wicked mans transgression, within my heart thus sayes, Vndoubtedly the fear of God is not before his eyes. Because himself he flattereth in his own blinded eye: Vntil the hatefulness be found of his iniquity. Words from his mouth proceeding, ar fraud and iniquity.
e to be wise, and to do good, hath left off utterly. He mischief lying on his bed, most cunuingly doth plot; e sets himself in wayes not good, ill he abhoreth not. Thy mercy, Lord, is in the heaven: thy truth doth reach the clouds. Thy justice is like mountains great; thy judgements deep as flouds; ord, thou preservest man and beast. How precious is thy grace! herefore in shadow of thy wings mens sons their trust shall place. They with the fatness of thy house shall be well satisfi'd: rom rivers of thy pleasures, thou wilt drink to them provide. Because of life, the fountain pure remains alone with thee: nd in that purest light of thine, we clearly light shall see. Thy loving kindness unto them continue that thee know; nd still on men upright in heart, thy righteousness bestow. Let not the foot of cruel pride come and against me stand: nd let me not removed be, Lord, by the wickeds hand. There fall'n are they, and ruined, that work iniquities: ast down they are, and never shall be able to arise. PSAL. XXXVII. Or evil doers fret thou not thy self unquietly,
Nor do thou envy bear to those that work iniquity. For, even like unte the grasse soon be cut down shall they: And, like the green and tender herb they wither shall away. Set thou thy trust upon the Lord, and be thou doing good. And so thou in the land shalt dwell, and verily have food. Delight thy self in God, hee'l give thine hearts desire to thee. Thy way to God commit, him trust, it bring to passe shall he. And like unto the light, he shall thy righteousnesse display, And He thy judgment shall bring forth like noon dide of the day. Rest in the Lord, and patiently wait for Him: do not fret For him, who prospering in his way, successe in sin doth get. Do thou from anger cease, and wrath see thou forsake also: Fret not thy self in any wayes, that evil thou should do. For those that evil doers are, shall be cut off and fall: But those that wait upon the Lord, the earth inherit shall: For yet a little while, and then the wicked shall not be: His place thou shalt consider well, but it thou shalt not see. But, by inheritance, the earth the meek ones shall possesse:
They also shall delight themselves in an abundant peace. The wicked plots against the just, nd at him whets his teeth. The Lord shall laugh at him because his day he coming seeth. The wicked have drawn out the sword, and bent their bow to slay he poor and needy, and to kill men of an upright way. But their own sword which they have drawn, shall enter their own heart; heir bows, which they have bent, shall break, and into pieces part. A little that a just man hath, is more and better far, hen is the wealth of many such as lewd and wicked are. For sinners arms shall broken be▪ but God the just sustains. God knows the just mans dayes, and stil their heritage remains. They shall not be asham'd, when they the evill time do see; nd when the dayes of famine are, they satisfi'd shall be. But wicked men, and foes of God, as fat of lambs decay, hey shall consume; yea into smoak, they shall consume away. The wicked borrows, but the same, again he doth not pay: hereas the righteous mercy showes, and gives his own away. For such as blessed be of Him, the earth inherit shall;
And they that cursed are of him, shall be destroyed all. A good mans footsteps by the Lord are ordered aright: And in the way wherein he walks, he greatly doth delight. Although he fall, yet shall he not be cast down utterly: Because the Lord with his own hand upholds him mightily. I have been young, and now am old: yet have I never seen The just man left, nor that his seed for bread have beggers been. He's ever merciful, and lends, his seed is blest therefore. Depart from evil, and do good: and dwell for evermore. For God loves judgment, and his sai leaves not in any case; They are kept ever: but cut off shall be the sinners race. The just inherit shall the land, and ever in it dwell. The just mans mouth doth wisdom spe his tongue doth judgement tell. In's heart the law is of his God, his steps slide not away. The wicked man doth watch the just, and seeketh him to stay. Yet him the Lord will not forsake, nor leave him in his hands; The righteous will he not condemn, when he in judgement stands. Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and thee exalt shall he,
Th'earth to inherite, when cut off the wicked thou shalt see. I saw the wicked great in pow'r. spread like a green hay tree. He past, yea, was not, him I sought, but found he could not be. Mark thou the perfect, and behold the man of uprightness; ecause that surely of this man the latter end is peace. But those men that transgressours are, shall be destroy'd together, he latter end of wicked men shall be cut off for ever. But the salvation of the just is from the Lord above; e in the time of their distress, their stay and strength doth prove. The Lord shall help, and them deliver▪ he shall them free and save From wicked men, because in him their confidence they have. PSAL. XXXVIII. N thy great indignation, O Lord, rebuke me not: Nor on me lay thy chastning hand, in thy displeasure hot. For in me fast thine arrows stick, thine hand doth press me sore. And in my flesh there is no health, nor soundness any more. This grief I have, because thy wrath is forth against me gone; And in my bones there is no rest, for sin that I have done. Because gone up above mine head my great transgressions be:
And as a weighty burden, they too heavy are for me. My wounds do stink, and are corrupt: my folly makes it so. I troubled am, and much bow'd down; all day I mourning go. For a disease that loathsome is, so fils my loins with pain: That in my weak and weary flesh no soundnesse doth remain. So feeble and infirm am I, and broken am so sore; That through disquiet of my heart, I have been made to roar. O Lord, all that I do desire, is still before thine eye: And of my heart the secret groans not hidden are from thee. My heart doth pant uncessantly, my strength doth quite decay: As for mine eyes, their wonted light is from me gone away. My lovers and my friends do stand at distance from my sore; And those do stand aloof, that were kinse-men, and kind before. Yea, they that seek my life, lay snare who seek to do me wrong, Speak things mischivous, and deceits: imagine all day long. But as one deaf, that heareth not, I suffered all to passe: I as a dumb man did become whose mouth not opened was. As one that hears not, in whose mout are no reproofs at all;
For, Lord, I hope in thee, my God, thou'lt hear me when I call. For I said, Hear me, lest they should rejoyce ov'r me with pride: And ov'r me magnifie themselves, when as my foot doth slide. For, I am near to halt, my grief is still before mine eye. For, Ile declare my sin; and grieve for mine iniquity. But yet mine enemies lively are, and strong are they beside: And they that hate me wrongfully, are greatly multipli'd. And they, for good that render ill, as enemies me withstood: Yea, ev'n for this, because that I do follow what is good. Forsake me not, O Lord: my God, far from me never be. O Lord, thou my salvation art, hast to give help to me. PSAL. XXXIX. I Said, I will look to my wayes, lest with my tongue I sin: In sight of wicked men, my mouth, with bridle Ile keep in. With silence, I as dumb became, I did my self restrain From speaking good, but then the more, increased was my pain. My heart within me waxed hot, and while I musing was, The fire did burn: and from my tongue these words I did let passe; Mine end, and measure of my daies, O Lord unto me show,
What is the same: that I thereby my frailty well may know. Lo, thou my days an hand-breadth mad mine age is in thine eye As nothing: sure each man at best is wholly vanity. Sure each man walks in a vain shew, they vex themselves in vain: He heaps up wealth, and doth not know to whom it shall pertain. And now, O Lord, what wait I for? my hope is fix'd on thee. Free me from all my trespasses, the fools scorn make not me. Dumb was I, opening not my mouth, because this work was thine. Thy stroke take from me, by the blow of thine hand I do pine. When with rebukes thou dost correct man for iniquity, Thou wastes his beauty like a moth: sure each man's vanity. Attend my cry, Lord, at my tears, and pray'rs not silent be: I sojourn as my fathers all, and stranger am with thée. O spare thou me, that I my strength recover may again, Before from hence I do depart, and here no more remain. PSAL. XL. I Waited for the Lord my God, and patiently did hear; At length to me he did encline my voice and cry to hear. He took me from a fearful pit, and from the myrie clay,
And on a rock he set my feet, establishing my way. He put a new song in my mouth, our God to magnify: Many shall see it, and shall fear, and on the Lord rely. O blessed is the man whose trust upon the Lord relyes: Respecting not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lyes. O Lord my God, full many are the wonders thou hast done: Thy gracious thoughts to us-ward, far above all thoughts are gone: In order none can reckon them to thee: if them declare, And speak of them I would, they moe then can be numbred are. No sacrifice, nor offering didst thou at all desire, Mine ears thou bor'dst, sin-offering thou, and burnt, didst not require. Then to the Lord these were my words, I come, behold and see: Within the volume of thy book, it written is of me: Lo do thy will, I take delight, O thou my God that art: Yea, that most holy law of thine, I have within my heart. Within the congregation great I righteousness did preach: Lo, thou dost know, O Lord, that I refrained not my speech. I never did within my heart conceal thy righteousness:
I thy salvation have declard, and shown thy faithfulnesse: Thy kindnesse which most loving is, concealed have not I, Nor from the congregation great have hid thy verity. Thy tender mercies, Lord, from me O do not thou restrain, Thy loving kindnesse, and thy truth let them me still maintain. For ills past reck'ning compasse me, and mine iniquities Such hold upon me taken have, I cannot lift mine eyes: They moe then hairs are on mine head, thence is mine heart dismaid. Be pleased, Lord to rescue me: Lord hasten to mine aid. Sham'd and confounded be they all that seek my soul to kill: Yea, let them backward driven be, and sham'd that wish me ill. For a reward of this their shame, confounded let them be. That in this manner scoffing say, Aha, aha, to me. In thee let all be glad and joy, who seeking thee abide: Who thy salvation love, say still, the Lord be magnifi'd. I'm poor and needy, yet the Lord of me a care doth take: Thou art my help and Saviour, my God no tarrying make. PSAL. XLI. BLessed is be that wisely doth the poor mans case consider;
For when the time of trouble is, the Lord will him deliver, God will him keep; yea▪ save alive, on earth he blest shall live: nd to his enemies desire, thou wilt him not up give. God will give strength when he on bed of languishing doth mourn: nd in his sicknesse sore O Lord, thou all his bed will turn. I said, O Lord, do thou extend thy mercy unto me; do thou heal my soul, for why, I have offended thee. Those that to me are enemies of me do evil say, When shall he die, that so his name, may perish quite away? To see me, if he comes, he speaks vain words, but then his heart Heaps mischief to it, which he tells, when forth he doth depart. My haters joyntly whispering, 'gainst me, my hurt devise. Mischief, say they, cleaves fast to him: he ly'th, and shall not rise. Yea ev'n mine own familiar friend, on whom I did rely, Who eat my bread, ev'n he his heel against me lifted hie. But, Lord, be merciful to me, and up again me raise, That I may justly them requite according to their wayes. But this I know, that certainly I favour'd am by thee: Because my hatefull enemy
triumphs not over me. But as for me, thou me upholdst in mine integrity: And me before thy countenance thou sest continually. The Lord, the God of Israel be blest for ever then. From age to age eternally. Amen; yea, and amen. PSAL. XLII. LIke as the hart for water brooks in thirst doth pant and bray; So pants my longing soul, O God, that come to thee I may. My soul for God, the living God, doth thirst; when shall I near Vnto thy countenance approach, and in Gods sight appear? My tears have unto me been meat, both in the night and day; While unto me continually, Where is thy God, they say? My soul is poured out in me, when this I think upon: Because that with the multitude I heretofore had gone: With them into Gods house I went, with voice of joy and praise; Yea, with the multitude, that kept the solemn holy dayes. O why art thou cast down, my soul, why in me thus dismaid? Trust God: for I shal praise him yet, his countenance is mine aid, My God, my soul's cast down in me: thée therefore mind I will
From Iordan's land, the Hermonites, and ev'n from Mizar hill. At the noise of thy water-spouts, deep unto deep doth call: Thy breaking waves pass over me: yea, and thy billows all. His loving kindness yet the Lord command will in the day, His song's with me by night, to God, by whom I live I'le pray. And I will say to God, my Rock, Why me forgetst thou so? Why for my foes oppression, thus mourning do I go? It's as a sword within my bones, when my foes me upbraid: v'n when by them, Where is thy God, it's daily to me said? O! why art thou cast down, my soul? why thus with grief opprest, Art thou disquieted in me? in God still hope and rest; For yet I know I shall him praise, who graciously to me, The health is of my countenance, yea, mine own God is he. PSAL. XLIII. JVge me, O God, and plead my cause, against th' ungodly nation; From the unjustand crafty man O be thou my salvation. For thou the God art of my strength, why thrusts thou me thee fro? For th' enemies oppression, why do I mourning go? O send thy light forth, and thy truth: let them be guides to me;
And bring me to thy holy hill, ev'n where thy dwellings be. Then will I to Gods altar go, to God my chiefest joy; Yea, God my God, thy Name to praise, my harp I will imploy. Why art thou then cast down, my soul? what should discourage thee? And why, with vexing thoughts, art thou disquieted in me? Still trust in God, for him to praise good cause I yet shall have; He of my countenance is the health, my God that doth me save. PSAL. XLIV. O God, we with our ears have heard, our fathers have us told, What works thou in their dayes hadst done ev'n in the dayes of old. Thy Hand did drive the Heathen out, and plant them in their place; Thou didst afflict the nations, but them thou didst increase, For, neither got their sword the land, nor did their arm them save: But thy right hand, arm, countenance, for thou them favour gave. Thou art my King, for Iacob, Lord, deliverances command. Through thee, we shal push down our foe, that do against us stand. We through thy Name, shall tread down those that risen against us have. For in my bow I shall not trust, nor shall my sword me save. But, from our foes thou hast us sav'd, our haters put to shame.
In God we all the day do boast, and ever praise thy Name. But now we are cast off by thée, and us thou put'st to shame: And, when our armies do go forth, thou go'st not with the same. Thou mak'st us from the enemy faint-hearted to turn back: And they who hate us, for themselves our spoils away do take. Like sheep for meat thou gavest us: 'mong heathen cast we be. Thou didst for nought thy people sell, their price enricht not thée. Thou mak'st us a reproach to be unto our neighbours near: Derision, and a scorn to them that round about us are. A by-word also thou dost us among the heathen make: The people in contempt and spite, at us their heads do shake. Before me my confusion continually abides; And of my bashful countenance, the shame me ever hides. For voice of him that doth reproach, and speaketh blasphemy: By reason of th'avenging foe, and cruel enemy. All this is come on us, yet we have not forgotten thee, Nor falsl in thy covenant bhav'd our selves have we. Back from thy way our heart not turn'd our steps no straying made:
Though us thou breakst in dragons place, and coverest with deaths shade. If we Gods Name forgot, or stretcht to a strange god our hands: Shall not God search this out? for he hearts-secrets understands. Yea, for thy sake we're kill'd all day; counted as slaughter sheep. Rise, Lord, cast us not ever off, awake, why dost thou sleep? O wherefore hidest thou thy face? forgetst our case distrest. And our oppression? For our soul is to the dust down prest. Our belly also on the earth fast cleaving hold doth take. Rise for our help, and us redeem, ev'n for thy mercies sake. PSAL. XLV. MY heart brings forth a goodly thing: My works that I indite Concern the King: my tongue's a pen of one that swift doth write. Thou fairer art then fons of men: into the lips is store Of grace infus'd: God therefore thee hath blest for evermore. O thou that art the mighty One, thy sword gird on thy thigh: Ev'n with thy glory excellent, and with thy Maiesty: For meeknesse, truth and righteousnesse in state ride prosperously: And thy right hand shall thee instruct in things that fearful be. Thine arrows sharply pierce the hearts of th' enemies of the King;
And under thy subjecton the people down do bring, For ever and for ever is, O God, thy throne of might: he scepter of thy Kingdom, is a scepter that is right. Thou lovest right, and hatest ill; For God thy God most Hie bove thy fellows hath, with th' oyl of joy anointed thee. Of Aloes, Myrrhe and Cassia, a smell thy garments had; Out of thy ivory palaces, thereby they made thee glad. Among thy women honourable, Kings daughters were at hand: pon thy right hand did the Queen, in gold of Ophir stand. O daughter, hearken and regard, and do thine ear incline; ikewise forget thy fathers house, and people that are thine. Then of the King desir'd shall be thy beauty vehemently: Because he is thy Lord, do thou him worship reverently. The daughter there of Tyre shall be, with gifts and offrings great: Those of the people that are rich, thy favour shall intreat. Behold, the daughter of the King, all glorious is within; And with imbroideries of gold, her garments wrought have bin. Se shall be brought unto the King in robes with needle wrought:
Her fellow-virgins following, shall unto thee he brought. They shal be brought with gladnes gr and mirth on every side, Into the palace of the King, and there they shall abide. In stead of those thy fathers dear, thy children thou mayst take, And in all places of the earth, them noble Princes make. Thy Name remembred I will make, through ages all to be; The people therefore evermore shall praises give to thee. Another of the same. MY heart inditing is, good matter in a song: I speak the things that I have made, which to the King belong: My tongue shall be as quick his honour to indite, As is the pen of any scribe that useth fast to write. Thou'rt fairest of all men, grace in thy lips doth flow: And therefore blessings evermore on thée doth God bestow. Thy sword gird on thy thigh, thou that art most of might; Appear in dreadful Maiesty, and in thy glory bright. For meeknesse, truth and right, ride prosperously in state: And thy right hand shall teach to thee things terrible and great. Thy shafts shall pierce their hearts, that foes are to the King:
Thereby into subjection the people thou shalt bring. Thy royal seat, O Lord, forever shall remain: he scepter of thy kingdom dosh all righteousness maintain. Thou loves right, and asill: for God, thy God most hie, ve thy fellows hath with th'oyl of joy anointed thee. Of myrrhe and spices sweet, asmell thy garments had: et of thy ivory palaces, whereby they made thée glad. And in thy glorious train, Kings daughters waiting stand; d thy fair Queen in ophir gold, doth stand at thy right hand. O daughter, take good heed; incline, and give good ear; ou must forget thy kindred all and fathers house most dear. Thy beauty to the King, hall then delightful be: d, do thou humbly worship him, ecause thy Lord is be. The daughter then of Tyre there with a gift shall be, nd all the wealthy of the land, shall make their suit to thee. The daughter of the King all glorious is within; d, with imbroideries of gold, er garments wrought have bin. She cometh to the King in robes with needle wrought,
The virgins that do follow her, shall unto thee be brought. They shall be brought with joy, and mirth on every side, Into the palace of the King, and there they shall abide. And in thy fathers stead, thy children thou may'st take, And, in all places of the earth, them noble princes make. I will shew forth thy Name to generations all: Therefore thy people evermore to thee give praises shall. PSAL. XLVI. GOd is our refuge, and our strength, in straits a present aid. Therefore, although the earth remove, we will not be afraid: Though hills amidst the sea be cast. Though waters roaring make, And troubled be, yea, though the hills by swetng seas on shake. A river is whose streames do glad the City of our Ed: The Holy place, wherein the Lord most High hah his abode. God in the midst of her doth dwell: nothing shall her remove; The Lord to her an helper will, and that right early prove. The heathen rag'd tumultuously, the Kingdoms moved were: The Lord God uttered his voice, the earth did melt for fear. The Lord of Hosts upon our side doth constantly remain:
e God of Iacob's our refuge, s safely to maintain. Come, and behold what wondrous works ave by the Lord been wrought: e, see what desolations He on the earth hath brought. Vnto the ends of all the earth wars into peace He turns: e bow He breaks, the spear He cuts, in fire the chariots burns. Be still, and know that I am God: among the heathen I ill be exalted I on earth will be exalted by. Our God, who is she Lord of Hosts, is still upon our side: e God of Iacob our refuge ever will abide. PSALM XLVII. All people clap your hands, to God with voice of triumph shut. For dreadful is the Lord most High, great King, the earth throughout. The heathen people under us Ye surely shall subdue: He shall make the nations nder our feet to bow. The lot of our inheritance choose out for us shall He, Iacob whom he loved well v'n the excellencie. God is with shouts gone up the Lord with trumpets sounding hie, Sing praise to God, sing praise, sing praise, praise to our King sing ye. For God is King of all the earth,
with knowledge praise expresse: God rules the nations, God sits on His throne of holinesse. The Princes of the people are assembled willingly, Ev'n of the God of Abraham they who the people be. For why the shields that do defend the earth, are only his: They to the Lord belong; yea, he exalted greatly is. PSAL. XLVIII. GReat is the Lord, and greatly he is to be praised still: Within the city of our God, upon his holy hill. Mount Sion stands most beautiful, the joy of all the land; The city of the mighty King on her north side doth stand. The Lord, within her palaces is for a refuge known: For lo, the Kings that gathered were together by have gone. But when they did behold the same, they wondring, would not stay; But, being troubled at the sight, they thence did haste away. Great terrour there took hold on them, they were possess'd with fear: Their grief came like a womans pain, when she a child doth bear. Thou Tarshish ships with east wi brea As we hav heard it told: So in the city of the Lord our eyes  ld it behold,
n our Gods city, which his hand for ever stablish will. We of the loving kindness thought, Lord in thy temple still. O Lord, according to thy Name hrough all the earth's thy praise: d thy right hand, O Lord, is full righteousness alwayes. Because thy judgments are made known let Sion mount rejoyce; Of Iudah let the daughters all nd forth a chearful voice. Walk about Sion, and go round, the high towers thereof tell: Consider ye her palaces, and mark her bulwarks well, hat ye may tell posterity; For this God doth abide, at God for evermore, he will v'n unto death us guide. PSAL. XLIX. Ear this all people, and give ear all in the world that dwell. oth low and high, both rich and poor. My mouth shall wisdom tell: y heart shall knowledge meditate. I will incline mine ear o parables, and on the harp any sayings dark declare. Amidst those dayes that evil be, why should I, fearing doubt? en of my heels th'iniquity hall compass me about. Who e're they be, that in their wealth their constnce no pitch, d boast themselves, because they are
become exceeding rich. Yet none of those his brother can redeem by any way, Nor can he unto God, for him sufficient ransom pay; (Their souls redemption precious is, and it can never be) That still he should for ever live, and not corruption see. For why? he feeth that wise men die, and brutish fools also Do perish, and their wealth, when dead, to others they let go. Their inward thought is, that their h and dwelling-places shall Stand through all ages; they their lan by their own names do call. But yet in honour shall not man abide continually; But pssing benes may be compar'd unto the beasts that die. Thus brutish folly plainly is their wisdom and their way; Yet, their posterity approve what they do fondly say. Like sheep, they in the grave are l and death shall them devour; And, in the morning upright men shall over them have pow'r; Their beauty from their dwelling shall consume within the grave. But from hells hand God will me for he shall me receive. Be thou not then afraid, when one inriched thou dost see, Nor when the glory of his house advanced is on hie.
For he shall carry nothing hence, when death his dayes doth end; Nor shall his glory after him into the grave descend. Although he his own soul did blesse, whil'st he on earth did live, (and when thou to thy self dost well, men will thee praises give) He to his fathers race shall go, they never shall see light. Man honour'd wanting knowledge, is like beasts that perish quite. PSAL. L. THe mighty God the Lord hath spoken, and did call The earth, from rising of the sun, to where he hath his fall. From out of Sion hill, which of excellency, And beauty the perfection is God shined gloriously. Our God shall surely come, keep silence shall not He; Before Hime fire shall waste, great storms shall round about Him be. Vnto the heavens clear, he from above shall call. And to the earth likewise, that He may judge his people all. Together let my saints unto me gathered be, Those that by sacrifice have made, a covenant with me. And then the heavens shall His righteousnesse declare; Because the Lord himself is He by whom men judged are.
My people Israel hear, speak will I from on by, Against thee I will testifie, God ev'n thy God am I. I for thy sacrifice, no blame will on thee lay, Nor for burnt offrings, which to me thou offredst every day. Ile take no calf, or goats, from house or fold of thine: For beasts of forrests, cattel all on thousand hills are mine. The fowls on mountains high, are all to me well known: Wilde beasts which in the fields do ly, ev'n they are all mine own. Then if I hungry were, I would not tell it thee; Because the world, and fulness all thereof belongs to me. Will I eat flesh of bulls? or gats blood drink will I? Thanks offer thou to God, and pay thy vows to the most hie: And call upon me when in trouble thou shalt be; I will deliver thee, and thou my Fame shall glorifie. But to the wicked man God saih, my laws and truth Shouldst thou declare? how darst thou ta my cov'nant in thy mouth. Sith thou instruction hat'st, which should thy ways direct; And sih my words behind thy back thou casts, and dost reject.
When thou a thief didst see, with him thou didst consent, And with the vile adulterers partaker on thou went. Thou giv'st thy mouth to ill, thy tongue deceit doth frame; Thou sitst and 'gainst thy brother speakst, thy mothers son dost shame. Because I silence kept, while thou these things have wrought; That I was altogether like thy self, hath been thy thought: I will thee reprove, and set before thine eyes n order ranked thy misdeeds, and thine iniquities. Now, ye that God forget, this carefully consider; st I in pieces tear you all, and none can you deliver. Who so doth offer praise e glorifies, and I ill shew him Gods salvation that orders right his way. Another of the same. THe mighty God the Lord hath spoke, and call'd the earth upon, Ev'n from the rising of the sun, unto his going down. From out of Sion, his own hill, where the perfection hy Of beauty is, from thence the Lord hath shined gloriously, Our God shal come, and shal no more▪ be silent but speak out: Before him fixe shall waste, great storms
shall compasse him about. He, to the heavens from above and to the earth below Shall call, that He His judgment may before His people show. Let all may saints together be unto me gathered; Those, that by sacrifice with me a covenant have made. And then the heavens shall declare his righteousnesse abroad: Bcause the Lord himself doth come, none else is iudge but God. Hear, O my people, and Ile speak, O Israel by name, Against thee I will testifie, God ev'n thy God I am. I, for thy sacrifices few, reprove thee never will; Nor for burnt-offrings to have been before me offred still: Ile take no bullock nor hee-goats frm house▪ nor folds of thine: For beasts of forrests cattle all on thousand hills are mine. The fowls are all to me well known, that mountains high do yeeld; And I do challenge as mine own, the ilde beasts of the field. If I were hungry, I would not to the for need complain; For earth, and all its fulnesse, doth to Me of right pertain. That I to eat the flesh of bulls take pleasure, dost thou think? Or, that I need to quench my thirst, the blood of goats to drink?
Nay, rather unto me, thy God, thanksgiving offer thou, To the most High perform thy word, and fully pay thy vow. And, in the day of trouble great; see that thou call on me; I will deliver thee, and thou my name shalt glorifie. But God unto the wicked saith, why should thou mention make Of my commands? how dar'st thou in thy mouth my cov'nant take. With it is so, that thou dost hate all good instruction; And sith thou casts behinde thy back, and slights my words each one. When thou a thief didst see, then straight thou joyn'd with him in sin; nd with the vile adulterers, thou hast pertaker bin: Thy mouth to evill thou dost give, thy tongue deceit doth frame, Thou sitst & 'gainst thy brother speakst, thy mothers son to shame. Those things thou wickedly hast done, and I have silent bin: Thou thought that I was like thy self, and did approve thy sin: But I will sharply thee reprove, and I will order right, Thy sins and thy transgressions, in presence of thy sight. Consider this, and be afraid, ye that forget the Lord, est I in pieces tear you all when none can help afford.
Who offereth praise, me glorifies: I will shew Gods salvation To him that ordereth aright his life and conversation. PSAL. LI. AFter thy loving kindness, Lord, have mercy upon me: For thy compassions great, blot out all mine iniquitie. Me cleanse from sin, and throughly wi from mine iniquitie. For my transgressions I confess, my sin I ever see. 'Gainst thee, thee only have I sinn'd, in th sight done this ill; That when thou speakst thou mayst be jus and clear in judging still. Behold, I in iniquity was form'd▪ the womb within: My mother also me conceiv'd in guiltiness and sin. Behold, thou in the inward parts, with truth delighted art; And wisdom thou shalt make me know within the hidden part. Do thou with byssop sprinkle me, I shall be cleansed so; Yea, wash thou me, and then I shal be whiter then the snow. Of gladness and of joyfulness make me to hear the voice; That so thefe very bones which thou hast broken, may rejoyce. mine iniquities blot out thy face hide from my sin. Treat a clean heart: Lord, renew a right sp'rit me within.
Cast me not from thy sight, nor take thy holy sp'rit away. Restore me thy salvations joy; with thy free sp'rit me stay. Then will I teach thy ways unto those that transgressours be: And those that sinners are, shall then be turned unto thée. O God, of my salvation, God, me from blood guiltiness Set frée: then shall my tongue aloud sing of thy righteousness. My closed lips, O Lord, by thée let them be opened: Then shal thy praises by my mouth abroad be published. For, thou desir'st not sacrifice, else would I give it thee; Nor wilt thou with burnt-offering at all delighted be. A broken spirit is to God a pleasing sacrifice, A broken and a contrite heart, Lord, thou wilt not despise. Shew kindness, and do good, O Lord, to Sion thine own hill; The walls of thy Ierusalem build up of thy good will. Then righteous offrings shal thee please, and offrings burnt, which they With whole burnt-offrings, and with calves shall on thine altar lay. PSAL. LII. WHy dost thou boast, O mighty man, of mischief and of ill? The goodness of Almighty God endureth ever still.
Thy tongue mischievous calumnies deviseth subtilly, Like to razor sharp, to cut, working deceitfully. Ill more then good, and more then truth, thou lovest to speak wrong. Thou lovest all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue! So God shall thee destroy for ay, remove thee, pluck thee out Quite from thy house, out of the land of life he shall thee root. The righteous shall'it sée, and fear, and laugh at him they shall: Lo, this the man is, that did not make God his strength at all: But he i his abundant wealth, his confidence did place; And he took strength unto himself from his own wickedness. But I am in the house of God lie to an olive green: M confidence for ever hath upon Gods mercy been. And I for ever will thee praise, bcause thou hast done this: I on thy Name will wait, for good before th saints it is. PSAL. LIII. THat there is not a God▪ the fool doth in his heart conclude: They are corrupt, their works are vile, not one of them doth good. The Lord upon the sons of men from heav'n did cast his eyes, To see if any one there was
that sought God, and was wise. They altogether filthy are, they all are backward gone, And there is none that doeth good, no not so much as one. These workers of iniquity do they not know at all, That they my people eat as bread, and on God do not call. Ev'n there they were afraid, and stood with trembling all dismaid, Whereas there was no cause at all, why they should be afraid: For God his bones that thée besiedg'd hath scattered all abroad, Thou hast confounded them, for they despised are of God. Let Isra'ls help from Sion come, when back the Lord shall bring His captives, Iacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall sing. PSAL. LIV. SAve me, O God, by thy great name, and judge me by thy strength: My prayer hear, O God, give ear unto my words at length. For they that strangers are to me, do up against me rise; Oppressours seek my soul, and God se not before their eyes. The Lord my God my helper is, lo therefore I am bold, He taketh part with every one that doth my soul uphold. Vnto mine enemies be shall mischief and ill repay;
O for thy truths sake cut them off, and swéep them clean away. I will a sacrifice to thee give with free willingness: Thy Name, O Lord, because it's good, with praise I will confess: For he hath me delivered from all adversiies; And his desire mine eye hath seen upon mine enemies. PSAL. LV. LOrd, hear my pray'r, hide not thy self from my intreating voice: Attend and hear me, in my plaint I mourn, and make a noise. Because of th'enemies voice, and for lewd mens oppression great; On me they cast iniquity, and they in wrath me hate. Sore pain'd within me is my heart, deaths terrours on me fall; On me comes trembling, fear and dre ov'rwhelmed me withal. O that I like a dove had wings, said I, then would I flie Far ence, that I might find a place where I in rest might be. Lo, then far off I wander would, and in the desert stay: From windy storm and tempest I would haste to scape away. O Lord, on them destruction bring, and vs their tongues divide; For, in the city, violence and stri I have espide. They day and night upon the walls do go about it round:
There mischief is, and sorrow there in midst of it is sound. Abundant wickedness there is within her inward part: And from her streets deceitfulness and guile do not depart. He was no foe that me reproach'd, then that endure I could, Nor hater that did 'gainst me boast, from him me hide I would. But thou man, who mine equal, guide, and mine acquaintance wast. We joyn'd swéet counsels, to Gods house in company we past. Let death upon them seise, and down let them go quick to hell; For, wickedness doth much abound among them where they dwell. Ile call on God, God will me save, Ile pray, and make a noise, Evening, morning, and at noon; and he shall hear my voice. He hath my soul delivered, that it in peace might be, from battel that against me was, for many were with me. The Lord shal hear, and them afflict, of old who hath abode: Because they never changes have, therefore they fear not God. 'Gainst those that were at peace wt him: he hath put forth his hand: The covenant that he had made, by breaking he prophan'd. More smooth then butter were his words, while in his heart was war: His speeches were more soft then oyl, and yet drawn swords they are.
Cast thou thy burden on the Lord, and he shall thee sustain; Yea, he shall cause the righteous man unmoved to remain, But thou, O Lord, my God, those men in justice shalt o're throw, And in destructions dungeon dark at last shalt lay them low. The bloudy and deceitful men shall not live half their dayes: But upon thee with confidence I will depend alwayes. PSAL. LVI. SHew mercy, Lord, to me: for man would swallow me outright: He me oppresseth while he doth against me daily fight. They daily would me swallow up, that hate me spitefully: For they be many that do fight against me, O most his. When I'm afraid, Ile trust in thee: In God Ile praise his word, I will not fear what flesh can do, my trust is in the Lord. Each day they wrest my words, their though 'gainst me are all for ill. They méet, they lurk, they mark my step waiting my soul to kill. But shall they by iniquity escape thy judgement so? O God, with indignation, down do thou the people throw. My wandrings all, what they have been, thou know'st, their number took, Into thy bottle put my tears, are they not in thy book?
My foes shall when I cry, turn back, I know't, God is for me: In God his word Ile praise, his word in God shall praised be. In God I trust, I will not fear what man can do to me. Thy vows upon me are, O God: Ile render praise to thee. Wilt thou not, who from death me sav'd my feet from falls keep free, To walk before God in the light o hose that living he? PSAL. LVII. BE merciful to me, O God, thy mercy unto me Do thou extend, because my soul doth put her trust in thee. Yea, in the shadow of thy wings my refuge I will place, Vntill these sad calamities do wholly overpass. My cry I will cause to ascend unto the Lord most hy, To God who doth all things for me perform most perfectly. From heav'n he shall send down, and me from his reproach defend That would devour me; God his truth and mercy forth shall send. My soul among fierce lions is, I fire-brands live among, Mens sons, whose téeth are spears and darts, a sharp sword is their tongue. Be thou exalted very high above the heav'ns, O God: Let thou thy glory be advanc'd ov'r all the earth abroad.
My soul's bow'd down, for they a net have laid, my steps to snare: Into the pit which they have dig'd for me, they fallen are. My heart is firt, my heart is fixt, O God, Ile sing and praise. My glory wake, wake psaltery, harp; my self Ile early raise. Ile praise thée 'mong the people, Lord, 'mong nations sing will I; For great to heav'n thy mercy is, thy truth is to the sky. O Lord, exalted be thy Name, above the heavn's to stand: Do thou thy glory far advance above both sea and land. PSAL. LVIII. DO ye O congregation, indéed speak righteousness; O ye that are the sons of men judge ye with uprightness? Yea, ev'n within your very hearts ye wickedness have done: And ye the violence of your hands do weigh the earth upon. The wicked men estranged are, ev'n from the very womb; They speaking lies do stray, as soon as to the world they come. Vnto a serpent poyson-like their poyson doth appear; Yea, they are like the adder deal, that closely stops her ear: That so she may not hear the voice of one that charm her would; No, not though be most cunning were, and charm most wisely could.
Their teeth, O God, within their mouth break thou in pieces small; The great teeth break thou out, O Lord, of these young lions all. Let them like waters melt away, which downward still do flow: o pieces cut his arrows all, when he shall bend his bow. Like to a snail that melts away, let each of them be gone: Like womans birth untimely, that they never see the sun. He shall them take away, before your pots the thorns can find, oth living, and in fury great, s with a stormy wind. The righteous when he vengeance sees, he shall be joyful then: The righteous one shal wash his feet in blood of wicked men. So men shal say, The righteous man reward shal never miss; d verily upon the earth a God to judge there is. PSAL. LIX. MY God, deliver me from those that are mine enemies: And do thou me defend from those that up against me rise. Do thou deliver me from them that work iniquity; And give me saely from the men of bloody cruelty. For lo, they for my soul lay wait; the mighty do combine Against me, Lord, not for my fault, nor any sin of mine,
They run, and without fault in me, themselves do ready make: Awake to meet me with thy help, and do thou notice take. Awake therefore, Lord God of hosts, thou God of Israel, To visit heathen all: spare none that wickedly rebel. At evening they go to and fro; they make great noise, and sound, Like to a dog, and often walk about the city round. Behold, they belch out with their mouth and in their lips are swords; For, they do say thus, Who is he that now doth hear our words? But thou, O Lord shal laugh at them, and all the heathen mock. Whle he's in pow'r, Ile wait on thee: for God is my high rock. He of my mecy that is God, betimes shal me prevent: Vpon mine enemies God shal let me see mine hearts content. Them slay not, lest thy folk forget; but scarter them abroad By thy stong pow'r, and bring them dow O thou our shield, and God. For their mouths sin, and for the words that from their lips do fly; Let them be taken in their pride, because they curse and ly. In wrath consume them, them consume that so they may not be: And that in Iacob God doth rule to th'earths ends let them see.
At evening let thou them return, making great noise and sound ie to a dog, and often walk about the city round. And let them wander up and down in seeking food to eat; d let them grudge, when they thall not be satisfi'd with meat. But of thy pow'r Ile sing aloud, it morn thy mercy praise: or thou to me my refuge wast, and tow'r in troublous dayes. O God, that art my strength, I will sing praises unto thee; or God is my defence, a God of mercy unto me. PSAL. LX. O Lord, thou hast rejected us, and scattered us abroad, hou justly hast displeased béen, return to us, O God. The earth to tremble thou hast made; therein didst breaches make: thou thereof the breaches heal, because the land doth shake. Vnto thy people thou hard things hast shew'd, and on them sent: nd thou hast caused us to drink wine of astonishment. And yet a banner thou hast giv'n to them who thee do fear: That it by them because of truth dispayed ma appear. That thy beloved people may delivered be from thrall; ave with the power of thy right hand, and hear me when I call.
God in his holinesse hath spoke, herein I will take pleasure: Shechem I will devide, and forth will Succoths valley measure: Gilead I claim as mine by right, Manasseh mine shall be: Ephraim is of mine head the strength, Iudah gives laws for me. Moab's my washing-pot, my shoe Ile over Edom throw: And over Palestina's land I will in triumph go. O who is he will bring me to the city fortifi'd? O who is he that to the land of Edom will me guide? O God, which hadest us cast off, this thing wilt thou not do? Ev'n thou▪ O God, who didest not forth with our armies go: Help us from trouble: for the help is vain which man supplies. Through God we'l do great acts: he sh tread down our enemies. PSALM LXI. O God, give ear unto my cry, unto my pray'r attend. From th' utmost corner of the land, my cry to thee Ile send: What time my heart is overwhelm'd, and in perplexity; Do thou me lead unto the Rock that higher is then I. For thou hast for my refuge been a shelter by thy power; And for defence against my foes, thou hast béen a strong tower.
Within thy tabernacle I for ever will abide: d under covert of thy wings with confidence me hide. For thou the vows that I did make, O Lord my God, didst hear: ou hast given me the heritage if those thy Name that fear. A life prolong'd for many dayes thou to the King shalt give: ke many generations be the years which he shall live. He in Gods presence his abode for evermore shall have: o thou truth and mercy both prepare that may him save: And so will I perpetually sing praise unto thy Name, That having made my vows, I may each day perform the same. PSAL. LXII. MY soul with expectation depends on God indeed: strength and my salvation doth from him alone proceed. He only my salvation is, nd my strong Rock is He; e only is my sure defence; much mov'd I shall not be. How long will ye against a man plot mischief? ye shall all e slain, ye as a tottering fence shall be, and bowing wall. They only plot to cast him down from his excellency; They joy in lies, with mouth they blesse;
but they curse inwardly. My soul, wait thou with patience upon thy God alone: On him dependeth all my hope and expectation. He only my salvation is, and my strong Rock is be; He only is my sure defence, I shall not moved be. In God my glory placed is, and my salvation sure: In God the Rock is of my strength, my refuge most secure. Ye people place your confidence in him continually: Before him pour ye out your heart: God is our refuge by. Surely mean men are vanity, and great men are a ly: In ballance laid, they wholly are more light then vanity. Trust ye not in oppression, in robbery be not vain: On wealth set not your hearts, when as increased is your gain, God hath it spoken once to me; yea, this I heard again, That power to Almighty God alone doth appertain. Yea, mercy also unto thee belongs, O Lord, alone; For, thou according to his work rewardest every one. PSAL. LXIII. LOrd thee my God, Ile early seek, my soul doth thirst for thee,
My flesh longs in a dry parcht land, wherein no waters be. That I thy power may behold, and brightness of thy face, s I have seen thee heretofore, within thy holy place. Since better is thy love then life, my lips thee praise shall give. I in thy Name will lift my hands, and bless thee while I live. Ev'n as with marrow and with sat, my soul shall filled be; Then shall my mouth with joyful lips, sing praises unto thee. When I do thee upon my bed remember with delight, nd when on thee I meditate in watches of the night. In shadow of thy wings Ile joy, for thou mine help hast been. My soul thee follows hard; and me thy right hand doth sustain. Who seek my soul to spill, shall sink down to earths lowest room: They by the sword shall be cut off and foxes prey become. Yet shall the King in God rejoyce, and each one glory shall That swear by him: but stopt shall be the mouth of liars all. PSAL. LXIV. VVHen I to thee my prayer make, Lord to my voice give ear; My life save from the enemy, of whom I stand in fear. Me from their secret counsel hide,
who do live wickedly; From insurrection of those men that work iniquity. Who do their tongues with malice whet and make them cut like swords; In whose bent bows are arrows set, ev'n sharp and bitter words? That they may at the perfect man, in secret aim their shot: Yea, suddenly they dare at him to shoot, and fear it not. In ill incourage they themselves; and their snares close to lay, Together conference they have, Who shall them see? they say. Thy have searcht out iniquities, a perfect search they keep, Of each of them the inward thought, and very heart is deep. God shall an arrow shoot at them, and wound them suddenly. So their own tongue shall them confoun all who them see shall fly. And on all men a fear shall fall; Gods works they shall declare: For they shall wisely notice take what these his doings are. In God the righteous shall rejoyce, and trust upon his might; Yea, they shall greatly glory all in heart that are upright. PSAL. LXV. PRaise waits for thee in Sion, Lord, to thee vows paid shall be. O thou that hearer art of pray'r, all flesh shall come to thee. Iniquities I must confesse,
prevail against me do; But as for our transgressions, them purge away shalt thou. Blest is the man whom thou dost chuse, and mak'st approach to thee: That he within thy courts, O Lord, may still a dweller he: e surely shall be satisfi'd with thy abundant grace; nd with the goodnesse of thy house even of thy holy place. O God of our salvation, thou in thy righteousness By fearful works unto our pray'rs thine answer dost expresse. Therefore the ends of all the earth, and these a far that be Vpon the sea, their confidence, O Lord will place in thee. Who, being girt wish power sets fast by his great strength the hills. Who noise of seas, noise of their waves and peoples tumult stills. Those in the utmost parts that dwell, are at thy signes afraid: h' out-going of the morn and even by thee are joyful made. The earth thou visit'st, watering it, thou mak'st it rich to grow With Gods full flood; thou corn prepar'st, when thou provid'st it so. Her ridges thou waterest plenteously, her surrows settlest: With showrs thou dost her molifie, her spring by thee is blest. So thou the year most liberally
dost with thy goodness crown; And all thy paths abundantly on us drop fatness down: They drop upon the pastures wide, that do in deserts ly: The little hills on every side rejoyce right pleasantly. With flocks the pastures cloathed be, the vales with corn are clad; And now they shout and sing to thee, for thou hast made them glad. PSAL. LXVI. ALl lands to God in joyful sounds aloft your voices raise. Sing forth the honour of his Name, and glorious make his praise. Say unto God, How terrible in all thy works art thou? Through thy great pow'r thy foes to thee, shall be constrain'd to bow. All on the earth shall worship thee, they shall thy praise proclaim In songs: they shall sing chearfully unto thy holy Name. Come, & the works that God hath wrong with admiration see, In's working to the sons of men, most terrible is he. Into dry land the sea he turn'd, and they a passage had, Ev'n marching through the floud on foot, there we in him were glad. He ruleth ever by his pow'r, His eyes the nations see: O let not the rebellious ones lift up themselves on hie.
Ye people, bless our God, aloud the voice speak of his praise: Our soul in life who safe preserves; our foot from sliding stayes. For thou didst prove, and try us, Lord, as men do silver try; Brought'st us into the net, and mad'st bands on our loins to ly. Thou hast caus'd men ride o're our heads, and though that we did pass Through fire and water, yet thou brought'st us to a wealthy place. Ile bring burnt-offring to thy house, to thee my vows Ile pay. Which my lips utter'd my mouth spake, when trouble on me lay. Burnt-sacrifices of sat rams, with incense I will bring Of bullocks, and of goats I will present an offering. All that fear God, come hear, Ile tell what he did for my soul. I with my mouth unto him cry'd, my tongue did him extoll. If in my heart I sin regard, the Lord me will not hear: But surely God me heard, and to my prayers voice gave ear. O let the Lord our gracious God, for ever blessed be, Who turned not my pray'r from him, nor yet his grace from me. PSALM LXVII. LOrd, bless and pity us, shine on us with thy face: That th'earth thy way, and nations all may know thy saving grace.
Let people praise thée Lord, let people all thee praise. O let the nations be glad in songs their voices raise. Thou'lt justly people judge, on earth rule nations all: Let people praise thee, Lord, let them praise thee both great and small. The earth her fruit shall yeeld, our God shall blessings send. God shall us blesse, men shall him fear, unto earths utmost end. Another of the same. LOrd, unto us be merciful, do thou us also blesse, And graciously cause shine on us the brightnesse of his face. That so thy way upon the earth to all men may be known, Also among the nations all, thy saving health be shown. O Let the people praise thee, Lord, let people all thée praise. O et he nations be glad, and sing for joy alwayes: For rightly thou shalt people judge, and nations rule on earth. Let people praise thee, Lord, let all the folk praise thee with mirth. Then shall the earth yeeld her increase, God our God blesse us shall. God shall us blesse, and of the earth the ends shall fear him all. PSAL. LXVIII. LEt God arise, and scattered let all his enemies be; no let all those tht do him hae,
before his presence flee. As smoke is driv'n, so drive thou them as fire melts wax away, Before Gods face let wicked men so perish and decay. But let the righteous be glad, let them before Gods fight Be very joyful; yea, let them rejoyce with all their might. To God sing, to His Name sing praise, extol him with your voice, That rides on heav'n, by his name IAH: before His face rejoyce. Because the Lord a Father is unto the fatherlesse: God is the widows Iudge within his place of holiness. God doth the solitary set in families and from bands The chain'd doth free, but rebels do inhabite parched lands. O God, what time thou didst go forth before thy peoples face: nd when through the great wildernesse, thy glorious marching was; Then at Gods presence shook the earth▪ then drops from heaven fell; This Sinai shook before the Lord, the God of Israel. O God thou to thine heritage didst send a plenteous rain; Whereby thou when it weary was, didst it refresh again. Thy congregation then did make their habitation there: Of thine own goodness, for the poor,
O God, thou didst prepare. The Lord himself did give the word, the word abroad did spread; Great was the company of them, the same who published. Kings of great armies foiled were, and forc'd to flee away, And women, who remain'd at home did distribute the prey. Though ye have lyen among the pots, like doves ye shall appear; Whose wings with silver, and with gold whose feathers covered are. When there th' Almighty feattred kings like Salmons snow 'twas white. Gods hill is like to Bashan hill, like Bashan hill for hight. Why do ye leap, ye mountains high? this is the hill where God Desires to dwell; yea, God in it for ay will make abode. Gods chariots twenty thousand are, thousands of angels strong: In's holy place God is, as in mount Sinai them among. Thou hast, O Lord, most glorious, ascended up on hie, And in triumph victorious led captive captivitie. Thou hast received gifts for men, for such as did rebell; Yea, ev'n for them, that God the Lord in midst of them might dwell. Blest be the Lord, who is to us of our salvation God, Who daily with his benefits s plenteously doth load.
He of salvation is the God, who is our God most strong: And unto God the Lord, from death the issues do belong. But surely, God shall wound the head of those that are his foes: The hairy scalp of him that still on in his trespass goes. God said, My people I will bring again from Bashan hill: Yea, from the seas devouring deeps, them bring again I will: That in the blood of enemies thy foot imbru'd may be; And, of thy dogs dipt in the same the tongues thou mayest see. Thy goings they have seen, O God, the steps of Majestie Of my God, and my mightie King within the Sanctuarie. Before went singers, players next on instruments took way; And them among the damsels were that did on timbrels play. Within the congregations, bless God with one accord: From Isra'ls fountain do ye bless and praise the mightie Lord. With their prince little Benjamin, princes and counsel there Of Iudah were, there Zabulons and Naphtalies princes were: Thy God commands thy strength: make strong what thou wroughtst for us, Lord, For thy house at Ieusalem Kings shall thee guts afford.
The spear-mens host, the multitude of bulls which fiercely look: Those calves which people have forth sent, O Lord our God, rebuke, Till every one submit himself and silver pieces bring: The people that delight in war, disperse, O God, and King. Those that be princes great shall then come out of Egypt lands, And Ethiopia to God shall soon stretch out her hands. O all ye Kingdoms of the earth, sing praises to this King, For he is Lord that rule hall, unto Him praises sing. To him that rides on heav'ns of heav'ns, which He of old did found. Lo, He sends out His voice, a voice in might that doth abound. Strength unto God do ye ascribe, for his excellencie Is over Israel, His strength is in the clouds most hie. Thou'rt from thy Temple dreadful Lord Isra'ls own God is He, Who gives his people strength and power, O let God blessed he. PSALM LXIX. SAve me, O God, because the flouds do so inviron me, That ev'n into my very soul come in the waters be. I downward in deep myre do sink, where standing there is none: I am into deep waters come. where floods have ov'r me gone.
I weary with my crying am, my throat is also dry'd: ine eyes do fall, while for my God I waiting do abide. Those men that do without a cause dear hatred unto me, en are the hairs upon my head, in number moe they be. ey that would me destroy and are mine enemies wrongfully e mighty: so what I took not to render forc'd was I. Lord, thou my folly knowst, my sins not covered are from thee. Let none that wait on thee be sham'd, Lord, God of Hosts, for me. Lord, the God of Israel, let none, who search do make, d seek thee, be at any time confounded for my sake. For I have born reproach for thee, my face is hid with shame. To brethren strange, to mothers sons n alien I became. Because the zeal did eat me up, which to thy house I bare; nd the reproaches cast at thée, upon me fallen are. My tears and fasts t'afflict my soul were turned to my shame. When sackcloath I did wear, to them a proverb I became. The men that in the gate do sit, against me evil spake: hey also that vile drunkards were, of me their song did make. But in an acceptable time
my pray'r, Lord, is to thee: In truth of thy salvation, Lord, and mercy great, hear me. Deliver me out of the mire, from sinking do me keep; Free me from those that do me hate, and from the waters deep. Let not the flood on me prevail, whose water overflows; Nor deep me swallow, nor the pit her mouth upon me close. Hear me, O Lord, because thy love and kindness is most good; Turn unto me according to thy mercies multitude. Nor from thy servant hide thy face, I'm troubled soon attend. Draw neer my soul, and it redeem: me from my foes defend. To thee is my reproach well known, my shame and my disgrace: Those that mine adversaries be, are all before thy face. Reproach hath broke my heart, I'm of grief; I look'd for one To pity me, but none I found; comforters found I none. They also bitter gall did give unto me for my meat: They gave me vineger to drink, when as my thirst was great. Before them let their table prove a snare; and do thou make Their welfare and prosperity a trap themselves to take. Let thou their eyes so darkned be, that sight may them forsake.
And let their loins be made by thee continually to shake. Thy fury pour thou out on them and indignation; And let thy wrathful anger, Lord, fast hold take them upon. All waste and desolate let be their habitation. And in their tabernacles all inhabitants be none. Because him they do persecute, whom thou didst smite before; They talk unto the grief of those whom thou hast wounded sore. Adde thou iniquity unto their former wickednesse: And do not let them come at all into thy righteousness. Out of the book of life let them be raz'd, and blotted quite; mong the just and righteous let not their names be writ, But now become exceeding poor, and sorrowful am I: y thy salvation, O my God, let me be set on hie. The Name of God, I with a song, most cheerfully will praise: nd I, in giving thanks to Him, His Name shall highly raise: This to the Lord a sacrifice more gracious shall prove, Then bullock, ox, or any beast that hath both horn and hoofe. When this the humble men shall see, it joy to them shall give; all ye that do seek the Lord.
your heart shall ever live. For God the poor hears, and will not his prisoners contemn, Let heav'n, and earth, & seas Him praise, and all that move in them. For God will Iudahs cities build, and he will Sion save; That they may dwell therein, and it in sure possession have. And they that are his servants seed, inherit shall the same; So shall they have their dwelling there, that love his blessed Name. PSALM LXX. LOrd, hast me do deliver, with speed, Lord, succour me: Let them, that for my soul do seek, sham'd and confounded be: Turn'd back be they and sham'd, that in my hurt delight. Turn'd back be they, Ha, ha, that say, their shaming to requite. In thee let all be glad, and joy that seek for thee: Let them who thy salvation love, say still▪ God praised be. I poor and needy am, come, Lord, and make no stay; My help thou and deliverer art, O Lord make no delay, Another of the same. MAke hast, O God, me to preserve, with speed, Lord, succour me. Let them that for my soul do do seek, sham'd and confounded be. Let them be turned back, and sham'd, that in my hurt delight.
Turn'd back be they, Ha, ha, that say, their shaming to requite. O Lord, in thee let all be glad, and joy that séek for thée: e them, who thy salvation love, say still, God praised be. But I both poor and needy am: come, Lord, and make no stay; y help thou and deliverer art, O Lord, make no delay. PSAL. LXXI. O Lord, my hope and confidence is plac'd in thee alone: Then let thy servant never be put to confusion. And let me in thy righteousness from thee deliverance have? Cause me escape, incline thine ear unto me, and me save. Be thou my dwelling rock, to which I ever may resort: Thou gav'st commandment me to save, for thou'rt my rock and fort. Frée me my God, from wicked hands, hands cruel and unjust. For thou, O Lord God, art my hope, and from my youth, my trust. Thou from the womb didst hold me up: thou art the same that me, Out of my mothers bowels took; I ever will praise thée. To many I a wonder am; but thou'rt my refuge strong. Fill'd let my mouth be with thy praise, and honour all day long. O do not cast me off when as old age doth overtake me;
And when my strength decayed is then do not thou forsake me. For those that are mine enemies, against me speak with hate: And, they together counsel take that for my soul lay wait. They said, God leaves him; him pur and take: none will him save, Be thou not far from me, my God: thy speedy help I crave. Confound, consume them that unto my soul are enemies: Cloath'd be they with reproach and sham that do my hurt devise. But I with expectation will hope continually; And yet with praises more and more I will thee magnifie. Thy justice and salvation my mouth abroad shall show. Ev'n all the day; for I thereof the numbers do not know. And I will constantly go on in strength of God the Lord: And thine own righteousnesse, ev'n thine alone I will record. For even from my youth, O God, by thee I have been taught; And hitherto I have declar'd the wonders thou hast wrought. And now Lord, leave me not when I old and gray-headed grow; Till to this age thy strength and pow'r to all to come I show. And thy most perfect righteousnesse, O Lord is very high,
Who hast so great things done, O God, who is like unto thee? Thou Lord who great adversities and sore to me didst show, halt quicken, and bring me again from depths of earth below. My greatnesse, and my pow'r thou wilt increase, and far extend; n every side, against all grief, thou wilt me comfort send. Thee, ev'n thy truth Ile also praise, my God, with psalterie: hou holy One of Israel, with harp Ile sing to thee. My lips shall much rejoyce in thee, when I thy praises sound: My soul which thou redeemed hast, in joy shall much abound. My tongue thy justice shall proclaim. continuing all day long; For they confounded are, and sham'd, that seek to do me wrong. PSAL. LXXII. O Lord, thy judgements give the King, his son thy righteousnesse. With right he shall thy people iudge, thy poor, with uprightnesse. The lofty mountains shall bring forth unto the people peace; Likewise the little hills the same shall do by righteousness. The peoples poor ones he shall judge, the needles children save: nd those shall he pieces break who them oppressed have. They shall thee fear, while Sun and Moon do last through ages all.
Like rain on mown grass he shall dro or showers on earth that fall. The just shall flourish in his days, and prosper in his reign: He shall, while doth the Moon endure, abundant peace maintain. His large and great dominion shall from sea to sea extend, It from the river shall reach forth unto earths utmost end. They, in the wilderness that dwell, bow down before him must: And they that are his enemies, shall lick the very dust. The Kings of Tarshish, and the Isle to him shall presents bring; And unto him shall offer gifts Sheba's and Seba's King. Yea all the mighty Kings on earth, before him down shall fall: And all the nations of the world do service to him shall. For, he the needy shall preserve, when he to him doth call; The poor also, and him that hath no help of man at all. The poor man and the indigent in mercy he shall spare: He shall preserve alive the souls of those that needy are. Both from deceit and violence, their soul be shall set frée: And in his sight right precious and dear their blood shall be. Yea, he shall live, and giv'n to him shall be of Sheba's gold;
n him still shall he pray, and he fall daily be extol'd. Of corn an handful on the earth on tops of mountains hie, ith prosperous fruit shal shake like trees on Lebanon that be. e City shal be flourishing, her citizens abound number shall like to the grass that grows upon the ground. His Name for ever shall endure, last like the sun it shall: n shall be blest in him, and blest all nations shall him call. Now blessed be the Lord, our God, the God of Israel, or He alone doth wondrous works, in glory that excell. And blessed be his glorious Name in all eternitie: The whole earth let his glory fill: Amen, so let it be. PSAL. LXXIII. YEt God is good to Israel, to each true-hearted one. But as for me, my steps neer slipt, my feet were almost gone. For I envious was, and grudg'd the foolish folk to see, When I perciv'd the wicked sort inio prosperitie. For still their strength continueth firm, their death of bands is free: They are not toil'd as other men, nor plagu'd as others be: Therefore, their pride like to a chain them compasseth about;
And, as a garment, violence doth cover them throughout. Their eyes stand out with fat, they ha more then their hearts could wish. They are corrupt, their talk of wrong, both lewd and lofty is. They set their uth against the heav in their blasphemous talk; And their reproaching tongue throughout the earth earth at large doth walk. His people oftentimes for this look back, and turn about, Sith waters of so full a cup to them are poured out. And thus they say, How can it be that God these things do know? Or can there in the Highest be knowledge of things below? Behold these are the wicked ones, yet prosper at their will In worldly things, they do increase in wealth and riches still. I verily have done in vain my heart to purifie: To no effect in innocence washed my hands have I. For daily, and all day throughout, great plagues I suffered have; Yea, every morning I of new did chastisement receive. If in this manner foolishly to speak I would intend, Thy childrens generation, behold, I should offend. When this I thought to know, it was to hard a thing for me.
Till to Gods Sanctuary I went, then I their end did see. Assuredly thou didst them set slippery place upon: m suddenly thou castedst down into destruction. How in a moment suddenly to ruine brought are they! ith fearful terrours utterly they are consum'd away. Ev'n like unto dream, when one from sleeping doth arise; thou, O Lord, when thou awak'st their image shalt despise. Thus grieved was my heart in me, and me my reins opprest. So rude was I, and ignorant, and in thy sight a beast. Neverthelesse continually, O Lord I am with thee: hou dost me hold by my right hand, and still upholdest me. Thou with thy counsel, while I live, wilt me conduct and guide; d to thy glory afterward receive me, to abide. Whom have I in the heavens high, but thee, O Lord alone? nd in the earth, whom I desire, beside thee there is none. My flesh and heart doth faint and fail, but God doth fail me never; For of my heart God is the strength, and portion for ever. For lo, they that are far from thee, for ever perish shall:
Them, that a-whoring from thée go, thou hast destroyed all. But surely it is good for me, that I draw near to God: In God I trust, that all thy works I may declare abroad. PSAL. LXXIV. O God, why hast thou cast us off? is it for evermore? Against thy pasture sheep why doth thine anger smoke so sore? O call to thy rememberance thy congregation, Which thou hast purchased of old, still think the same upon. The rod of thine inheritance, which thou redeemed hast, This ion hill, wherein thou hadst thy dwelling in times past. To these long desolations thy feet life, do not tarry: For all the ills thy foes have done within thy Sanctuary. Amidst thy congregations thine enemies do roar: Their ensigns they set up, for signs of triumph, thee before. A man was famous, and was had in estimation: According as he lifted up his ax thick trees upon. But all at once with axes now and hammers they go to, And down the carved work thereof they break, and quite undo. They fired have thy Sanctuary, and have defil'd the same,
By casting down unto the ground the place where dwelt thy Name, Thus said they in their hearts, Let us estroy them out of hand: ey burnt up all the Synagogues of God within the land: Our signes we do not now behold, there is not us among Prophet more, nor any one that knows the time how long. How long, Lord, shall the enemy thus in reproach exclaim? shall the adversary thus alwayes blaspheme thy Name? Thy hand, even thy right hand of might: why dost thou thou thus draw back: from thy bosome pluck it out, for our deliverance sake. For certainly God is my King, ev'n from the times of old, orking in midst of all the earth salvation manifold. The sea by thy great pow'r to part asunder, thou didst make; od thou the dragons heads, O Lord, ithin the waters brake: The leviathans heads thou brake in pices, and didst give im to be meat unto the folk in wildernesse that live. Thou clave the fountain and the floud hich did with streams abound; hou dryd'st the mighty waters up into the very ground, Thine only is the day, O Lord, thine also is the night;
And thou alone prepared hast the sun and shining light. By thee the borders of the earth were setled every-where: The summer and the winter both by thee created were. That th'enemy reproached hath O kéep it in record; And that the foolish people have blasphem'd thy Name, O Lord. Vnto the multitude do not thy turles soul deliver; The congregation of thy poor, do not forget for ever. Vnto thy Cov'nant have respect; for earths dark places be Full of the habitations of wicked cruelty. O let not those that be opprest, return again with shame: Let those that poor and needy are, give praise unto thy Name, Do thou, O God, arise, and plead the cause that is thine own: Remember how thou art reproacht still by the foolish one. Do not forget the voice of those that are thine enemies: Of those the tumult ever grows that do against thee rise. PSAL. LXXV. TO thee, O God, do we give thanks, we do give praise to thee: Because thy wondrous works declare thy great Name near to be. I purpose when I shall receive the congregation,
That I shall judgment uprightly render to every one. Dissolved is the land, with all that in the same do dwell; ut I the pillars thereof do ear up, and stablish well. I to the foolish people said, not deal foolishly: ad unto those that wicked are, ift not your born on hy. Lift not your horn on high, nor speak with stubborn neck: But know t nor from East, nor West, nor South promotion doth flow. But God is Iudge; he puts down one▪ and sets another up. For in the hand of God most high of red wine is a cup: full of mixture, he pours forth, and makes the wicked all ring out the bitter dregs thereof▪ yea, and they drink them shall. But I, for ever will declare, I Iacobs God will praise. All horns of lewd men Ile cut off▪ but just mens horns will raise. PSAL. LXXVI. N Iudah's land God is well known. His Name's in Israel great: In Salem is his tabernacle, n Sion is his seat. There arrows of the bow he brake, the shield, the sword, the war. More glorious thou than hills of prey, more excellent art far. Those that were stout of heart are spoil'd
they slept their steep out-right; And none of those their hands did find that were the men of might. When thy rebuke, O Iacobs God, had forth against them past, Their horses and their chariots both were in a dead sleep cast. Thou Lord, ev'n thou art he that shoul be fear'd, and who is he That may stand up before thy sight, if once thou angry be? From heaven thou judgement cause hea the earth was still with fear. When God to judgment rose to save all méek on earth that were. Surely the very wrath of man unto thy praise redounds: Thou to the remnant of his wrath wilt set restraining bounds. Vow to the Lord your God, and pay all ye that near him be, Bring gifts and presents unto him: for to be fear'd is he. By him the sp'rits shall be cut-off of those that princes are: Vnto the Kings that are on earth be fearfull doth appear. PSAL. LXXVII. VNto the Lord I with my voice, I unto God did cry, Ev'n with my voice, and unto me his ear he did apply. I in my trouble sought the Lord; my sore by night did run And ceased not, my grieved soul did consolation shun. I to remembrance God did call,
yet trouble did remain; ad overwhelm'd my spirit was, whilst I did sore complain. Mine eyes debar'd from rest and sleep thou makest still to wake; My trouble is so great that I unable am to speak. The dayes of old to mind I call'd, and oft did think upon he times and ages that are past full many years agone. By night my song I call'd to minde, and commune with my heart, My sp'rit did carefully enquire how I might ease my smart. For ever will the Lord cast off? and gracious be no more? For ever is his mercy gone? ils his word evermore? Is't true that to be gracious the Lord forgotten hath? nd that his tender mercies he hath shut up in his wrath? Then did I say that surely this is mine infirmitie: e minde the years of the right hand of Him that is most hie. Yea, I remember will the works performed by the Lord: The wonders done of old by thee I surely will record. I also will of all thy works my meditation make, nd of thy doings to discourse, great pleasure I will take. O God, thy way most holy is
within the sanctuary: And what God is so great in power, as is our God most by; Thou art the God that wonders dost by thy right hand most strong: Thy mighty power thou hast declar'd the nations among. To thine own people with thine arm thou didst redemption bring: To Iacobs sons, and to the tribes of Ioseph that do spring. The waters, Lord, percived thée; the waters saw thée well: And they for fear aside did flée, the depths on trembling sell. The clouds in water furth were pour sound loudly did the skie. And swiftly through the world abroad thine arrows fierce did slie. Thy thunders voice alongst the bead a mighty noise did make: By lightnings lightned was the world, the earth tremble did and shake: Thy way is in the sea, and in the waters great thy path: Yet are thy footsteps hid, O Lord, none knowledge thereof hath. Thy people thou didst safely lead like to a flock of shéep, By Moses hand and arons thou didst them conduct and kéep. PSAL. LXXVIII. ATtend, my people, to my Law, thereto give thou an ear: The words that from my mouth procéed, attentively do hear. My mouth shall speak a parable,
and sayings dark of old: The same which we have heard & known, and us our fathers told. We also will them not conceal from their posteritie; Them to the generation to come declare will we: The praises of the Lord our God, and his Almighty strength, The wondrous works that he hath done we will declare at length. His testimony and his law in Israel he did place, And charg'd our fathers it to show to their succéeding race. That so the race which was to come, might well them learn and know; And sons unborn, who should arise, might to their sons them show: That they might set their hope in God; and suffer not to fall His mighty works out of their minde: but keep his precepts all. And might not like their fathers, be a stiff rebellions race, race not right in heart with God whose sp'rit not stedfast was. The sons of Ephraim, who nor bows nor other arms did lack, When as the day of battle was they faintly turned back. They broke Gods cov'nant, and refus'd in his commands to go. His works and wonders they forgot, which he to them did show. Things marvellous he brought to passe, their fathers them beheld,
Within the land of Egypt done yea ev'n in Zoans field. By him divided was the sea, he caus'd them through to passe: And made the water so to stand, as like an heap it was. With cloud by day, with light of fire all night he did them guide. In desert rocks he clave, and drink as from great depths supply'd. He from the rock brought streams, li flow made waters to run down Yet sinning more, in desert they provok'd the highest One. For, in their heart they tempted God, and speaking with mistrust, They gréedily did meat require to satisfie their lust. Against the Lord himself they spake, and murmuring said thus, A table in the wildernesse can God prepare for us? Behold, he smote the rock, and thenc came streams and waters great; But can he give his people bread? and send them flesh to eat? The Lord did hear, and waxed wroth, so kindled was a flame 'Gainst Iacob; and 'gainst Israel up indignation came: For they believ'd not God, nor trust in his salvation had: Though floods above he did command, and heav'ns doors open made; And Manna rain'd on them, and gave them corn of heav'n to eat.
Man Angels food did eat, to them he to the full sent meat. And in the heaven he did cause n Eastern winde to blow; nd by his power he let out the Southern wind to go. Then flesh, as thick as dust, he made, to rain down them among; d feathered fowls like as the sand which ly'th she shore along. At his command amidst their camp these showres of flesh down fell, Around about the tabernacles and tents where they did dwell. So did they eat abundantly, and had of meat their fill; For he did give to them what was their own desire and will. They from their lust had not estrang'd their heart and their desire; t while the meat was in their mouth, which they did so require. Gods wrath upon them came and sle the fattst of them all; o that the choise of Israel ov'rthrown by death did fall. Yet notwithstanding of all this, they sinned still the more; And though he had great wonders wrought believ'd him not therefore. Wherefore their dayes in vanity he did consume and wast, And by his wrath their wretched years away in trouble past. But when he slew them then they did to séek him shew desire:
Yea they return'd, and after God right early did inquire. And that the Lord had been their Rock they did remember then: Ev'n that the high Almighty God had their redeemer been: Yet with their mouth they flattered him and speak but fainedly, And they unto the God of truth, with their false toungues did ly. For though their words were good, the hea with him was not sincere: Vnstedfast and perfidious they in his covenant were, But full of pity he forgave. their sin, them did not slay; Nor stir'd up all his wrath, but oft his anger turn'd away. For that they were but fading flesh, to minde he did recall; A wind that passeth soon away, and not returns at all. How often did they him provoke within the wildernesse; And in the desart did him grieve with their rebelliousnesse? Yea turning back, they tempted God, and limits set upon Him who in midst of Israel is the only Holy One. They did not call to mind his pow'r nor yet the day when he Delivered them out of the hand of their fierce enemie. Nor how great signes in Egypt land he openly had wrought
What miracles in Zoans field his hand to passe had brought. How lakes and rivers every-where he turned into bloud; o that nor man, nor beast could drink of standing lake or floud. He brought among them swarms of flies which did them sore annoy; nd diverse kinds of filthy frogs he sent them to destroy. He to the caterpillar gave the fruits of all their soil: heir labours he deliver'd up unto the locusts spoil: Their vines with hail, their sycomores he with the frost did blast. Their beasts to hail, he gave, their flocks hot thunder-bolts did waste. Fierce burning wrath he on them cast, and indignation strong. nd trouble sore, by sending forth ill angels them among. He to his wrath made way, their soul from death he did not save: But over to the pestilence the lives of them he gave. In Egypt land the first-born all he smot down every where; mongst the tents of Ham, ev'n these chief of their strength that were. But his own people like to sheep, thence to go forth he made: nd he amidst the wilderness them▪ as a flock, did lead. And he them safely on did lead, so that they did not fear:
Whereas their enemies by the sea quite overwhelmed were. To borders of his Sanctuary the Lord his people led: Ev'n to the mount, which his right hand for them had purchased. The nations of Canaan by his Almighty hand, Before their face he did expell out of their native land; Which for inheritance to them by line he did divide, And made the tribes of Israel, within their tents abide. Yet God most high they did provoke, and tempted ever still, And to observe his testmonies did not incline their will. But like their fathers turned back. and dealt unfathfully: Aside they turned like a bow that shoots deceitfully. For they to anger did provoke him with their places hie, And with their graven images mov'd him to jealousie. When God heard this, he waxed wroth, and much loath d Israel then: So Shilohs tent he left, the tent which he had plac'd with men. And he his strength delivered into captivity, He left his glory in the hand of his proud enemy. His people also he gave over unto the swords fierce rage;
So sore is wrath inflamed was gainst his heritage. The fire consum'd their choise young men: their maids no marriage had. And when their priests fell by the sword, heir wives no mourning made. But then the Lord arose, as one that doth from sleep awake; d like a gaint, that by wine refresht, a noise doth make. Vpon his enemies hinder-parts e made his stroak to fall: o so upon thm he did put a shame perpetual. Moreover, he the tabernacle of Ioseph did refuse: e mighty tribe of Ephraim e would in no wayes chuse. But he did chuse Iehudahs tribe to be the rest above, d of mount Sion he made choise, which he so much did love. And he his sanctuary built, like to a palace hy, e to the earth, which he did found to perpetuity. Of David that his servant was, he also choise did make; ad even from the folds of sheep was pleased him to take. From waiting on the ews with young, he brought him for to feed rael his inheritance, his people Iacobs seed. So after the integrity of his heart he them fed:
And by the good skill of his hands, them wisely governed. PSAL. LXXIX. O God, the heathen entred have thine heritage, by them Defiled is thy house; on heaps they laid Ierusalem. The bodies of thy servants, they have cast forth to be meat To ravenous fowls, thy dear saints fles they give to beasts, to eat. Their blood about Ierusalem like water they have shed; And there was none to bury them, when they were slain and dead. Vnto our neighbours a reproach most base become are we; A scorn and laughing-stock to them that round about us be. How long, Lord, shall thine anger last; wilt thou still keep the same? And shall thy fervent jealousie burn like unto a flame? On heathens pour hy fury forth, that have thee never known. And on these Kingdoms which thy Name, have never call'd upon. For these are they which Iacob have devoured cruly, And they his habiation have caused waste to ly. Against us mind not former sins; thy ender mercies show, Let them prevent us speedily; for we're brought very low. For thy Names glory help us, Lord, who hast our Saviour bin.
Deliver us; for thy Names sake O purge away our sin. Why say the heathen, Where's their God? let him to them be known; hen these, who shed thy servants blood, are in our sight o'rthrown. O Let the prisoners sighs ascend before thy sight on by: reserve those in thy mighty pow'r that are design'd to dy. And to our neighbours bosome cause it seven-fold rendred be, 'n the reproach, wherewith they have, O Lord, reproached thee. So we thy folk, and pasture sheep shall give thee thanks alwayes, od unto generations all we will shew forth thy praise. PSAL. LXXX. HEar, Israels Shepherd, like a flock thou that dost Ioseph guide: hine forth, O thou, that dost between the cherubims abide. In Ephraims and Benjamins, and in Manasses sight, come for our salvation, stir up thy strength and might. Turn us again, O Lord, our God, and upon us vouchsafe To make thy countenance to shine, and so we shall be safe. O Lord of hosts, Almighty God, how long shall kindled be Thy wrath, against the prayer made by thine own folk to thee? Thou tears of sorrow gives to them, in stead of bread to eat▪
Yea, tears in stead of drink thou gives to them in measure great. Thou makest us a strife unto our neighbours round about: Our enemies among themselves at us do laugh and flout. Turn us again, O God of hosts, and upon us vouchsafe To make thy countenance to shine, and so we shall be safe. A vine from Egypt brought thou hast, by thine out-stretched hand: And thou the heathen out didst cast, to plant it in their land. Before it thou a room didst make, where it might grow and stand: Thou causedst it déep root to take, and it did fill the land. The mountains vaild were with its shae as with a covering: Like goodly Cedars were the boughs which out from it did spring. Vpon the one hand to the sea her boughs she did out send; On th'other side, unto the floud her branches did extend. Why hast thou then thus broken down and tne her hedge away? So that all passengers do pluck, and make of her a prey. The Boar who from the forrest comes doth waste it at his pleasure: The wild beast of the field also devours it out of measure. O God of hosts, we thee be seech; return now unto thine: Look down from heav'n in love, behold
and visit this thy Vine: This vinyard which thine own right hand hath planted us among: d that same branch which for thy self thou hast made to be strong. Burnt up it is with flaming fire, it also is cut down: hey utterly are perished then as thy face doth frown. O let thy hand be still upon man of thy right hand; he son of man, whom for thy self ou madest strong to stand. So henceforth we will not go back nor turn from thee at all: do thou quicken us, and we upon thy Name will call. Turn us again, Lord God of hosts, and upon us vouchsafe o make thy countenance to shine, and so we shall be safe. PSAL. LXXXI. SIng loud to God, our strength, with joy to Iacobs God do sing. Take up a Psalm, the pleasant harp, timbrel and psaltry bring: Blow trumpets at new moon, what day our feast appointed is; For charge to Israel, and a law of Iacobs God was this. To Ioseph this a testimony he made, when Egypt land e travel'd throgh, where spéech I heard I did not understand. His shoulder I from burdens took his hands from pots did free. Thou didst in trouble on me call,
and I delivered thee. In secret place of thundering I did thée answer make; And at the streams of Meribah of thee a proof did take. O thou, my people, give an ear, Ile testifie to thee; To thee, O Israel, if thou wilt but hearken unto me. In midst of thee, there shall not be any strange god at all; Nor unto any God unknown thou bowing down shalt fall. I am the Lord thy God, which did from Egypt land thee guide: Ile fill thy mouth abundantly, do thou it open wide. But yet my people to my voice, would not attentive be; And even my chosen Israel he would have none of Me. So to the lust of their own hearts I them delivered: And then in counsels of their own they vainly wandered, O that my people had me heard, Israel my wayes had chose. I had their enemies soon subdu'd, my hand turn'd on their foes. The haters of the Lord, to him submission should have fain'd, But as for them, their time should have for ever more remain'd. He should have also fed them with the finest of the wheat: Of honey from the rock thy fill I should have made thee eat.
PSAL. LXXXII. O gods assembly GOD doth stand: He judgeth gods among. How long, excepting persons vile, will ye give judgement wrong? Defend the poor and fatherless, to poor opprest do right. The poor and needy ones fet free, id them for ill mens might. They know not, nor will understand. in darknesse they walk on: l the foundations of the earth out of their course are gone. I said that ye are gods, and are sons of the Highest all; But ye shall die like men, and as one of the princes fall. O God, do thou raise up thy self, the earth to judgement call: n thou as thine inheritance, shalt take the Nations all. PSAL. LXXXIII. KEep not, O God, we thee intreat: O keep not silence now: o thou not hold thy peace, O God, and still no more be thou. For lo, thine enemies a noise tumultuously have made; And they that haters are of thee, have lifted up the head. Against thy chosen people they do crafty counsel take: And they against thy hidden ones do consultaions make. Come, let us cut them off, said they, from being a nation; That of the name of Israel may no more be mention.
For, with joynt heart they plot, in lea against thee they combine. The tents of Edom, Ishmaelites, Moabs, and Hagars line. Gebal and Ammon, Amalek, Philistines, those of Tyre; And Assur joyn'd with them, to help Lots children they conspire. Do to them as to Midian, Iabin at Kison strand; And Sisera, which at Endor fell, as dung to fat the land. Like Oreb, and like Zéeb make, their noble-men to fall; Like Zeba, and Zalmuna-like, make thou their princes all: Who said, For our possession let us Gods houses take. My God, them, like a whéel, as chaft before the wind, them make. As fire consumes a wood, as flame doth mountains set on fire; Chase and affright them with the stor and tempest of thine ire, Their faces fill with shame, O Lord, that they may seek thy Name. Let them confounded be, and vext, and perish in their shame, That men may know, that thou to whom alone doth appertain The Name Iehovah dost most high ov'r all the earth remain. PSAL. LXXXIV. HOw lovely is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts, to me, The tabernacles of thy grace,
how pleasant, Lord, they be! y thirsty soul longs vehemently; ea, faints thy courts to see: very heart and flesh cry out, living God, for thee. Behold, the sparrow findeth out n house wherein to rest; e swallow also for her self ath purchased a nest: n thine own altars, where she safe her young ones forth may bring, thou Almighty Lord of hosts, ho art me God and King, Blest are they in thy house that dwell, they ever give thee praise. Blest is the man whose strength thou art, in whose heart are thy wayes. Who passing thorow Baca's vale, therein do dig up wells; o the rain whith falleth down, the pools with water fills. So they from stength unwearied go, till forward unto strength, till in Zion they appear before the Lord at length. Lord God of hosts, my prayer hear, O Iacobs God give ear. See God, our shield, look on the face of thine anointed dear. For, in thy courts one day excells a thousand; rather in My Gods house will I keep a door, than dwell in tents of sin. For, God the Lord's a sun and shield, he'l grace and glory give; nd will with-hold no good from them that uprightly do live.
O thou that art the Lord of hosts, that man is truly blest, Who by assured confidence on thee alone doth rest. PSAL LXXXV. O Lord, thou hast been favourable to thy beloved land: Iacobs captivity thou hast recall'd with mighty hand. Thou pardoned thy people hast all their iniquties, Thou all their trespasses and sins hast cover'd from thine eyes. Thou took'st off all thine ire, and turn from thy wraths furiousnesse. Turn us, God of our health, and cause thy wrath 'gainst us to cease. Shall thy displeasure thus endure against us without end? Wilt thou to generations all thine anger forth extend? That in thee may thy people joy, wilt thou not us revive? Shew us thy mercy, Lord, to us do thy salvation give. Ile hear what God the Lord, will spea to his folk he'l speak peace, And to his Saints, but let them not return to foolishnesse. To them that fear him, surely near is his salvation; That glory in our land may have her habitation. Truth met with mercy, righteousness and peace kiss'd mutually, Truth springs from earth, & righteousne looks down from heaven hie.
Yea, what is good the Lord shall give, r land shall yeeld increase. Iustice, to set us in his steps, all go before his face. PSAL LXXXVI. Lord, do thou bow down thine ear, and hear me graciously: cause I sore afflicted am, nd am in poverty. Because I'm holy, let my soul y thee preserved be: thou my God, thy servant save ut puts his trust in thee. ith unto thee I daily cry, e merciful to me. Rejoyce thy servants soul, for Lord, I lift my soul to thee. For thou art gracious, O Lord, and ready to forgive, d rich in mercy, all that call pon thee to relieve. Hear, Lord, my prayer, unto the voice of my request attend. In troublous times Ile call on thee, for thou wilt answer send. Lord there is none among the gods that may with thee compare; d like the works which thou hast done not any work is there. All Nations, whom thou mad'st shall come and worship reverently Before thy face, and they O Lord, thy Name shall glorifie. Because thou art exceeding great, and works by thee are done, hich are to be admir'd; and thou art GOD thy self alone.
Teach me thy way, and in thy truth, O Lord, then walk will I: Vnite my heart, that I thy Name my fear continually. O Lord, my God, with all my heart to thee I will give praise: And I the glory will ascribe unto thy Name alwayes. Because thy mercy toward me in greatnesse doth excell? And thou delivered hast my soul out from the lowest hell. O God, the proud against me rise, and violent men have met, That for my soul have sought; and thee before them have not set. But thou art full of pity, Lord, a God most gracious, Long-suffering, and in thy truth and mercy plenteous: O turn to me thy countenance, and mercy on me have: Thy servant strengthen, and the son of thine own hand-maid save. Shew me a sign for good, that they which do me hate, mey see, And be asham'd; because thou, Lord, didst help and comfort me. PSALM LXXXVII. UPon the hills of holinesse He his foundation sets. God, more then Iacobs dwellings all delights in Zions gates. Things glorious are said of thee, thou City of the Lord. Rahab and Babel, I to those that know me, will record:
Behold, ev'n Tyrus, and with it the land of Palestine, nd likewise Ethiopia; this man was born therein. And it of Zion shall be said, This man, and that man there Was born; and he that is most high himself shall stablish her. When God the people writes, he'l count that this man born was there. There be that sing and play, and all my well-springs in thee are. PSAL. LXXXVIII. LOrd God, my Saviour, day and night before thee cry'd have I. Before thee let my prayer come, give ear unto my cry. For troubles great do fill my soul: my life draws nigh the grave. I'm counted with those that go down to pit, and no strength have. Ev'n free among the dead, like them that slain in grave do ly, Cut off from thy hand, whom no more thou hast in memory. Thou hast me laid in lowest pit, in deeps and darksome caves. Thy wrath lies hard on me, thou hast me prest with all thy waves. Thou hast put far from me my friends, thou mad'st them to abhore me: And I am so shut up, that I find no evasion for me. By reason of affliction, mine eye mourns dolefully: To thee, Lord, do I call, and stretch
my hands continually. Wilt rhou shew wonders to the dead shall they rise, and thee blesse? Shall in the grave thy love be told? in death thy faithfulnesse? Shall thy great wonders in the dark, or shall thy righteousnesse? Be known to any in the land of deep forgetfulnesse? But, Lord, to thee I cry'd, my pray at morn prevent shall thee. Why, Lord, dost thou cast off my s and hid'st thy face from me? Distrest am I, and from my youth I ready am to dy; Thy terrours I have born, and am distracted fearfully. The dreadfull fiercenesse of thy wrath quite over me doth go: Thy terrours great have cut me off, they did pursue me so. For, roand about me every day, like water they did roul: And, gathering together, they have compassed my soul. My friend thou hast put far from me, and him that did me love, And those that mine acquaintance were to darknesse didst remove. PSAL. LXXXIX. GOds mercies I will ever sing, and, with my mouth, I shall Thy faithfulnesse make to be known to generations all. For, mercy shall be built, said I, for ever toendure:
y faithfulnesse ev'n in the heav'ns ou wilt establish sure. I with my chosen One have made cov'nant graciously; to my servant whom I lov'd David sworn have I: That I thy seed establish shall ever to remain; d will to generations all, y throne build and maintain. e praises of thy wondrs, Lord, heavens shall expresse: in the congregation Saints, thy faithfulnesse. For, who in heaven with the Lord ay once himself compare? o is like GOD among the sons those that mighty are? reat fear in meetings of the Saints, due unto the Lord; he, of all about him, should ith reverenc be ador'd. O thou that art the Lord of hosts hat Lord in mightinesse. ike to thee? who compast round t with thy faithfulnesse. v'n in the raging of the sea, ou over it dost reign; when the waves thereof do swell, ou stillest them again; Rhab in pieces thou didst break, ke on that slaughtered is; with thy mighty arm thou hast sperst thine enemies. The heavens are thine, thou for thine own e earth dost also take:
The world, and fulness of the same, thy pow'r did found and make. The North and South from thee alo their first beginning had; Both Tabor mount, and Hermon hill shall in thy Name be glad. Thou hast an arm that's full of pow' thy hand is great in might; And thy rigt hand exceedingly exalted is in hight. Iustice and judgment of thy throne▪ are made the dwelling-place: Mercy, accompani'd with truth, shall go before thy face. O greatly blest the people are the joyfull sound that know In brightnesse of thy face, O Lord, they ever on shall go. They in thy Name shall all the day rejoyce exceedingly, And in thy righteousnesse shall they exalted be on hy. Because the glory of their strength doth only stand in thee; And in thy favour shall our horn and pow'r elalted be. For, God is our defence, and he to us doth safety bring; The holy One of Israel is our Almighty King. In vision to thy Holy One thou saidst, I help upon A strong one laid: out of the folk I rais'd a chosen One: Ev'n David, I have found him out a servant unto me; And with my holy oyl my King
ointed him to be. With whom my hand shall stablisht be, aine arm shall make him strong. On him the foe shall not exact, for son of mischief wrong. I will beat down before his face ll his malicious foes: will them greatly plagne, who do with hatred him oppose. My mercy and my faithfulnesse with him yet still shall be. in my name his horn and pow'r en shall exalted see. His hand and pow'r shall reach afar, Ile set it in the sea: d his right hand established hall in the rivers be. Thou art my Father, he shall cry, thou art my God alone: d he shall say, Thou art the Rock of my salvation. Ile make him my first born, more high than Kings of any land: My love Ile ever keep for him, my cov'nant fast shall stand. His seed I by my pow'r will make for ever to endure; d as the dayes of heav'n, his throne shall stable be and sure. But if his children shall forsake my Laws, and go astray, d in my judgements shall not walk, but wander from my way. If they my Laws break, and do not keep my Commandements, Ile visit then their faults with rods,
their sins with chastisments. Yet Ile not take my love from him, nor false my promise make; My cov'nant Ile not break, nor chang what with my mouth I spake. Once by my holinesse I sware, to David Ile not ly. His seed and throne shall as the sun before me last for ay. It like the moon shall ever be establisht stedfastly. And like to that which in the heaven doth witnesse faithfully: But thou displeased, hast cast off, thou didst abhore and loath; With him that thine anointed is thou hast been very wroth. Thou hast they servants covenant mad void and quite cast by; Thou hast profan'd his crown, while it cast on the ground doth ly. Thou all his hedges hast broke down his strong holds down hast torn. He to all passers by a spoil, to neighbours is a scorn. Thou hast set up his foes right hand, mad'st all his enemies glad. Turn'd his swords edge, and him to sta in battell hast not made. His glory thou hast made to cease, his throne to ground down cast; Shortned his dayes of youth, and him with shame thou covered hast. How long, Lord, wilt thou hide thy se for ever in thine ire: And shall thine indignation burn like unto a fire?
Remember, Lord, how short a time I shall on earth remain: wherefore is it so that thou hast made all men in vain? What man is he that liveth here, and death shall never see? r from the power of the grave that man his soul shal free? Thy former loving kindnesses, O Lord, where be they now? those which, in truth and faithfulnesse to David sworn hast thou. Mind, Lord, thy servants sad reproach how I in bosome bear he scornings of the people all, who strong and mighty are. Wherewith thy raging enemies reproach'd, O Lord, think on; herewith they have reproach'd the steps of thine anointed one. All blesseng to the Lord, our God let be ascribed then: forevermore so let it be, Amen, yea and amen. PSAL. XC. LOrd, thou hast been our dwelling place in generations all. Before thou ever hadst brought forth the mountains great or small: re ever thou hadst form'd the earth, and all the world abroad, Ev'n thou from everlasting art to everlasting God. Thou dost unto destruction man that is mortal turn: And unto them thou say'st, again ye sons of men return.
Because a thousand years appear no more before thy sight, Then yesterday, when it is past, or then a watch by night. As with an overflowing floud thou carriest them away: They like a sleep are▪ like the grasse that grows at morn are they. At morn it flourishes and grows, cut down at ev'n doth fade: For by thine anger we consume, thy wrath makes us afraid. Our sins thou, and iniquities dost in thy presence place, And setst our secret faults before the brightnesse of thy face. For in thine anger all our dayes do passe on, to an end; And as a tale that hath béen told so we our years do spend. Threescore and ten years do sum up our dayes and years we see: Or if by reason of more strength, in some fourscore they be, Yet doth the strength of such old men but grief and labour prove; For it is soon cut off, and we fly hence, and soon remove. Who knows the power of thy wrath according to thy fear So is thy wrath: Lord, teach thou us our end in mind to bear: And so to count our dayes, that we our hearts may still apply To learn thy wisdom and thy truth, that we my live thereby. Turn yet again to us, O Lord;
how long thus shall it be? et it repent thee now, for those that servants are to thee. O with thy tender mercies, Lord, o early satisfie: o we rejoyces shall all our dayes, d still be glad in thee. According as the dayes have been therein we grief have had, d years wherein we ill have seen, so do thou make us glad. O let thy work and pow'r appear hy servants face before: d show unto their children dear thy glory evermore. And let the beauty of the Lord our God be us upon: or handy-works establish thou establish them each one. PSAL. XCI. HE that doth in the secret place of the most High recide, der the shade of him, that is Th'Almighty, shall abide. I of the Lord my God, will say, he is my refuge still; e is my fortresse and my God, and in him trust I will. Assuredly he shall thee save, and give deliverance From subtile fowlers snare and from the noisome pestilence. His feather's shall thee hide: thy trust under his wings shall be: His faithfulnesse shall be a shield and buckler unto thee.
Thou shalt not need to be afraid for terrours of the night, Nor for the arrow that doth flie by day while it is light. Nor for the pestilence that walks in darknesse secretly, Nor for destruction that doth waste at noon day, openly. A thousand at thy side shall fall, on thy right hand shall lie Ten thousand dead, yet unto thee it shall not once come nigh. Only thou with thine eyes shalt look, and a beholder he; And thou therein the just reward of wicked men shalt see. Because the Lord, who constantly my refuge is alone, Ev'n the most high is made by thee thy habitation. No plague shal near thy dwelling come no ill shall thee befal: For thee to keep in all thy wayes, his angels charge he shal. They in their hands shall bear thee up, still waiting thee upon; Lest thou at any time should dash thy foot against a stone. Vpon the Adder thou shalt tread, and on the Lyong strong: Thy feet on Dragons trample shal, and on the Lyongs young. Because on me he set his love: Ile save and set him free: Because my great Name he hath known, I will him set on high.
He'll call on me, I'le answer him, I will be with him still n trouble to deliver him, and honour him I will. With length of dayes unto his mind I will him satisfie: I also my salvation will cause his eyes to sée. PSAL. XCII. TO render thanks unto the Lord it is a comly thing, nd to thy Name, O thou most high, one praise aloud to sing. Thy loving kindnesse to shew forth, when shines the morning light: And to declare thy faithfulnesse, with pleasure, every night. On a ten stringed instrument, upon the psallery; d on the harp, with solemn sound, and grave sweet melody. For thou, Lord, by thy mighty work hast made my heart right glad; And I will triumph in the works which by thine hands were made. How great, Lord, are thy works, each though of thine a déep it is; A brutish man it knoweth not, fools understand not this. When those that lewd and wicked are, spring quickly up like grasse, And workers of iniquity doth flourish all apace. It is that they for ever may destroyed be and slain; But thou, O Lord. art the most high for ever to remain▪
For lo, thine enemies, O Lord, thine enemies perish shall: The workers of iniquitie shall be dispersed all. But thou shalt, like unto the horn of th' unicorn, exalt My horn on high; thou with fresh oyl anoint me also shalt. Mine eye shall also my desire see on mine enemies; Mine ears shall of the wicked hear, that do against me rise. But like the Palm tree, flourishing shall be the righteous one: He shall like to the Cedar grow that is in Lebanon. Those that within the house of God are planted by his grace They shall grow up, and flourish all in our Gods holy place. And in old age, when others fade they fruit still forth shall bring; They shall be fat, and full of sap, and ay be flourishing. To shew that upright is the Lord, he is a rock to me: And he from all unrighteousnesse is altogether free. PSAL. XCIII. THe Lord doth reign, and cloth'd is he with majesty most bright; His works do shew him cloth'd to be and girt about with might. The world is also stablished, that it cannot depart. Thy throne is fixt of old, and thou from everlasting art.
The flouds, O Lord, have lifted up they lifted up their voice; The flouds have lifted up their waves, and made a mighty noise. But yet the Lord, that is on high, is more of might by far, Then noise of many waters is, or great sea billows are! Thy testimonies, every one, in faithfulnesse excell: And holinesse for ever, Lord, thine house becometh well. PSALM XCIV. O Lord God, unto whom alone all vengeance doth belong. O mighty God who vengeance ownst, shine forth avenging wrong. Lift up thy self, thou of the earth the soveraign judge that art, And unto those that are so proud a due reward impart. How long, O mighty God, shall they who lewd and wicked be, How long shall they who wicked are, thus triumph haughtily? How long shall things most hard by them be uttered and told? And al that work iniquity to boast themselves be bold? Thy folk they break in pieces, Lord, thine heritage oppresse. The widow they, and stranger slay, and kill the fatherlesse. Yet say they, God it shall not see, nor God of Iacob know. Ye brutish people understand, fools, when wise will ye grow?
The Lord did plant the ear of man, and hear then shall not he? He only form'd the eye, and then shall he not clearly see? He that the Nations doth corect, shall he not chastise you? He knowledge unto man doth teach, and shall himselfe not know? Mans thoughts to be but vanity, the Lord doth well discern. Blest is the man thou chastnest, Lord, and mak'st thy Law to learn. That thou mayst give him rest, from day of sad adversitie, Vntill the pit be dig'd for those that work iniquitie. For sure the Lord will dot cast off those that his people be, Neither his own inheritance quite and forsake will he. But judgment unto righteousnesse shall yet return again, And all shall follow after it that are right hearted men. Who will rise up for me, against those that do wickedly? Who will stand up for me, 'gainst those that work iniquitie? Vnlesse the Lord had been my help, when I was fore opprest, Almost my soul had in the house of silence been at rest. When I had uttered this word, my foot doth slip away, Thy mercy held me up O Lord, thy goodnesse did me stay.
Amidst the multitude of thoughts, which in my heart do fight: y soul lest it be overcharg'd. thy comrorts do delight. Shal of iniquity the throne have fellowship with thee. Which mischief cunningly contriv'd, doth by a law decree? Against the righteous souls they joyn, the guiltlesse blood condemn: t of my refuge God's the Rock, and my defence from them. On them their own iniquity the Lord shall bring and lay, d cut them off in their own sin, our Lord God shall them stay. PSAL. XCV. O Come, let us sing to the Lord, come, let us every one, joyfull noise make to the Rock of our salvation. Let us before his presence come, with praise and thankfull voice, Let us sing Psalms to him with grace, and make a joyful noise. For God a great God, and great King. above all gods he is. Depths of the earth are in his hand, the strength of hills is his, To him the spacious sea belongs, for he the same did make: The dry land also from his hands it's form at first did take. O come, and let us worship him, let us how down withall, And on our knées before the Lord, our maker let us fall.
For he's our God the people we of his own pasture are, And of his hand the sheep: to day, if ye his voice will hear. Then harden not your hearts, as in the procation, As in the desart, on the day of the tenation. When me your fathers tempt'd & prov'd, and did my working see: Ev'n for the space of fourty years this race hath grieved me: I said this people erres in heart, my wayes they do not know; To whom I sware in wrath, that to my rest they should not go. PSAL. XCVI. O Sing a new song to the Lord, sing, all the earth, to God: To God sing, blesse his Name, shew still his saving health abroad. Among the heathen nations his glory do declare: And unto all the people shew his works that wondrous are. For great's the Lord, and greatly he is to be magnifi'd: Yea, worthy to be fear'd is he above all gods beside. For all the gods are idols dumb, which blinded nations fear: But our God is the Lord, by whom the heavens created were. Great honour is before his face, and Majesty divine: Strength is within his holy place, and there doth beauty shine.
Do you ascribe unto the Lord, of people every tribe. lory do you unto the Lord, and mighty power ascribe, Give ye the glory to the Lord that to his Name is due. me ye into his courts, and bring in offering with you. In beauty of his holinesse, O do the Lord adore: kewise let all the earth throughout tremble his face before. Among the heathen say, God reigns: the world shall stedfastly fixt from moving, he shall judge the people righteously. Let heavens be glad before the Lord and let the earth rejoyce, et seas and all that is therein, cry out and make a noise: Let fields rejoyce, and every thing that springeth of the earth: Then woods and every tree shall sing with gladnesse and with mirth. Before the Lord, because he comes, to judge the earth comes he: e'l judge the world with righteousnesse, the people faihfully. PSAL. XCVII. GOd reigneth, let the earth be glad, and isles rejoyce each one. Dark clouds him compasse, and in right with judgement dwells his throne, Fire goes before him, and his foes, it burns up round about. His lightnings lighten did the world, earth saw, and shook throughout.
Hills at the presence of the Lord, like wax, did melt away: Ev'n at the presence of the Lord, of all the earth, I say. The heav'ns declare his righteousnesse, all men his glory see. All who serve graven images, confounded let them be: Who do of idols boast themselves, let shame upon them fall. Ye that are called gods, see that ye do him worship all. Sion did hear, and joyfull was, glad Iudah's daughters were. They much rejoyc'd O Lord, because the judgements did appear. For thou, O Lord, art high above all things on earth that are: Above all other gods thou art exalted very far. Hate ill, all ye that love the Lord, his saints souls keepeth he, And from the hands of wicked men he sets them safe and free. For all those that be righteous sown is a joyful light, And gladness sown is for all those that are in heart upright. Ye righteous in the Lord rejoyce, expresse your thankfulness, When ye into your memory do call his holiness. PSAL. XCVIII. O Sing a new song to the Lord, for wonders he hath done: His right hand his holy arm him victory hath won.
The Lord God his salvation ath caused to be known; justice in the heathens sight he openly hath shown. e mindful of his grace and truth to Israels house hath been; ed the salvation of our God ll ends of th'earth have séen. et all the earth unto the Lord send forth a joyful noise: t up your voice aloud to him, ng praises and rejoyce. With harp, with harp, & voice of Psalms into Iehovah sing. With trumpets, cornets gladly sound before the Lord the King. Let seas, and all their fulness roar, the world and dwellers there. Let flouds clap hands, and let the hills together joy declare. Before the Lord, because he comes, to judge the earth comes he: e'l judge the world with righteousnesse, his folk with equity. PSAL. XCIX. TH' Eternal Lord doth reign as King, let all the people quake e sits between th cherubims, let th'earth be mov'd and shake. The Lord in Sion great, and high above all people is. Thy great and dreadful Name (for it is holy) let them bless. The Kings strength also judgment loves, thou settlest equity, ust judgement thou dost execute in Iacob righteously.
The Lord our God exalt on hie, and reverently do ye Before his footstool worship him: the Holy One is he. Moses and Aaron 'mongst his priests, Samuel with them that call Vpon his Name; these call'd on God, and he them answer'd all. Within the pillar of the cloud he unto them did speak: The testimonies he them taught, and laws, they did not break. Thou answer'dst them, O Lord, our God thou wast a God that gave Pardon to them, though on their déeds thou wouldest vengeance have. Do ye exalt the Lord, our God, and at his holy Hill Do ye him worship; for the Lord our God is holy still. PSAL. C. ALL people that on earth do dwell, Sing to the Lord with chearfull voice. Him serve with mirth, his praise forth tel Come ye before him and rejoyce. Know that the Lord is God indéed, Without our aid he did us make: We are his flock, he doth us féed, And for his sheep he doth us take. O enter then his gates with praise, Approach with joy his courts unto: Praise, laud, and blesse his Name alwayes For it is séemly so to do. For why the Lord our God is good, His mercy is for ever sure: His truth at all times firmly stood, And shall from age to age endure.
Another of the same. All ye lands, unto the Lord make ye a joyfull noise. Serve God with gladnesse, him before, come with a singing voice: know ye the Lord▪ that he is God, not we, but he us made; We are his people, and the sheep within his pasture fed. Enter his gates and courts with praise. to thank him go ye thither: o him expresse your thankfulnesse, and blesse his Name together. Because the Lord our God is good, his mercy faileth never; And to all generations his truth endureth ever. PSAL. CI. I Mercy will, and judgment sing, Lord, I will sing to thée. With wisdom in a perfect way shall my behaviour be. O when in kindnesse unto me, wilt thou be pleas'd to come; I with a perfect heart will walk within my house, at home. I will endure no wicked thing before mine eyes to be: I hate their work that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me. A stubborn and a froward heart depart quite from me shall: A person giv'n to wickednesse I will not know at all. Ile cut him off that slandereth his neighbour privily: The haughty heart I will not bear
nor him that looketh hie. Vpon the faithful of the land mine eyes shall be, that they May dwell with me, he shall me serve that walks in perfect way. Who of deceit a worker is, in my house shall not dwell: And in my presence shall be not remain, that lies doth tell. Yea, all the wicked of the land early destroy will I; All from Gods city to cut off, that work iniquity. PSALM CII. O Lord, unto my pray'r give ear, my cry let come to thee; And in the day of my distresse hide not thy face from me: Give ear to me: what time I call, to answer me make haste: For as an hearth my bones are burnt, my dayes like smoke do waste. My heart within me smiten is, and it is withered, Like very grasse, so that I do forget to eat my bread. By reason of my groaning voice, my bones cleave to my skin. Like Pelican in wildernesse forsaken I have bin: I like an Owl in desart am that nightly there doth moan: I watch and like a sparrow am on the house top alone. My bitter en'mies all the day reproaches cast on me: And being mad at me, with rage
against me sworn they be: for why I ashes eaten have, ke bread in sorrows deep; drink I also mingled have with tears that I did weep. Thy wrath and indignation did cause this grief and pain: r thou hast lift me up on high, nd cast me down again. My days are like unto a shade which doth declining passe: I am dry'd and withered, ev'n like unto the grasse. But thou, Lord, everlasting art, and thy remembrance shall ntinually endure and be to generations all. Thou shalt arise, and mercy have upon thy Zion yet; he time to favour her is come, the time that thou hast set. For, in her rubbish and her stones thy servas pleasure take; ea, they the very dust thereof do favour for her sake. So shall the heathen people fear the Lords most holy Name: nd all the Kings on earth shall dread thy glory and thy same. When Zion by the mighty Lord, built up again shall be, In glory then and majesty to men appear shall be. The prayer of the destitute he surely will regard, Their prayer he will not despise, by him it shall be heard.
For generations yet to come this shall be on record: So shall the people that shall be created: praise the Lord. He from his sanctuaries height hath downward cast his eye, And from his glorious throne in heav'n, the Lord the earth did spy. That of the mournfull prisoner the goanings he might hear, To set them free that unto death by men appointed are: That they in Zion may declare the Lords mst holy Name, And publish in Ierusalem the praises of the same: When as the people gather shall in troops with one accord, When kingdoms shall assembled be to serve the ighst Lord. My woned force and strength he hath abated in the way; And he my dayes hath shortened: Thus therefore did I say, My God, in mid-time of my dayes, take thou me not away. From age to age, eternally thy years endure and stay. The firm foundation of the earth of old time thou hast laid: The heavens also are the work which thine own hands have made. Thou shalt for evermore endure, but they shall perish all; Yea, every one of them wax old, like to a garment, shall:
Th as a vesture shall them change, and they shall changed be. But thou the same art, and thy years as to eternitie. The children of thy servants shall continually endure, d in thy sight, O Lord, their seed hall be establisht sure. Another of the same. LOrd, hear my pray'r, and let my cry, Have speedy accesse unto thee. In day of my calamity, ide not thou thy face from me: ar when I call to thee, that day answer speedily return: My dayes like smoke consume away: d as an hearth my bones do burn, My heart is wounded vry sore withered, like to grasse, doth fade: forgetfull grown therefore a take and eat my daily bread. By reason of my smart within, ed voice of my most grievous groans. flesh consumed in, my skin. parcht, doth cleave unto my bones, The Pelican of wildernesse, he Owl in desarts I do match. And sparrow-like companionlesse, pon the houses top I watch. I all day long am made a scorn, proacht by my malicious foes; he mad men are against me sworn, e men against me that arose. For I have ashes eaten up, o me as if they had been bread; o with my drink I in my cup
Of bitter tears a mixture made, Because thy wrath was not appeas'd, And dreadfull indignation, Therefore it was that thou me rais'd, And thou again didst cast me down. My dayes are like a shade alway, Which doth declining swiftly passe, And I am withered away Much like unto the fading grasse: But thou, O Lord, shall still endure From change and all mutation free, And to all generations sure Shall thy remembrance ev'r be. Thou shalt arise, and mercy yet Thou to mount Zion shalt extend: Her time for favour which was set: Behold, is now come to an end. Thy saints take pleasure in her stones Her very dust to them is dear. All heathen lands, and Kingly throne On earth, thy glorious Name shall fear. God in his glory shall appear, When Zion he builds and repairs, He shall regard and lend his ear Vnto the needies humble pray'rs. The' afflicteds pray'r he will not scorn: All times this shall be in record, And generations yet unborn Shall praise and magnifie the Lord. He from his holy place look'd down, The earth he view'd from heaven on hie, To bear the prisoners murning groa And free them that are dam'd to die: That Zion and Ierusalem oo His Name and praise may well record. When people and the Kingdoms do
Assemble all to praise the Lord. My strength he weakned in the way, des of life he shortened. My God, O take me not away mid-time of my dayes, I said: My years throughout all ages last. Of old thou hast established e earths foundation firm and fast: My mighty hands the heav'ns have made: They perish shall, as garments do, thou shalt evermore endure: estures thou shalt change them so, they shall all be changed sure. But from all changes thou art free, y endless years do last for ay. Thy servants, and their seed, who be blish'd shall before thee stay. PSAL. CIII. Thou, my soul, blesse God the Lord, and all that in me is stirred up his holy Name magnifie and blesse, lesse, O my soul, the Lord, thy God, d not forgetful be ll his precious benefits hath bestow'd on thee. ll thine iniquities who doth st graciously forgive: o thy diseases all and pains h heal, and thee relieve. ho doth redeem thy life, that thou death may not go down: o thee with loving kindnesse doth o tender mercies crown, ho with abundance of good things h satisfie thy mouth;
So that, ev'n as the Eagles age, renewed is thy youth. God righteous judgement executes for all oppressed ones. His way to Moses, he his acts made known to Israels sons. The Lord our God is mercifull, and he is gracious, Long-suffering and slow to wrath, in mercy plenteous. He will not chide continually nor keep his anger still. With us he dealt not as we sinn'd, nor did requite our ill. For as the heaven in its height the earth surmounteth far: So great to those that do him fear, his tender mercies are, As far as East is distant from the West, so far hath be From us removed, in his love, all out iniquity. Such pity as a father hath unto his children dear, Like pity shows the Lord to such as worship him in fear: For he remembers we are dust, and he our frame well knows. Frail man his dayes are like the gr as flower in field he grws, For over it the wind doth passe, and it away is gone, And of the place where once it was it shall no more be known. But unto them that do him fear, Gods mercy never ends;
d to their childrens children still his righteousnesse extends: To such as keep his coenant, and mindfull are alway this most just commandements, that they may them obey. The Lord prepared hath his throne in heavens from to stand: evry thing that being hath his Kingdom doth command. O ye his angels, that excell n strength, blesse ye the Lord, who obey what he commands, and hearken to his word. O blesse and magnifie the Lord, ye glorious hosts of his, Ministers that do fulfill what ev'r his pleasure is, O blesse the Lord, all ye his works, wherewith the world is stor'd, his dominions every where: my soul blesse thou the Lord. PSAL. CIV. BLesse God, my soul, O Lord my God, thou art exceeding great, With honour and with majesty thou clothed art in state. With light, as with a robe, thy self thou coverest about, And like unto a courtain, thou the heavens stretchest out. Who of his chambers doth the beams within the waters lay; Who doth the clouds his chariot make, on wings of wind make way. Who flaming fire his ministers,
his angels sp'rits did make: Who earths foundations did lay: that it should never shke. Thou didst it cover with the déep, as with a garment spred: The waters stood above the hills, when thou the word but said. But at the voice of thy rebuke they fled, and would not stay: They at thy thunders dreadfull voice, did haste them fast away. They, by the mountains do ascend, and by the valley ground Descend, unto that very place which thou for them didst found. Thou hast a bound unto them set, that they may not passe over, That they do not return again the face of earth to cover, He to the valleys sounds the springs, which run at the hills: They to all hearts a held give drnik, wilde ass drink their sills. By them the fowls of heaven shall have their habitation, Which do among the branches sing with delectation, He from his chambers watereth the ills when they are dry'd, With fruit and increase of thy works the earth is satisfi'd. For cattell he makes grasse to grow, he makes the herb to spring For th'use of man, that food to him, he from the earth may bring. And wine that to the heart of man doth chéerfulnesse impart,
Oyl that his face makes shine, and bread. hat strenhtheneth his heart. The trées of God are full of sap, the cedars that do stand Lebanon, which planted were y his Almighty hand. Birds of the air upon their boughs o choose their nests to make: for the Stork, the fir-trees she doth for her dwelling take. The lofty mountains for wilde Goats place of refuge he; e Chris also to the rocks to for their safety slee. He sets the Moon in heaven, thereby the seasons to discern: rom him the Sun, his certain time f going down doth learn. Thou darknesse mak'st, 'tis night, then beasts, of forrests creep abroad. The Lions young roar for their prey, and seek their meat from God. The Sun doth rise, and home they flock, down in their dens they ly, Man goes to work, his labour he doth to the evening ply. How manifold, Lord, are thy works in wisdom wonderfull: hou every one of them hast made; arth's of thy riches full. So is this great and spacious sea, wherein things créeping are, hich numbred cannot be; and beasts oth great and small are there. There ships go, there thou makest to play that Leviathan great:
These all wait on thee, that thou ma in due time give them meat. That, which thou givest unto them, they gather for their food; Thine hand thou openest liberally, they filled are with good. Thou hid'st thy face, they troubled ar their breath thou tak'st away, Then do they die, and to their dust return again do they. Thy quickning spirit thou send'st fort then they created be: And then the earth's decayed face. renewed is hy thee. The glory of the mighty Lord continue shall for ever: The Lord Iehovah shall rejoyce in all his wors together. Earth, as affrighted, trembleth all, if e on it but look, And if the mountains he but uch, they presently do smoke. I will sing to the Lord most high, so long as I shall live; And while I beeing have, I shall to my God praises give. Of him my meditation shall sweet thoughts to me afford. And as for me, I will rejoyce in God, my only Lord. From earth let sinners be consum'd, let ill men no more be: O thou my soul, blesse thou the Lord, praise to the Lord give ye. PSAL. CV. GIve thanks to God, call on his Nam to men his deeds make known:
ng ye to him, sing Psalms, proclaim s wondrous works each one. ee that ye in his holy Name o glory do accord: let the heart of every one ejoyce that seeks the Lord. The Lord Almighty, and his strength ith stedfast hearts séek ye: blessed and his glorious face eek ye continually. Think on the works that he hath done, hich admiration breed; wonders and the judgments all hich from his mouth proceed. O ye that are of Abrahams race, is servant well approv'n, ye that Iacobs children are, whom he chos'd for his own, Because he, and he only is he mighty Lord, our God; d his most righteous judgments are in all the earth abroad. His covenant he remembred hath, that it may ever stand: thousand generations the word he did command. Which covenant he firmly made with faithfull Abraham. d unto Isaac, by his oath he did renew the same: And unto Iacob for a Law, he made it firm and sure. covenant to Israel, which ever should endure: He said, I'le give Canaans land for heritage to you:
While they were strangers there & few in number very few. While yet they went from land to land without a sure abode: And while, through sundry kingdoms, the did wander far aboad, Yet notwithstanding suffered he no man to do them wrong: Yea for their sakes, he did reprove, Kings who were grea and strong. Thus did he say, Touch ye not those that mine anointed be, Nor do the prophets any harm that do partain to me. He call'd for famine on the land, He brake the staff of bread. But yet he sent a man before by whom they should be fed. Ev'n Ioseph whom unnaturally sell for a slave did they; Whose feet with fetters they did hurt, and he in trours lay. Vntill the time that his word came to give him liberty: The word and purpose of the Lord did him in prison try. Then sent the King, and did command that he inlarg'd should be. He that the peoples Ruler was, did send to set him free. A Lord, to rul his amily, he rais'd him, as most fit To him, of all that he possst, he did the charge commit. That he might at his pleasure binde the Princes of the land; And he might teach his Senatours
wisdom to understand. The people then of Israel down into Egypt came: nd Iacob also sojourned within the land of Ham. and he did greatly, by his pow'r, increase his people there; nd stranger then their enemies they by his blessing were. Their heart he turned to envy his folk maliciously, ith those that his own servants were o deal in subilty His servan Moses he did send, Aaron his chosen one: By these his signes and wonders great in Hams land were made known, Darknesse he sent, and made it dark: his word they did obey. He turn'd their waters into blood, and he their fish did slay. The land in plenty brought forth frogs in chambers of their Kings. His word all sorts of flies and lice in all their borders brings. He hail for rain, and flaming fire into heir land he sent: And he their vines and fig-trees smot, trées of their coasts he rent. He spake and caterpillars came, locusts did much abound, Which in their land all herbs consum'd and all fruits of their ground He smote all first-born in their land, chief of their strength each one. With gold & silver brought them forth,
weak in their tribes were none Egypt was glad when forth they went, their fear on them did light. He spread a cloud for covering and fire to shine by night. They askt, and he brought Quails with bread of heaven he filled them. He opened rocks, floods gusht and ran in desarts like a stream. For, on his holy promise he, and servant Abraham thought. Wish joy his people, his elect with gladnesse forth he brought. And unto them the pleasant lands he of the heathen gave: That of the peoples labours they inheritance might have; That they his statutes might observe, according to his word, And that they might his Laws obey, give praise unto the Lord PSAL CVI. GIve praise and thanks unto the Lord, for bountifull is he: His tender mercy doth endure unto eternity. Gods mighty works who can expresse? or shew forth all his praise? Blessed are they that judgment kéep, and justly do alwayes. Remember me, Lord, with that love, which thou to thine dost bear: With thy salvation, O my God. to visit me draw near: That I they chosens good may see, and in their joy rejoyce. And may with thine inheritance
triumph with chéerfull voice. We with our fathers sinned have, and of iniquity oo long we have the workers béen, we have done wickedly. The wonders great which thou, O Lord, didst work in Eygpt land, ur fathers, though they saw, yet them they did not understand. ad they thy mercies multitude kept not in memory, t at the sea, ev'n the Red-sea, provok'd him grievously. Neverthelesse he saved them ev'n for his own Names sake; That so he might to be well known, his mighty power make. When he the Red-sea did rebuke, then dried up it was, Through depths, as through the wilderness he safely made them passe. From hands of those that hated them, he did his people save, nd from the enemies cruel hand, to them redemption gave, The waters overwhelm'd their foes, not one was left alive; Then they believ'd his word, and praise to him in songs did give. But soon did they his mighty works forget unthankfully, nd on hs counsel and his will did not wait patiently. But much did lust in wildernesse, and God in desart tempt. He gave them what they sought, but to their soul he leannesse sent.
And against Moses in the camp, their envy did appear: At Aaron they, the saint of God, envious also were. Therefore the earth did open wide, and Dathan did devour, And all Abirams company did cover in that hour. Likewise among their company a fire was kindled then. And so the hor consuming flame brunt up these wicked men. Vpon the hill of Horeb, they an idol calf did frame, A molten image they did make, and worshipped the same. And thus their glory, and their God, most vainly changed they Into the likenesse of an ox that eateth grasse or hay. they did forget the mighty God, that had their Saviour been: By whom such great things brought to passe they had in Egypt seen. In Hams and he did wondrous works: things terrible did he, When he his mighty hand and arm stretcht out at the Read sea. Then said he he would them destroy, had not, his wrath to stay, His chosen Moses stood in breach, that them  should not stay. Yea, they despis'd the pleasand land, belived not his word: But in their tents they murmered, not hearkning to the Lord. Therefore in desart, them to slay,
he lifted up his hand: 'Mong nations to o'rethrow their seed, and scatter in each land. They unto Baal-Peor did themselves associate: he sacrifices of the dead, they did profanely eat. Thus by their lewd inventions, they did provoke his ire; nd then upon them suddenly the plague brake in, as fire. Then Phineas roase and justice did, nd so the plague did cease: That to all ages counted was to him for righteousnesse. And a the waters, where they strove, they did him angry make, n such sort, that it fared ill with Moses for their sake. Because they there his spirit méek provoked bitterly, o that he uttered with his lips words unadvisedly, Nor, as the Lord commanded them, did they the nations slay; But with the heathen mingled were, and learn'd of them their way. And they their idols serv'd, which did a snare unto them urn, Their sons and daughters they to devils in sacrifice did burn. In their own childrens guiltlesse blood their hands they did embrew, Whom to Canaans idols they for sacrifices slew. So was the land defil'd with blood.
They stain'd with their own way, And with their own inventions, a-woring they did stray. Against his people kindled was the wrath of God therefore▪ Insomuch that he did his own inheritance abhore. He gave them to the heathens hand, their foes did them command: Their enemies them opprest, they were made subject to their hand. He many times delivered them, but with their counsel, so They him provok'd, that for their sin they were brought very low. Yet their affliction be beheld, when he did hear their cry: And he for them his Covenant did call to memory: After his mercies multitude He did repent; And made Them to be pitied of all those who them did captive lead. O Lord our God, us save, and gather the heathen from among, That we thy holy Name may praise in a triumphant song. Blest be Iehovah, Israels God, to all eternity: Let all the people say, Amen, Praise to the Lord give ye. PSAL. CVII. PRaise God, for he is good, for still his mercies lasting be. Let Gods redéem'd say so, whom he from th'enemies hand did free;
And gathered them out of the lands om North, South, East and West, they stray'd in desarts pathlesse way, city found to rest. For thrist and hunger in them faints their soul. When straits them presse ey cry unto the Lord and he em frees from their distresse. Them also in a way to walk, at right is he did guide, ut they might to a city go, herein they might abide. O that men to the Lord would give praise, for his goodnesse then, d for his works of wonder done unto the sons of men. For he the soul that longing is th fully sisfie, h goodnesse he the hungry soul oth stil abundantly. Such as shut up in darknesse deep, and in as shade abide. hom strgly hath affliction bound, and iros fast have ty'd. (Because against the words of God, they wrought rebelliousty, nd they the counsel did contemn of him that is most hie.) Their heart he did bring down with grief they fell, no help cloud have. In trouble then they cry'd to God, he them from straits did save. He out of darknesse did them bring, and from deaths shade them take, These bands wherewith they had béen bound asunder quite he brake.
O that men to the Lord would give praise, for his goodnesse then, And for his works of wonder done unto the sons of men, Because the mighty gates of brasse in pieces he did tear, By him in sunder also cut the bars of iron were. Fools for their sin, and their offence do sore affliction bear. All kind of meat their soul abhores, they to deaths gates draw near. In grief they cry to God, he saves them from their miseries: He sends his word, them heals, and the from their destruction frées. O that men to the Lord would give praise, for his goodnesse then, And for his works of wonder done unto the sons of men. And let them sacrifice to him offrings of thankfulnesse. And let them shew abroad his works in songs of joyfulnesse. Who go to sea in ships, and in great waters trading be, Within the deep these men Gods works and his great wonders fee. For he commands, and forth in haste the stormy tempest flies. Which makes the sea with rouling waves aloft to swell and rise. They mount to heav'n, then to the depths they do go down again, Their soul doth faint, and melt away with trouble and with pain.
They reel and stagger like one drunk, their wits end they be: Then they to God in trouble cry, to them from straits doth free. The storm is chang'd into a calm. his command and will, hat the waves which rag'd before, o quiet are and still. Then are they glad, because at rest. d quiet now they be, o the haven he them brings ch they desire to see. that men to the Lord would give lle, for his goodnesse then, for his works of wonder done to the sons of men. Among the people gathered, t them exal his Name: ong assembled Elders spread s most renowned fame. He to dry land turns water-springs, nd floods to wildernesse: For sis of those that dwell therein, t land to barrennesse. The burnt and parched wildernesse water-pools he brings; ground that was dry'd up before, eturns to water-springs. And there for dwelling he a place th to the hungry give, t they a city may prepare mmodiously to live. There sow they fields, & vineyards plant, yeeld fruits of increase. His blessing makes them multiply, s not their beasts decrease.
Again they are diminished, and very low brought down, Through sorrow and affliction, and great appression. He upon Princes pours contempt, and causeth them to stray And wander in a wildernesse, wherein there is no way. Yet setteth he the poor on high from all his miseries; And he much like unto a flock, doth make him families. They that are righteous shall rejoyc when they the same shall see; And as ashamed, stop her muth shall all iniquity. Who so in wise, and will these things observ and them record, Ev'n the shal understand the love and kindnesse of the Lord. PALM CVIII. MY heart is fixt, Lord, I will sing, and with my glory praise. Awake up Psaltery and Harp, my self Ile early raise. Ile praise thée 'mongst the people, Lor 'mong nations sing will I. For above heav'n thy mercy's great thy truth doth reach the sky. Be thou above the heavens, Lord, exalted gloriously: Thy glory all the earth above be lifted upon hie, That those who thy beloved are, delivered may be; O do thou save with thy right hand, and answer give to me.
God in his holinesse hath said, irein I will take pleasure: chem I will divide▪ and forth ill Succths valley measure. Gilead I claim as mine by right, Manasseh mine shall be, hraim is of my head the strength: Iudah gives laws for me. Moab's my washing-pot, my shoe Ile over Edom throw, der the land of Palastine I will in triumph go. O who is he will bring me to the city fortifi'd! who is he that to the land of Edom will me guide! O God, thou who hadst cast us off, this thing wilt thou not do? ad wilt not thou, ev'n thou, O God, forth with our armies go? Do thou from trouble give us help▪ for helplesse is mans aid. Through God we shall do valiantly, our foes he shall down tread. PSAL CIX. O Thou the God of all my praise, do thou not hold thy peace: For mouths of wicked men, to speak against me do not cease. The mouths of vile deceitful men against me opened be: And with a false and lying tongue they have accused me. They did beset me round about with words of hatefull spight: And though to them no cause I gave against me they did fight.
They for my love became my foes, but I me set to pray. Evil for good, hatred for love to me they did repay. Set thou the wicked over him, and upon his right hand Give thou his greatest enemy: ev'n Satan leave to stand, And when by thee he shall be judg'd, let him condemned be: And let his pray'r be turn'd to sin, when he shall call on thée. Few be his dayes, and in his room his charge another take. His children let be fatherlesse, his wife a widow make. His children let be vagabonds, and beg continually; And from their places desolate seek bread for their supply. Let covetous extortioners catch all he hath away: Of all for which he labour'd hath let strangers make a prey. Let there be none to pity him, let there be none at all. That on his children fatherlesse will let his mercy fall. Let his posterity from earth en off for ever be: And in the following age, their name be bloted out by thee. Let God his fathers wickedness still to remembrane call: And never let his mothers sin he blotted out at all.
But let them all before the Lord pear continually, t he may wholy from the earth off their memory. Because he mercy minded not, t persecuted still poor and needy, that he might he broken-hearted kill. As he in cursing pleasure took, let it to him fall; e delighted not to blesse, o lesse him not at all. As cursing he like clothes put on, to his bowels so water, and into his bones e oyl down let it go. like to that garment let it be which doth himself aray, for a girdle wherewith he s girt about alway. From God let this be their reward, hat enemies are to me. d their reward, that speak against my soul maliciously. But do thou for thine own names sake, O God, the Lord, for me: th good and sweet thy mercy is, from trouble set me free. For I am poor and indigent, afflicted sore am I; y heart within me also is wounded exceedingly. I passe like a declining shade, am like the locust lost. My knees through fasting weakned are, my flesh hath fatnesse lost.
I also am a vile reproach unto them made to be: And they that did upon me look, did shake their heads at me, O do thou help and succour me, who art my God and Lord: And for thy tender mercies sake, safety to me afford. That thereby they may know, that th is thy Almighty hand, And that thou, Lord, hast done the same they may well understand. Although they curse with spite, yet Lor blesse thou with loving voice: Let them asham'd be, when they rise: thy servant let rejoyce. Let thou mine adversaries all with shame be clothed over. And let their own confusion them as a mantle cover. But as for me, I with my mouth will greatly praise the Lord; And I among the multitude his praises will record. For he shall stand at his right hand who is in poverty, To save him from all those that would condemn his soul to die. PSAL CX. THe Lord did say unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, Vntill I make thy foes a stool whereon thy feet may stand. The Lord shall out of Zion send the rd of thy great pow'r: In midst of all thine enemies be thou the Governour.
A willing people, in the day of pow'r shall come to thee. holy beauties from morns womb: thy youth like dew shall be. The Lord himself hath made an oath. nd will repent him never, th'order of Melchisedeck hou art a Priest for ever. The glorious and mighty Lord, hat ss at thy right hand all in his day of wrath, strike through ngs that do him withstand. e shall among the heathen judge, e shall with bodies dead e places fill, o're many lands e wound shall every head. The brook that runneth in the way with drink shall him supplie: d for this cause, in triumph he hall lift his head on hie PSAL. CXI. Raise ye the Lord: with my whole heart I will Gods praise declare, here the assemblies of the just and congregations are, The whole works of the Lord our God re great above all measure, ught out they are of every one that do therein take peasure. His work most honourable is, most glorious and pure, d his untainted righteousnesse or ever doth endure. His works most wonderfull he hath made to be thought upon; e Lord is gracius and he is
full of compassion. He giveth meat unto all those that truly do him fear; And evermore his Covenant, he in his mind will bear. He did the power of his works, unto his people show, When he the heathens heritage upon them did bestow. His handy-works are truth and right, all his commands are sure; And done in truth and uprightnesse, they evermore endure. He sent redemption to his folk his Covenant for ay He did command; holy his Name and reverend is alway. Wisdoms beginning is Gods fear: good understanding they Have all, that his commands fulfill: his praise endures for ay. PSAL CXII. PRaise ye the Lord, the man is blest that fears the Lord aright, He who in his commandements doth greatly take delight. His séed and off-spring powerfull shall be the earth upon: Of upright men blessed shall be the generation. Riches and wealth shall ever be within his house in store: And his unspotted righteousnesse endures for evermore. Vnto the upright light doth rise, though they in darknesse be:
Compassionate and merciful. and righteous is he. A good man doth his favour shew, and doth to others lend. e with discretion his affairs will guide unto the end. Surely there is not any thing that eer shall him mode: e righteous mans memorial shall everlasting prove. When he shall evil tidings hear, e shall not be afraid; heart is fixt, his confidence pon the Lord is staid. His heart is firmly stablished, afraid he shall not be, ill upon his enemies e his desire shall see. He hath dispers'd, giv'n to the poor, his righteousnesse shall be ages all: with honour shall his horn be raised high. The wicked shall it sée and fret, his teeth gnash, melt away: hat wicked men do most desire, shall utterly decay. PSAL. CXIII. Raise God: ye servants of the Lord, O praise, the Lords Name praise. Yea, blessed be the Name of God, from this time forth alwayes; From rising Sun to where it sets, Gods Name is to be prais'd. Above all nations God is high, bove heav'n his glory rais'd, Vnto the Lord our God that dwels
on high, who can compare? Himself that humbleth things to see in heav'n and earth that are He from the dust doth raise the poor, that very low did ly, And from the dunghill lifts the man opprest with poverty. That he may highly him advance, and with the Princes set, With those that of his people are the chief, ev'n Princes great: The barren woman house to keep he maketh; and to be Of sons a mother full of joy: Praise to the Lord give ye. PSAL CXIV. WHen Israel out of Egypt went, and did his dwelling change: When Iacobs house went out from those that were of language strange: He Iudah did his Sanctuary, his kingdome Israel make: The sea it saw, and quickly fled, Iordan was driven back. Like rams the mountains, and like lambs the hills skipt to and fro: O sea why fledst thou? Iordan back why wast thou driven so? Ye mountains great, wherefore was it that ye did skip like rams? And wherefore was it little hills that ye did leap like lambs? O at the presence of the Lord earth tremble thou for fear, Whileas the presence of the God of Iacob doth appear.
Who from the hard and stony rock did standing water bring, And by his power did turn the flint into a water spring. PSAL. CXV. NOt unto us, Lord, not to us but do thou glory take nto thy Name, ev'n for thy truth, and for thy mercies sake. O wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God now gone? But our God in the heavens is, what pleas'd him he hath done Their idols silver are and gold works of mens hands they be: Mouths have they, but they do not speak; and eyes but do not see. Ears have they, but they do not hear; noses, but favour not: Hands, feet, but handle not, nor walk, nor speak they through their throat. Like them their makers are, and all on them their trust that build. O Isra'l trust thou in the Lord, he is their help and shield. O Aarons house trust in the Lord, their help and shield is be. Ye that fear God trust in the Lord: their help and shield he'l be. The Lord of us hath mindfull been, and he will blesse us still; He will the house of Israel blesse, blesse Aarons house he will, Both small and great that fear the Lord, he will them surly blesse, The Lord will you, you and your seed
ay more and more increase. O blessed are ye of the Lord: who made the earth and heaven. The heav'n, ev'n heav'ns are Gods, bu h earth to mens sons hath given. The dead, nor who to silence go, Gods praise do not record. But henceforth we for ever will blesse God. Praise ye the Lord. PSAL. CXVI. I Love the Lord because my voice and prayers he did hear. I while I live will call on him, who bow'd to me his ear. Of death the cords and sorrows did about me compasse round, The pains of hell took hold on me, I grief and trouble found. Vpon the Name of God, the Lord, then did I call and say, Deliver thou my soul, O Lord, I do thee humbly pray. God merciful and righteous is; yea, gracious is our Lord. God saves the meek: I was brought low he did e help afford. O thou my soul, do thou return unto thy quiet rest; For largely, so the Lord to thée his bounty hath exprest. For my distressed soul from death delivered was by thee, Thou didst my mourning eyes from tear, my feet from falling free. I in the land of those that live will walk the Lord before,
I did believe, therefore, I spake: I was afflcted sore. I said when I was in my haste, that all men liars be: What shall I render to the Lord, for all his gifts to me? Ile of salvation take the cup, on Gods Name will I call. Ile pay my vows now to the Lord, before his people all. Dear in Gods sight is his saints death: Thy servant, Lord, am I, Thy servant sure, thine hand-maids son, My hands thou didst unty. Thank-offerings I to thee will give, and on Gods Name will call. Ile pay my vows unto the Lord, before his people all. Within the courts of Gods own house, within the midst of thee. city of Ierusalem, Praise to the Lord give ye. PALM CXVII. O Give ye praise unto the Lord, all nations that be: ikewise ye people all accord his Name to magnifie. For great to us-ward ever are his loving kindnesses: His truth endures for evermore, the Lord, O do ye blesse. PSAL. CXVIII▪ O Praise the Lord, for he is good: his mercy lasteth ever. Let those of Israel now say, his mercy faileth never,
Now let the house of Aaron say, his mercy lasteth ever. Let those that fear the Lord, now say, his mercy faileth never, I in destresse call'd on the Lord, the Lord did answer me; He in a large place did me set, from trouble made me free. The mighty Lord is on my side, I will not be afraid For any thing that man can do I shall not be dismaid. The Lord doth take my part with them that help to succour me: Therefore on those that do me hate I my desire shall see. Better it is to trust in God then trust in mans defence. Better to trust in God, than make Princes our confidence The nations joyning all in one did compasse me about: But in the Lords most holy Name I shall them all root out. They compasse me about, I say they compasse me about: But in the Lords most holy Name I shall them all root out. Like bees they compasse me about: like unto thornes that flame They quenched are, for them shall I destroy in Gods own name. Thou sore hast thrust, that I might fall▪ but my Lord helped me. God my salvation is become, my strength and song is he.
In dwellings of the righteous heard the melody joy and health: the Lords right hand oth ever valiantly The right hand of the mighty Lord xalted is on hie: he right hand of the mighty Lord oth ever valiantly. I shall not die, but live, and shall he works of God discover. The Lord hath me chastised sore, t not to death given over. set ye open unto me e gates of righteousnesse: en will I enter into them, and I the Lord will blesse. This is the gate of God, by it he just shall enter in, Thee wil▪ I praise, for thou me hardst and hast my safety bin. That stone is made head-corner stone, which builders did despise. This is the doing of the Lord, and wondrous in our eyes. This is the day God made, in it wée'l joy triumphantly. Save now, I pray thée, Lord, I pray end now prosperity. Blessed is he in Gods great Name that cometh us to save. e from the house, which to the Lord pertains, you blessed have. God is the Lord, who unto us hath made light to arise: inde ye unto the alters horns, with cords the sacrifice.
Thou art my God, Ile the exalt: my God, I will thee praise. Give thanks to God, for he is good, his mercy lasts alwayes. PSALM CXIX. ALEPH. The first par BLessed are they that undefil'd, and straight are in the way: Who in the Lords most holy Law do walk, and do not stray. Blessed are they, who to observe his statutes are inclin'd; And who do séek the living God with their whole heart and mind. Such in his wayes do walk, and do no iniquity: Thou hast commanded us to keep thy precepts carefully. O that thy statutes to observe thou would'st my wayes direct: Then shall I not be sham'd, when I thy precepts all respect. Then with integrity of heart thee will I praise and blesse, When I the judgements all have learn'd of thy pure righteousnesse. That I will keep thy statutes all stely rsov'd have I: O do not then most gracious God, forsake me utterly. BETH. The 2. part. By what means shall a young man learn his way to purifie? If he according to thy word thereto attentive be. Vnfainedly thee have I sought
with all my soul and heart: O let me not from the right path of thy commands depart. Thy word I in my heart have hid, that I offend not thee. O Lord, thou ever blessed art, thy statutes teach thou me. The judgements of thy mouth each one my lips declared have: More joy thy testimonies way then riches all me gave. I will thy holy precepts make my meditation: And carefully Ile have respect unto thy wayes each one. Vpon thy statutes my delight shall constantly be set: nd by thy grace I never will thy holy word forget. GIMEL. The 3. part. With me thy servant, in thy grace, deal bountifully, Lord; That by thy favour I may live, and duely kéep thy word. Open mine eyes, that of thy law the wonders I may see, I am a stranger on this earth, hide not thy laws from me. My soul within me breaks, and doth much fainting still endure, hrough longing that it hath all times unto thy judgements pure. Thou hast rebuk'd the cursed proud, who from thy pecepts swerve. Reproach and shame remove from me, for I thy laws observe.
Against me Princes speak with spite, while they in counsel sat But I thy servant, did upon thy statutes meditate. My comfort, and my hearts delight thy testimonies be, And they in all my doubts and fears are counsellers to me. DALETH. The 4. part. My soul to dust cleaves: quicken me according to thy word. My wayes I shew'd, and me thou heardst teach me thy statutes, Lord. The way of thy commandements make me a right to know: So all thy works that wondrous are, I shall to others show. My soul doth melt and drop away, with heavinesse and grief: To me according to thy word give strength and send relief. From me the wicked way of lies let far removed be And gaciously thy holy law do thou grant unto me. I chosen have the perfect way of truth and verrity: Thy judgements that most righteous are before me laid, have I. I to the testimonies cleave: shame do not on me cast, Ile run thy precepts way when thou my heart enlarged hast. HE. The 5. part. Teach me, O Lord, the perfect way of thy precepts divine:
And to observe it to the end I shall my heart incline. Give understanding unto me, so keep thy law shall I; , ev'n with my whole heart I shall observe it carefullie. In thy laws path make me to go, for I delight therein. My heart unto thy testimonies, and not to greed incline Turn thou away my sight and eyes om viewing vanitie, o in thy good and holy way be pleas'd to quicken me. Confirm to me thy gracious word which I did gladly bear, d, n to thy servant, Lord, who is devoted to thy fear. Turn thou away my fear'd reproach; for good thy judgments be. Lo for thy precepts, I have long'd: in thy truth quicken me. VAU. The 6. part. Let thy sweet mercies also come and visit me: O Lord, Ev'n thy benign salvation, according to thy word. So shall I have wherewith I may give him an answer just, Who spitefully reproacheth me: for in thy word I trust. The word of truth out of my mouth take thou not utterly: For on thy judgments righteous my hope doth still rely. So shall I keep for evermore
thy law continually: And sith that I thy precepts seek, Ile walk at liberty. Ile speak thy word to Kings, and I with shame shall not be mov'd: And will delight my self alwayes in thy laws, which I lov'd. To thy commandments which I lov'd, my hands lift up I will: And I will also meditate upon thy statutes still. ZAIN. The 7, part Remember, Lord, thy gracious word, thou to my servant spake, Which for a ground of my sure hope, thou causedst me to take. This word of thine my comfort is, in mine affliction: For in my straits, I am reviv'd by this thy word alone. The men whose hearts with pride are stuft, did greatly me deride: Yet from thy straight commandements I have not turn'd aside. Thy judgements righteous, O Lord, which thou of old forth gave, I did remember, and my self by them comforted have. Horrour took hold on me, because ill men thy Law forsake. I in my house of pilgrimage th Laws my songs do make. Thy Name by night Lord, I did mind, and I have kept thy Law. And this I did, because thy word I kept, and stood in aw.
CHETH. The . part Thou my sure portion art alone, which I did choise, O Lord: have resolv'd and said, that I would keep thy holy Word. With my whole heart I did intreat thy face. and favour free: ccording to thy gracious word, be mercifull to me. I thought upon my former wayes, nd did my life well try; to thy testimonies pure my feet then turned I. I did not stay no linger long, s those that slothful are ut hastily thy Laws to keep, my self I did prepare. Bands of ill men me rob'd; yet I the precepts did not flight. I▪le rise at midnight thee to praise, even for thy judgments right. I am companion to all those who fear and thee obey. O Lord, thy mercy fills the earth: teach me thy laws I pray. TETH. The 9. part. Well hast thou with thy servant dealt, as thou did'st promise give. Good judgment me and knowledge teach for I thy word believe, Ere I afflicted was I sry'd, but now I kéep thy word. Both good thou art and good thou dost: teach me hy statutes, Lord, The men that are puft up with pride. against me forg'd a ly:
Yet thy commandments to observe with my whole heart will I. Their hearts through worldly ease and wealsh as fat as grease they be. But in thy holy law take delight continually. It hath been very good for me, that I afflicted was, That I might well instructed be, and learn thy holy laws The word that cometh from thy mouth is better unto me. Then many thousands, and great sums of gold and silver be. JOD The 10. part. Thou mad'st & fashionedst me; thy laws to know give wisdom, Lord. So who thee fear, shall joy to see me trusting in thy word. That very right thy judgements are I know and do confesse, And that thou hast aflicted me in truth and faithfulnsse. O let thy kindnesse merciful, I pray thee, comfort me, As to thy servant faithfully was promised by thee. And let thy tender mercies come to me, that I may live; Because thy holy laws to me swee delectation give. Lord, let the proud ashamed be: for they, without a cause. With me perversly dealt; but I will muse upon thy laws. Let such as fear thee and have known thy statutes, turn to me.
My heart let in thy laws be found, that sham'd I never be. KOPH The 11. part: My soul for thy salvation faints; yet I thy word believe. Mine eyes fail for thy word: I say, When wilt thou comfort give; For like a bottle I'm become. that in the smoke is set: m black and parcht with grief, yet I thy statutes not forget. How many are thy servants dayes; when wilt thou execute st judgement on these wicked men that do me persecute? Th proud have digged pits for me, which is against thy laws. Thy words all faithful are: help me pursu'd without a cause They so consum'd me that on earth my life they scarce did leave: Thy precepts yet forsook I not, but close to them I clave. After thy loving kindnesse, Lord, me quicken, and preserve: The testimony of thy mouth so shall I still observe. LAMED. The 12. part. Thy word for ever is, O Lord, in heav'n settled fast Vnto all generations thy faithfulnesse doth last The earth thou hast established and it abides by thee. This day they stand, as thou ordain'd: for all thy servants be,
Vnlesse in thy most perfect law my soul delights had found, I should have perished when as my troubles did abound. Thy precepts I will nev'r forget: they quickning to me brought. Lord, I am thine: O save thou me: thy precepts I have sought. For me the wicked have laid wait, me seeking to destroy: But I thy testimonies true consider will with joy. An end of all perfection here have I seen, O God: But as for thy commandment it is exceeding broad. MEM. The 13 pa O how love I thy law: it is my study all the day. It makes me wiser then my foes: for it doth with me stay. Then all my teachers now I have more understanding far: Because my meditation thy testimonies are. In understanding I excell those that are ancients; For I endeavoured to keep all thy commandements, My feet from each ill way I staid, that I may keep thy word. I from thy judgments have not swerv for thou hast taught me, Lord. How sweet unto my taste, O Lord, are all thy words of truth: Yea, I do find them sweeter far, than honey to my mouth.
I through thy precep hat are pure do understanding get: therefore every way that's false with all my heart do hate. NUN. The 14 part. Thy word is to my feet a lamp, and to my path a light. I sworn have, and I will perform to keep thy judgements right. I am with sore affliction, ev'n overwhelm'd: O Lord: merey raise and quicken me, according to thy word. The free will-offrings of my mouth accept, I thee beseech: nd unto me thy servant, Lord. thy judgements clearly teach: Though still my soul be in my hand, thy laws Ile not forget. I err'd not from them, though for me the wicked snares did set. I of thy testimonies hade above all things made choifs, o be my heritage for ay, for they my heart rejoyce. I carefully inclined have my heart still to attend, hat I thy staintes may perform alway unto the end. SAMECH. The 15. part. I hate the thoughts of vaulty, but love thy law do I. My shield and hiding place thou art, I on thy word rely. All ye that evil doers are, from me depart away;
For the commandements of my God I purpose to obey. According to thy faithful word uphold and stablsh me. That I may live, and of my hope ashamed never be. Hold thou me up, so shall I be in peace and safety still, And to thy statutes have respect continually I will. Thou treadst down all that love to stra false their deceit doth prove. Lewd men like drosse, away thou put therefore thy law I leave. For fear of thee my very flesh doth tremble all dismaid; And of thy righteous judgements, Lord, my soul is much afraid. AIN. The 16. par To all men I have judgement done, performing justice right: Then let me not be left unto my fierce oppressours might. For good unto thy servant, Lord, thy servants surety be: From the oppression of the proud do thou deliver me. Mine eyes do fail, with looking long for thy salvation, The word of thy pure righteousnesse while I do wait upon. In mercy with thy servant deal, thy laws me teach and show: I am thy servant, wisdom give, that I thy Laws may know It's time thou work; Lord for they had made void thy law divine:
Therefore thy precepts more I love hen gold; yea gold most fine. Concerning all things, thy commands ll right I judge therefore: every false and wicked way I perfectly abhore. PE The 17. part Thy statutes, Lord, are wonderful; y soul them keeps with care. The entrance of thy words gives light makes wise who simple are. My mouth I have wide opened, d panted earnstly, le after thy commandements I long'd exceedingly Look on me, Lord, and merciful o thou unto me prove▪ thou art wont to do to those, hy name who truly love. O let my footsteps in thy word right still ordered be: t no iniquity obtain ominion over me. From mans oppression save thou me kéep thy laws I will. Thy face make on thy sevant shine: each me thy statutes still. Rivers of waters from mine eyes id run down when I saw w wicked men run on in sin, nd do not keep thy law. TSADDI. The 18. part. O Lord, thou art most righteous, hy judgements are upright. Thy testimonies, thou command ost saithful are and right.
My zeal hath ev'n consumed me, because mine enemies Thy holy words forgotten have, and do thy laws despise. Thy word's most pure: therefore on thy servants love is set. Small, and despis'd I am, yet I thy precepts not forget: Thy righteousnesse, is righteousnesse which ever doth endure. Thy holy law, Lord, also is the very truth most pure. Trouble and anguish have me found, and taken hold on me: Yet in my trouble my delight thy just commandments be. Eernal righteousnesse is in thy testimonies all: Lord to me understanding give, and ever live I shall. KOPH. The 19 part With my whole heart, I cry'd, Lord, heare I will thy word obey, I cry'd to thee, save me, and I will kéep thy laws alway. I of the morning did prevent the dawning, and did cry: For all my expectation did on thy word rely. Mine eyes did timously prevent the watches of the night, That in thy word with carefull minde, then meditate I might. After thy loving kindnesse hear my voice, that calls on thee: According to thy judgment, Lord, revive and quicken me.
Who follow mischief they draw nigh, ey from thy saw are far: But thou art near, Lord, most firm truth ll thy commandments are. As for thy testimonies all, old this have I try'd. t thou hast surely founded them, ever to abide. RESH. The 20. part. Consider mine affliction, safety do me set: ver me, O Led, for I saw do not forget. After thy word revive thou me; de me and plead my cause. Salvation is from sinners far; r they seek not thy laws. O Lord, both great and manifold, y tender mercies be: ording to thy judgments just die and quicken me. My persecuters many are d foes which do combine: from thy testimonies pure y heart doth not decline. I saw transgressours and was griev'd: they kept not thy word. See how I love thy law! as thou kind, me quicken Lord. From the beginning all thy word ath been most true and sure: y righteous jugdments every one or evermore endure. SCHIN The 21. part. Princes have persecuted me, though no cause they saw: ill of the must holy word
my heart doth stand in aw. I at thy word rejoyce as one of spoil that finds great store. Thy law I love, but lying all I hate and do abhore, Seven times a day it is my eare to give due praise to thee: Because of all thy judgments, Lord, which righteous ever be. Great peace have they who love thy la offence they shall have none. I hop'd for thy salvation, Lord, and thy commands have done. My soul thy testimonies pure observed carefully: On them my heart is set, and them I love exceedingly. Thy testimonies and thy laws I kept with special care: For all my works and wayes each one before thee open are. TAU. The 22 par O let my earnest pray'r and cry come near before thee, Lord: Give understanding unto me according to thy word. Let my request before thee come: after thy word me free. My lipes shall utter praise, when thou hast taught thy laws to me. My tongue of thy most holy word shall speak, and it confesse: Because all thy commandements are perfect righteousnesse. Let thy strong hand make help to me thy precepts are my choise,
I long'd for thy salvation, Lod, and in thy law rejoyce. O let my soul live, and it shall give praises unto thée: let thy judgements gracious be helpfull unto me. I like a lost sheep went astray, thy servant seek, and finde: r thy commands I suffered not to slip out of my minde. PSAL. CXX. my distresse to God I cry'd, nd he gave ear to me. from lying lips and guilefull tongue, O Lord, my soul set free. What shall be given thee? or what shall be done to thee fase tongue? Ev'n burning coals of Iuniper, sharp arrows of the strong. o's me that I in Mesech am sojourner so long; at I in tabernacles dwell to Kedar that belong. My soul with him that hateth peace ath long a dweller been. I am for peace: but when I speak or battel thy are keen. PSAL CXXI. To the hills will lift mine eyes, from whence doth come mine aid: My safety cometh from the Lord, who heav'n and earth hath made. Thy foot hée'l not let slide, nor will e slumber, that thee kéeps: ehold he that kéeps Israel slumbers not, nor sléeps.
The Lord thée kéeps, the Lord thy sha on thy right hand doth stay: The Moon by night thee shall not smite, nor yet the Sun by day. The Lord shall keep thy soul, he shall preserve thee from all ill: Henceforth thy going out and in God keep for ever will. PSAL CXXII. Ioy'd when to the house of God, go up, they said to me. Ierusalem, within thy gates our feet shall standing be. Ierusalem as a city is, compactly built together: Vnto that place the tribes go up, the tribes of God go thither, To Israels testimony, there to Gods Name thanks to pay. For throns of judgement▪ ev'n the thron of Davids house there stay. Pray that Ierusalem may have peace and felicitie: Let them that love thee and thy peace have still prosperitie. Therefore I wish that peace may still within thy walls remain. And ever may thy palaces prosperity re retain. Now for my friends and brethrens sake peace be in thee, I'le say: And for the house of God our Lord, Ile seek thy good al way. PSAL. CXXIII. O Thou that dwellest in the heav'ns I lift mine eyes to thee.
Behold, as servants eyes do look their masters hand to see. s hand-maids eyes their mistresse hand, so do our eyes attend Vpon the Lord our God, until to us he mercy send O Lord, be gracious to us unto us gracious be: Because replenisht with contempt exceedingly are we. Our soul is fill'd with scorn of those that at their ease abide, d with the insolent contempt of those that swell in pride. PSAL CXXIV. HAd not the Lord béen on our side, may Israel now say: Had not the Lord béen on our side, when men rose us to stay. They had us swallowed quick, when as their wrath 'gainst us did flame: Waters had covered us, our soul had sunk beneath the stream. Then had the waters, swelling high, over our soul made way. Blest be the Lord, who to their téeth us gave not for a prey. Our soul's escaped as a bird out of the sowlers snare: The snare asunder broken is and we escaped are, Our sure and all-sufficient help is in Iehovahs Name; is Name who did the heav'n create, nd who the earth did frame,
Another of the same NOw Israel my say, and that truly, If that the Lord had not our cause maintain'd: If that the Lord had not our right sustain'd When cruel men against us furiously Rose up in wrath to make of us their prey. Then certainly they had devour'd us all And swallowed quick, for ought that we could deem: Such was their rage, as we might well esteem: And as fierce flouds, before them all things drown. So had they brought our soul to death quite down, The raging streams, with their proud swelling waves, Had then our soul, ov'rwhelmed in the deep: But blest be God, who doth us safely keep And hath not given us for a living prey Vnto their teeth and bloody cruelty. Even as a bird out of the foulers snare Escapes away, so is our soul set free: Broke are their nets, and thus escaped we:
Therefore our help is in the Lords great Name, ho heaven and earth by his great power did frame. PSAL. CXXV. THey, in the Lord that firmly trust shall be like Zion hill, Which at no time can be remov'd but standeth ever still. As round about Ierusalem the mountains stand alway: the Lord his folk doth compasse so from henceforth and for ay. For ill mens rod upon the lot of just men shall not ly: Lest righteous men streach forth their hands unto iniquity. Do thou to all those that be good thy goodnesse, Lord, impart; And do thou good to those that are upright within their heart. But as for such as turn aside after their crooked way: God shall lead forth with wicked men; on Israel peace shall stay, PSAL CXXVI. WHen Zions bondage God turn'd back, as men that dream'd were we: Then fill'd with laughter was our mouth our tongue with melody: They 'mong the heathen said, The Lord great things for them hath wrought. The Lerd hath done great things for us, whence joy to us is brought. As streams of water in the south, ur bondage, Lord, recall.
Who sow in tears, a reaping time of joy enioy they shall. That man, who hearing precious seed, in going forth doth mourn: He doubtlesse, bringing back his sheaves, rejoycing shall return. PSAL. CXXVII. EXcept the Lord do build the house, the builders lose their pain: Except the Lord the city keep, the watchmen watch in vain: It's vain for you to rise betimes, or late from rest to keep, To seed on sorrows bread: so gives be his beloved sleep. Lo, children are Gods heritage, the wombs fruit his reward. The sons of youth as arrows are for strong mens hands prepar'd. O happy is the man that hath his quiver iil'd with those, They unashamed in the gate shall speak unto their foes. PSAL. CXXVIII. BLest is each one that fears the Lord, and walketh in his wayes. For of thy labour thou shalt eat, and happy be alwayes. Thy wife shall as a fruitful vine, by thy house sides be found: Thy children like the olive plants about thy table round. Behold the man that fears the Lord, thus blessed shall he be. The Lord shall out of Zion give his blessing unto thée:
Thou shalt Ierusalems good behold, whilst thou on earth do dwell. Thou shalt thy childrens children sée, and peace on Israel. PSAL. CXXIX. OFt did they vex me from my youth, may Israel now declare: Oft did they vex me from my youth, yet not victorious were. The plowers plow'd upon my back, they long their surrows drew. The righteous Lord did cut the cords of the ungodly crew. Let Zions haters alll be turn'd back with confusion, As grasse on houses topes be they, which fades ere it be grown: Whereof enough to fill his hand the mower cannot find. or can the man his bosome stil whose work is sheaves to bind. Neither say they who do go by Gods blessing on you rest, e in the Name of God the Lord: do wish you to be blest. PSAL CXXX. Ord, from the depths to thee I cry'd: My voice, Lord do thou hear: nto my supplications voice, give an attentive ear. Lord, who shall stand, if thou, O Lord, shouldst mark iniquitie; But yet with thee forgivenesse is, that fear'd thou mayest be. I wait for God, my soul doth wait, y hope is in his word.
More then they that for morning watch my soul waits for the Lord: I say, more then they that do watch the morning light to see. Let Israel hope in the Lord for with him mercies be, And plenteous redemption is ever sound with him, And from all his iniquities be Israel shall redeem. PSALM CXXXI. MY heart not haughty is, O Lord, mine eyes not lofty be, Not do I deal in matters great or things for me too hie. I surely have my self behav'd with quiet sp'rit and milde, As child of mother wean'd: my soul is like a weaned childe. Vpon the Lord let all the hope of Israel rely, Ev'n from the time that present is unto eternity PSAL CXXXII. DAvid and his afflictions all Lord, do thou think upon: How unto God he sware, and vow'd to Iacobs mighty One. I will not come within my house, nor rest in bed at all: Nor shall mine eyes take any sleep, nor eyes-lids slumber shall. Till for the Lord a place I find, where he may make abode: A place of habitation for Iacobs mighty God, Lo, at the place of Ephratah
of it we understood: nd we did finde it in the fields and city of the wood. Wee'l go into his tabernacles, and at his footstool bow. Arise, O Lord, unto thy rest, th' ark of thy strength and thou. O let thy priests be clothed, Lord, with truth and righteousnesse: d let all those that are thy saints about loud for joyfulnesse. For thine own servant Davids sake, is not deny thy grace, r of thine own anointed one turn thou away thy face. The Lord in truth to David sware, he will not turn from it, of thy bodies fruit will make upon thy throne to sit. My cov'nant if thy sons will kéep, and laws to them made known: eir children then shall also sit for ever on thy throne. For God of Zion hath made choice, ere he desires to dwell. This is my rest; here will I stay, for I do like it well: Her food Ile greatly blesse, her poor with bread will satisfie. Her priests Ile clothe with health, her saints, shall shout forth joyfully. And there will I make Davids horn to bud forth pleasantly: or him that mine anointed is lamp ordain'd have I.
As with a garment, I will clothe with shame his enemies all; But yet the crown that he doth wear upon him flourish shall. PSAL. CXXXIII. BEhold, how good a thing it is, and how becoming well, Together such as brethren are, in unity to dwell. Like precious ointment on the head, that down the beard did flow. Ev'n Aarons beard, and to the skirts did of his garment go. As Hermons dew, the dew that doth on Zion hills descend: For their the blessing God commands, life that shall never end. PSAL. CXXXIV. BEhold, blesse ye the Lord, all ye that his attendants are, Ev'n you that in Gods Temple be, and praise him nightly there. Your hands within Gods holy place lift up, and praise his Name. From Zion hill the Lord thee blesse, that heaven and earth did frame. PSAL. CXXXV. PRaise ye the Lord: the Lords name prais his servants praise ye God: Who stand in Gods house, in the courts of our God make abode. Praise ye the Lord, for he is good, unto him praises sing: Sing praises to his Name, because it is a pleasant thing. For Iacob to himself the Lord did choise of his good preasure,
And he hath chosen Irael for his peculiar treasure. Because I know assuredly the Lord is very great, And that our Lord above all gods, in glory hath his seat. What thing soever pleas'd the Lord, that in the heaven did he, nd in the earth, the seas, and all the places deep that be. He from the ends of earth doth make the vapours to ascend: With rain he lightnings makes, and wind doth from his treasures send. Egypts first-born from man to beast Who smote. Strange tokens he n Pharaoch, and his servants sent, Egypt, in midst of thee. He smote great nations, slew great kings Sihon of Heshbon king, d Og of Bashan, and to nought did Canaans kingdomes bring. And for a wealthy heritage their pleasant land he gave, heritage which Israel is chosen folk should have. Thy Name, O Lord, shall still endure, and thy memoriall ith honour shall continued be to generations all. For why the righteous God will judge, his people righteousty, oncerning those that do him serve himself repent will he: The idols of the nations silver are and gold, y the hands of men is made
their fashion and mold. Mouths have they, but they do not speak, eyes but they do not see: Ears have they, but hear not, and in their mouths no breathing be. Their makers are like them, so are all that on them rely. O Israels house, blesse God, blesse God, O Aarons family. O blesse the Lord of Levies house, ye who his servants are; And blesse the holy Name of God, all ye the Lord that fear. And blessed be the Lord our God, from Zions holy hill, Who dwelleth at Ierusalem: the Lord, O praise ye still. PSAL. CXXXVI. GIve thanks to God, for good is he; for mercy hath he ever. Thanks to the God of gods give ye: for his grace faileth never. Thanks give the Lord of lords unto: for mercy hath he ever. Who only wonders great can do: for his grace faileth never. Who by his wisdom made heavens hie for mercy he hath ever. Who stretcht the earth above the sea: for his grace falleth never. To him that made the great light shine: for mercy he hath ever. The Sun to rule till day decline: for his grace faileth never. The Moon and Stars to rule by night for mercy hath he ever.
Who Egypts first-born kill'd outright: for his grace faileth never. And Israel brought from Egypt land, for mercy hath he ever. With streacht out arm, and with strong hand: for his grace faileth never. By whom the Red-sea parted was; for mercy he hath ever. And through its midst made Israel pass, for his grace faileth never. But Pharaoh, and his host did drown: for mercy hath he ever. Who through the desart led his own: for his grace faileth never. To him great Kings who overthrew: for he hath mercy ever. Yea, famous Kings in battel slew, for his grace faileth never. Ev'n Sihon King of Amorites: for he hath mercy ever. And Og the King of Bashanites. for his grace faileth never. Their land in heritage to have, (for mercy hath he ever) His servant Israel right he gave: for his grace faileth never, In our low state who on us thought: for he hath mercy ever. And from our foes our fréedom wrought: for his grace faileth never. Who doth all flesh with food relieve: for he hath mercy ever. Thanks to the God of heaven give: for his grace faileth never. Another of the same. I Raife God, for he is kind; His mercy lasts for ay.
Give thanks with heart and mind to God of gods alway: For certainly His mercies dure Most firm and sure Eternally. The Lord of lords praise ye Whose mercies stiil endure. Great wonders only he Doth work by his great power: For certainly, &c. Which God Omnipotent, By might and wisdom hie, The heav'n and firmament Did frame, as we may sée: For certainly, &c. To him who did out streach This earth so great and wide, Above the waters reach Making it to abide: For certainly, &c. Great Lights he made to be, For his Grace lasteth ay. Such as the Sun we sée To rule the lightsome day: For certainly, &c. Also the Moon so clear, Which shineth in our sight: The Stars that do appear, To guide the darksome night: For certainly. &c. To him that Egypt smote Who did his message scorn; And in his anger hot Did kill all their first-born; For certainly, &c.
Thence Israel out he brought: For his grace lasteth ever. With a strong hand he wrought, And stretcht out arm deliver. For certainly, &c. The sea he cut in two; For his grace lasteth still. And through its midst to go Made his own Israel: For certainly. &c. But overwhelm'd and lost Was proud King Pharao, With all his mighty host, And chariots, there also: For certainly, &c. To him who powerfully His chosen people led, Ev'n through the desart dry, And in that place them fed: For certainly, &c. To him great Kings who smote: For his grace hath no bound. Who slew and spared not Kings famous and renown'd: For certainly, &c. Sihon th'Amorites King: For his grace lasteth ever. Og also who did reign The land of Bashan over: For certainly, &c. Then land by lot he gave; For his grace faileth never, That Israel might it have, In heritage for ever: For certainly, &c. Who hath remembered If s in our low estate;
And us delivered From foes who did us hate: for certainly, &c. Who to all flesh gives food: For his grace falleth never. Give thanks to God most good The God of heav'n for ever, For certainly, &c. PSAL. CXXXVII. BY Babels streams we sat and wept, when Zion we thought on: In midst thereof we hang'd our harps the willow trees upon. For there a song required they who did us captive bring; Our spoilers call'd for mirth, and said, a song of Zion sing. O How the Lords song shall we sing within a forreign land? If thée Ierusalem I forget, skill part from my right hand. My tongue to my mouths root let cleave if I do thee forget, Ierusalem, and thee above my chief joy do not set. Remember Edoms children, Lord, who in Ierusalem day, Ev'n unto its foundation, raze raze it quite, did say, O daughter thou of Babylon. néer to destruction, Blest shall he be that thee rewards, as thou to us hast done: Yea, happy surely shall he be. thy tender little ones Who shall lay hold upon, and them shall dash against the stones:
PSALM CXXXVIII. THee will I praise with all my heart, I will sing praise to thee. Before the gods: And worship will toward they Sanctuarie. 'le Praise thy Name, ev'n for thy truth, and kindnesse of thy love: For thou thy Word hast magnifi'd all thy great Name above. Thou didst me answer in the day when I to thee did cry. d thou my fainting soul with strength didst strengthen inwardly. All Kings upon the earth that are, shall give thee praise, O Lord, hen as they from thy mouth shall hear thy true and faithful Word: Yea, in the righteous wayes of God with gladnesse they shall sing: For great's th glory of the Lord, who doth for ever reign. Though God he high, yet he respects all those that lowly be; Whereas the proud and lofty ones afar off knoweth he. Though I in midst of trouble walk, I life from thee shall have, Gainst my foes wrath thoul't streach thine, hand thy right hand shal me save. Surely that which concerneth me. the Lord will perfect make: ord still thy mercy lasts, do not thine own hands works forsake. PSAL CXXXIX O Lord, thou hast me searcht and known, Thou knowst my sitting down, rising up; yea, all my thoughts Fr to thee are known.
My foot steps, and my lying down thou compassest alwayes; Thou also most intirely art acquaint with all my wayes. For in my tongue, before I speak, not any word can be, But altogether, lo, O Lord, it is well known to thée. Behind, before, thou hast beset, and laid on me thy hand. Such knowledge is too strange for me, too high to understand. From thy Sp'rit whither shall I or from thy presence flée? Ascend I heaven, lo, thou art there; there if in hell I lie. Take I the mornings wings, and dwell in utmost parts of sea: Ev'n there, Lord shall thy hand me lead, thy right hand hold shall me. If I do say that darknesse shall me cover from thy sight, Then surely shall the very night about me be as light. Yea, darknesse hideth not from thee, but night doth shine as day: To thee the darknesse and the light are both alike alway. For thou possessed hast my reins, and thou hast covered me, When I within my mothers womb inclosed was by thee. Thee will praise, for fearfully and strangely made I am; Thy works are marvelous, and right well my soul doth know the same.
My substance was not hid from thee, when as in secret I as made, and in earths lowest parts was wrought most curiously, Thine eyes my substance did behold, et being unperfite: o in the volum of thy bok ay members all were writ. ich after in continuance ere fashion'd every one, en as they yet all shapeless were d of them there was none. How precious also are thy thoughts O gracious God to me: in their sum how passing great and numberlesse they be? If I should count them. then the sand they more in number be: hat time soever I awake, I ever am with thée. Thou, Lord, wilt sure the wicked slay: ence from me bloudy men. Thy foes against thee lewdly speak, and take thy Name in vain. Do not I hate all those, O Lord; that hatred bear to thee? ith those that up against thee rise an I but grieved be? With perfect hatred them I hate, ny foes I them do hold. Search me, O God, and know my heart, hy me, my thoughts unfold. And see if any wicked way there be at all in me; d in thine everlasting way me a leader be.
LOrd, from the ill and froward man give me deliverance; And do thou safe preserve me, from the man of violence. Who in their heart mischievous thing are meditating ever: And they for war assembled are continually together. Much like unto a serpents tongue thir tongues they sharp do make; And underneath their lips there lyes the poyson of a snake. Lord, keep me from the wickeds hand from violent men me save, Who utterly to overthrow my goings purpos'd have. The proud for me a snare have hid, and cords; yea, they a net Have by the way side for me spread, they grins for me have set: I said unto the Lord, thou art my God: unto the cry Of all my supplications, Lord, do thine ear apply. O God, the Lord, who art the strengt of my salvation: A covering in the day of war my head thou hast put on. Vnto the wicked man, O Lord, his wishes do not grant, Nor suffer thou his ill device, lest they themselves should vaunt. As for the head and chief of those about that compasse me. Ev'n by the mischief of their lips let thou them covered be.
Let burning coals upon them fall, them throw in fiery flame, d in déep pits, that they no more may rise out of the same. Let not an evil sper be n earth established: schief shall hunt the violent man ill he be ruined. I know God will th'afflicteds cause maintain, and poor mens right. Surely the just shall praise thy name, th'upright dwell in thy sight. PSAL. CXLI. O Lord, I unto thee do cry, do thou make haste to me, d give an ear unto my voice, when I cry unto thee: As incense let my prayer be directed in thine eyes; nd the uplifting of my hands as th' ev'ning sacrifice. Set Lord, a watch before my mouth, keep of my lips the door. My heart incline thou not unto the ills I should abhore. a practise wicked works with men to work iniquity d with their delicates my taste let me not satisfie. Let him that righteous is me smite, it shall a kindnesse be: et him reprove, I shall it count an precious oyl to me. uch smiting shall not break my head: for yet the time shall fall, en I in their calamities Fo God pray for them shall:
When as their Iudges down shall be in stonie places cast, Then shall they hear my words, for the shall sweet be to their taste: About the graves devouring mouth, our bones are scatt'red round, As wood which men do cut and cleav lies scattered on the ground. But unto thee, O God the Lord, mine eyes uplifted be: My soul do not leave destitute, my trust is set on thee. Lord, keep me safely from the snare, which they for me prepare, And from the subtile grins of them, that wicked workers are. Let workers of iniquity, into their own nets fall, Whilst I do hy thine help escape the danger of them all. PSAL CXLII I With my voice cry'd to the Lord, with it made my request: Pour'd out to him my plaint, to him my trouble I exprest. When in me was o'erwhelm'd my sp'ri then well thou knewest my way: Where I did walk a snare for me they privily did lay. I look'd on my right hand, and view'd, but none to know me were; All refuge failed me no man did for my soul take care. I cry'd to thee, I said, thou art my refuge, Lord alone, And in the land of those that live thou art my portion,
Because I am brought very low, attend unto my cry; e from my persecutors save, who stronger are then I. From prison bring my soul, that I thy Name may glorifie: The just shall compasse me, when thou with me deal'st bounteoustie. PSAL. CXLIII. LOrd, hear my pray'r, attend my fuits, and in thy faithfullnesse Gve thou an answer unto me, and in thy righteousnesse. Thy servant also bring thou not in judgemnt to be try'd; Because no living man can be in thy sight justifi'd. For th'enemy hath pursu'd my soul, my life to ground down tread; n darknesse he hath made me dwell, as who have long been dead. My sp'rit is therefore overwhelm'd in me perplexedly; ithin me is my very heart amazed wondrously. I call to minde the dayes of old, to meditate I use n all thy words: upon the deeds I of thy hands do muse. My hands to thee I stretch: my soul thirsts, as dry land, for thee, Haste, Lord, to hear, my spirit fails hide not thy face from me: st like to them I do become, Wat go down to the dust: morn let me thy kindnesse hear, For  thee do I trust.
Teach me the way that I should walk, I lift my soul to thee: Lord, free me from my foes, I flee to thee, to cover me. Because thou art my God, to do thy will do me instruct: Thy sp'rit is good, me to the land of uprightnesse conduct. Revive and quicken me, O Lord, ev'n for thine own Names sake: And do thou for thy righteousnesse, my soul from trouble take. And of thy mercy stay my foes; let all destroyed be That do afflict my soul, for I a servant am to thee. Another of the same. OH hear my prayer, Lord And unto my desire To vow thine ear accord, I humble thee require. And in thy faithfulnesse, Vnto me answer make, And in thy righteousnesse Vpon me pitie take. In judgement enter not With me thy servant poor: For why, this well I wot, No sinner can endure The sight of thée, O God, If thou his deeds shalt try, He dare make no abode Himself to justifie. Behold the cruel foe Me persecutes with spight. My soul to over throw:
Yea, he my life down quite, Vnto the ground hath smote, And made me dwell full low In darkness, as forgot, Or men dead long ago. Therefore my sp'rit much vext O'rwhelm'd is me within; My heart right sore perplext, And desolate hath bin. Yet I do call to mind, What ancient dayes record; thy works of every kind I think upon, O Lord. lo, I do stretch my hands To thee my help alone, For thou well understands All my complaint and moan: My thirsting soul desires, And longeth after thee, As thirsty ground requires With rain refresht to be. Lord let my pray'r prevail, To answer it make speed, For lo, my sp'rit doth fail; Hide not thy face in need. Lest I be like to those That do in darkness sit, Or him that downward goes nto the dreadful pit. Because I trust in thee, O Lord cause me to bear Thy loving kindness free, When morning doth appear: Cause me to know the way Wherein my path should lie For why my soul on hie
I do lift up to thee. From my fierce enemy In safety do me guide, Because I flie to thee, Lord, that thou may'st me hide. My God alone art thou; Teach me thy righteousness: Thy sp'rits good, lead me to The land of uprightness. O Lord for thy Names sake, Be pleas'd to quicken me, And for thy truth forth take My soul from miserie. And of thy grace destroy My foes, and put to shame All who my soul annoy: For I thy servant am. PSAL. CXLIV. O Blessed ever be the Lord, who is my strength and might, Who doth instruct my hands to war, my fingers teach to fight. My goodness, sortress, my high tow'r, deliverer and shield, In whom I trust, who under me my people makes to yield. Lord, what is man, that thou of him dost so much knowledge take? Or son of man, that thou of him so great account dost make? Man is like vanity: his dayes, as shadows, pass away. Lord, bow the heavens, come down, touch thou the hills, and smoke shall they. ast forth thy lightnings, scatter them: arrows shoot, them rout. and send from above, me save
from great depths draw me out: And from the hand of children strange: Whose mouth speaks vanity: And their right hand is a right hand that works deceitfully. A new song I to thée will sing, Lord, on a psalterie; I, on a ten string'd instrument will praises sing to thee. Ev'n he it is, that unto Kings salvation doth send: Who his own servant David doth from hurtful sword defend. O frée me from strange childrens hands, whose mouth speaks vanity: find their right hand a right hand is that works deceitfully. That as the plants our sons may be in youth grown up that are; Our daughters like to corner stones, carv'd like a palace fair. That to afford all kind of store our garners may be fill'd; That our sheep thousands in our streets, ten thousands they may yeeld. That strong our oxen be for work, that no in breaking be, Nor going out, and that our streets may from complaints be free. Those people blessed are, who be in such a case as this: Yea, blessed all those people are whose God IEHOVAH is. PSAL. CXLV. I'Le thee extoll, my God, O King I'le bless thy Name alwaye race,
Thee will I bless each day, and will thy Name for ever praise. Great is the Lord, much to be prais'd, his greatness search exceeds. Race unto race shall praise thy works, and show thy mighty déeds. I of thy glorious Majesty the honour will record; Ile speak of all thy mighty works, which wondrous are, O Lord. Men of thine acts the might shall show, thine acts, that dreadful are: And I, thy glory to advance, thy greatness will declare. The memory of thy goodness great they largely shall express: With songs of praise they shall extoll thy perfect righteousness. The Lord is very gracious, in him compassions flow, In mercy he is very great, and is to anger slow. The Lord IEHOVAH unto all his goodness doth declare: And over all his other works his tender mercies are. Thee all thy works shall praise, O Lord, and hee thy saints shall bess: They shall thy kingdoms glory show, thy pow'r by speech express. To make the sons of men to know his act done mightily, And of his kingdom th'excellent And glorious Majesty. ingdom shall for ever stand, through ages all.
God raiseth all that are bow'd down, upholdeth all that fall. The eyes of all things wait on thee, the giver of all good, And thou in time convenient bestows on them their food. Thy hand thou openest liberally, and of thy bounty gives Enough to satisfie the need of every thing that lives. The Lord is just in all his wayes; holy in his works all. God's near to all that call on him, in truth that on him call. He will accomplish the desire of those that do him fear: He also will deliver them, and he their cry will hear. The Lord preserves all who him love, that nought can them annoy; But he all those that wedare will utterly destroy. My mouth the praises of the Lord to publish, cease shall never: Let all flesh bless his holy Name for ever and for ever. Another of the same. O Lord, thou art my God and King, Thee will I magnifie and praise: I will thee bless, and gladly sing Vnto thy holy Name alwayes. Each day I rise, I will thée bless, And praise thy name time without end. Much to be prais'd, and great God is, his greatness none can comprehend. Race shall thy works praise unto race,
The mighty acts show done by thee: I will speak of the glorious grace, And honour of thy majesty; Thy wondrous works I will record, By men the might shall be extold Of all thy dreadful acts, O Lord: And I thy greatness will unfold, They utter shall abundantly The memory of thy goodness great, And shall sing praises cheerfully, Whilst they thy righteousness relate. The Lord our God is gracious, Compassionate is he also, In mercy he is plenteous: But unto wrath and anger slow. Good unto all men is the Lord: O're all his works his mercy is. Thy works all praise to thée afford, Thy saints, O Lord thy Name shal bless. The glory of thy Kingdom show Shall they, and of thy power tell, That so mens sons his deeds may know, His Kingdoms grace that doth excel. Thy Kingdom hath none end at all, It doth through ages all remain. The Lord upholdeth all that fall, The cast-down raiseth up again. The eyes of all things, Lord, attend, And on thée wait, that here do live: And thou in season due dost send Sufficient food them to relieve. Yea, thou thine hand dost open wide, And every thing dost satisfie That lives, and doth on earth abide, Of thy great liberality. The Lord is just in his wayes all, And holy in his works each one.
He's near to all that on him call, who call in truth on him alone. God will the just desire fulfill Of such as do him fear and dread: Their cry regard, and hear he will, And save them in the time of need. The Lord preserves all, more and lesse, That bear to him a loving heart: But workers all of wickednesse, Destroy will he, and clean subvert. Therefore my mouth and lips I'le frame. To speak the praises of the Lord: To magnifie his holy Name, For ever let all flesh accord. PSAL. CXLVI. PRaise God, the Lord praise, O my soul. Ile praise God while I live: While I have beeing, to my God in songs Ile praises give. Trust not in Princes, nor mans son, in whom there is no stay: His breath departs, to's earth he turns, that day his thoughts decay. O happy is that man and blest, whom Iacobs God doth aid, Whose hope upon the Lord doth rest, and on his God is staid. Who made the earth and heavens high, who made the swelling deep. And all that is within the same: who truth doth ever keep. Who righteous judgement executes for those opprest that be; Who to the hungry giveth food, God sets the prisoners free. The Lord doth give the blinde their sight, the bowed down doth raise:
The Lord doth dearly love all those that walk in upright wayes. The strangers shield, the widows stay, the orphans help is he: But yet by him the wickeds way turn'd up-side down shall he. The Lord shall reign for evermore, thy God, O Zion, he Reigns to all generations: Praise to the Lord give ye. PSAL. CXLVII. PRaise ye the Lord: for it is good praise to our God to sing: For it is pleasant, and to praise, it is a comely thing. God doth build up Ierusalem: and he it is alone That the disperst of Israel doth gather into one. Those that are broken in their hearts, and grieved in their minds, He healeth, and their painful wounds he tenderly up-binds. He counts the number of the stars, he names them every one. Great is our Lord, and of great pow'r: his wisdom search can none. The Lord lifts up the meek, and casts the wicked to the ground. Sing to the Lord, and give him thanks, on harp his praises sound: Who covereth the heav'n with clouds, who for the earth below Prepareth rain, who maketh grasse upon the mountains grow. He gives the beast his food, he feeds the ravens young that cry,
His pleasure not in horses strength, nor in mans legs doth ly. But in all those that do him fear, the Lord doth pleasure take, In those that to his mercy do by hope themselves betake. The Lord praise, O Ierusalem: Zion thy God confess: For thy gates bars he maketh strong, thy sons in thee doth bless. He in thy borders maketh peace: with fine wheat filleth thee. He sends forth his command on earth, his word runs speedilie. Hoar frost, like ashes, scattereth he: like wool he snow doth give: Like morsels casteth forth his ice; who in its cold can live? He sendeth forth his mighty word, and melteth them again: is winds he makes to blow, and then the waters flow amain. The doctrine of his holy word, o Iacob he doth show: statutes and his judgements he ives Israel to know: To any nation never he h favour did afford: they his judgements have not known: do ye praise the Lord. PSAL. CXLVIII. aise God. From heavens praise ye Lo in hights praise to him be. ll ye his Angels praise ye him: s hosts all praise him ye. praise ye him both Sun and Mo
praise him all stars of light: Ye heav'ns of heav'ns him praise & floud above the heavens hight. Let all the creatures praise the Name of our Almighty Lord: For he commanded, and they were created by his word. He also for all times to come, hath them establisht sure: He hath appointed them a law, which ever shall endure. Praise ye IEHOVAH from the eart dragons, and every deep: Fire, hail, snow, vapour, stormy win his word that fully keep. All hills and mountains, fruitful tree and all ye cedars hy. Beasts and all cattel, creeping thing and all ye birds that fly. Kings of the earth, all Nations, Princes, earths Iudges all. Both young men, yea, and maidens old men, and children small. Let them Gods name praise: for his alone is excellent: His glory reacheth far above the earth and firmament. His peoples horn, the praise of all his saints exalteth he: Ev'n Israels seed, a people near to him: The Lord praise ye. Another of the same. THe Lord of heav'n confess; On high his glories raise. Him let all Angels bless: Him all h armies praise. Him glorifie,
Sun, Moon, and Stars: Ye higher sphears, And cloudy skie. rom God your beings are, m therefore famous make: all created were, en he the word but spake. And from that place. Where fixt you be By his decree You cannot pass. raise God from earth below dragons, and ye deps: re, hail, clouds, wind and snow, hom in command be keeps: Praise ye his Name hills great and small: Trees low and tall: Beasts wild and tame. All things that creep or fly: Ye Kings, ye vulgar throng. ll Princes mean or high. Both men and virgins young. Ev'n young and old, Exalt his Name, For much his fame Should be extold. O let Gods Name be prais'd above both earth and skie: For he his saints hath rais'd, nd set their horn on hie: Ev'n those that be Of Israels race, Near to his grace. The Lord praise ye. PSAL. CXLIX. PRaise ye the Lord: unto him sing a new song, and his praise the assembly of the saints in sweet Psalms do ye raise. Let Israel in his maker joy. and to him praises sing: t all, that Zions children are, be joyfull in their King. O let them unto his great N give praises in the dance: et them with timbrel and in songs his praise advan
doth pleasure take in those own people be: he with his salvation he meek will beautifie. And in his glory excellent let all his saints rejoice: Let them to him upon their beds aloud lift their voice. Let in their mouth aloft be rais'd the high praise of the Lord: And let them have in their right hand a sharp two-edged sword. To execute the vengeance due upon the heathen all, And make deserved punishment upon the people fall. And ev'n with chains, as prisoners bind ir Kings that them command; Yea, and with iron fetters strong he nobles of their land. n them the judgement to perform nd written in his word, is honour is to all his saints, O do ye praise the Lord. PSAL. CL. PRaise ye the Lord: Gods praise within his sanctuary raise: And to him in the firmament of his power give ye praise. Because of all his mighty acts with praise him magnifie: O'praise him as he doth excell in glorious majestie. Praise him with trumpets sound; his praise ith psaltery advance: timbrel, harp, string'd instruments, in the dance. cymbals loud, him praise ding hie. thing praise the Lord: give ye. NIS.
