C5662 105.f.17[30] R228992 99888077 201538
Comprehensive, tho' Compendious CHARACTER of the Late Royal Martyr King CHARLES I. of ever-blessed Memory. DELINEATED by One of the most EMINENT DIVINES OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND. depiction of Charles I with others — Luis talia fando Temperet a lacrymis? — VIRG. HE was a David, a Saint, a King, but never a Shep∣herd. Some of all the Royal Blood in Christendom ran in his Veins; that is to say, many Kings went into the Composition of this One Potentate: His Education and Improvements were commensurate to his Extraction: He was accurate in all the recommending Excellencies of human Accomplishments; able to deserve, had he not inherited a Kingdom: Of so controuling a Genius, that in every Science he attempted, he did not so much study as reign, and appear'd not only a Proficient, but a Prince. HIS own Performances make good this Assertion, and speak him as much an Orator, as a Monarch. These are compos'd with such an uninterrupted, and unfailing Accuracy; such a commanding, majestic Pathos; as if they had been written, not with a Pen, but with a Scepter. As it is hard to counterfeit the Spirit of Majesty, and the inimitable Peculiarities of an incom∣municable Genius and Condition; so are some of his Works ri∣diculously imputed to others; they did not write them, because they could not. AT the Council-Board, he had the Ability still to give himself the best Counsel, but the unhappy Modesty to diffide in it: In∣deed, his only Fault; for Modesty is a Paradox in Majesty, and Humility a Solecism in Supremacy. LOOK we next upon his Piety and unparallell'd Virtues; tho', without an Absurdity, it may be affirm'd, that his very Endowments of Nature were supernatural: So pious was he, that had Others measur'd their Obedience to Him, by his Obe∣dience to God, he had been the most absolute Monarch in the World: As eminent for frequenting the Temple, as Solomon for building One: So firm to the Protestant Cause, that tho' he convers'd in the Midst of Temptation, in the very Bosom of Spain; and tho' France lay in His; yet could nothing shake him, but that he espous'd the Cause of Religion, even more than his beloved Queen. HE fitted every Way the Title under which he was pray'd for. He could defend his Religion as a King; dispute for it as a Divine; and dye for it as a Martyr. THIS eminent Piety of his was adorn'd with the whole Train of moral Virtues. His Temperance was so great and impreg∣nable, amidst all these Allurements, with which the Courts of Kings are apt to melt, even the most stoical and resolv'd Minds, that he did, at the same Time, both teach and upbraid the Court; so that it was not so much their own Vice, as his Example, that render'd their Debauchery inexcusable. Look over the whole List of our Kings, and take in the Kings of Israel to boot, and Who ever kept the Bond of Conjugal Af∣fection so inviolate? David was chiefly eminent for repenting in this Matter; Charles for needing no Repentance: None ever appear'd of greater Fortitude of Mind, which was more resplendent in the Conquest of himself, and in those miraculous Instances of passive Valour, than if he had strew'd the Field with all the Rebels Armies; and to the Justness of his own Cause, had join'd the Success of theirs; and yet withal so meek, so gentle, so merciful, and that even to a Cruelty to himself, that, if ever the Lion and the Lamb dwelt together, if ever Courage and Meekness were united, it was in the Breast of this Royal Person. HIS EPITAPH By the Celebrated Mr. BUTLER. STAY, Passenger, stay here, and see Intomb'd lies injur'd Majesty. Why tremblest not? — Here's That would make All but a hard'ned Rebel quake. A King! — O! starts thou not with Fear? A murder'd King lies bury'd here! Search all the Records of old Times, And muster up all Ages Crimes, And roll 'em up in one great Mass, 'Twill fall far short of what This was: A Monarch sentenc'd to his Death, By vulgar, base, Plebeian Breath: A Law-giver, by Laws unknown, Condemn'd to lose his Head and Throne; Nay, and to make the Odium more, This must be done at his own Door; And all under the false Pretence Of Liberty of Conscience. N. B. His Majesty King Charles I. was Born in the Year of our Lord 1600, Crown'd in 1625, and Martyr'd on the 30th. of January, 1649.
