C5909CD 1888.c.11[55] T146874 99893674 189482
CONSIDERATIONS Humbly Offered to the Honourable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament assembled, shewing the Necessity and Benefit of an Act of Parliament, to Incorporate a certain select Number of Persons, for the more Beautiful and Ʋseful Paving and Cleansing the Streets in the Cities of London and West∣minster, and Suburbs and Liberties thereof, and Out-Parishes in the County of Middlesex, and in the Borough of Southwark, and other Places within the Weekly Bills of Mortality. IT hath been a Matter of Wonder to all Travellers that have resorted to the City of London, to observe the vast Riches, and beautiful Structures therein, and yet that the Streets thereof should lie deformedly Paved, and unwholsomly Dirty; which being duly remedied, must needs tend much to the Heathfulness as well as Beauty of the City, of which likewise the whole Kingdom seem sensible, by the several Acts of Par∣liament from time to time made, for the Paving and Cleansing the said Streets, none of which have hitherto had the desired Effect; for that the said Acts do only inflict Penalties where there is a Defect, but have not provided Means to make it the particular Business and Interest of any Persons to have it effected, neither can the same ever be brought to any perfection, but by a General Undertaking, which all the Cities in Europe, that are fa∣mous for their beautiful Pavements and Cleanness, have by Experience found, and that for these Reasons: I. The Quantity that is to be Paved and Cleansed is so large, that to have it done and kept as it ought, requires a very great Sum to be raised and appropriated to that only use. II. If every one Pave only before his own Door, there never can be a true Level, or regular Current ob∣served, each one Paving at several times, according to his private Interest or Fancy, higher or lower, to ac∣commodate some Threshold, Cellar-door, Cross-kennel, or some irregular Ascent or Fall, he hath no mind to alter, without any regard to the Publick: So that it is by this means impossible for a Common Line to be ob∣served, or that there should be any raising or abating, turning, or any ways altering a Current, though never so needful. III. Many when they Pave, have so little time in their Houses, that they purposely do it slightly to last their own time only, and some out of Covetousness, will either not Pave at all, or so very little, that the Streets are nothing the better. IV. Where the Paviours are allowed a sufficient Price to do their Work well, yet notwithstanding they either put in such bad Stuff, or work it so slightly that it soon lieth rough and disorderly again, it being their Interest to have the Work rather often doing, than well done, and therefore impoly unskilful Persons, who will work at the cheapest Rate. And also by raising every new Pavement higher than their Neighbors, as is their con∣stant Practice, the adjoyning Pavements are quickly spoiled. Whereas, if it be done by a Society, that are to continue the doing thereof, it will be their Business and Interest to imploy the most skilful and experienced Per∣sons, and to form and keep each Street with a perfect and regular Level and Current, and to have the Stones of a true size, and of the most lasting sort; and likewise, that they shall be laid in such Stuff, in which they will longest abide firm; by which means it is only possible to have the Streets lie even, and handsomly paved, and by this means they may be swept clean, and kept neat; but otherwise it is impossible they should. 'Tis likewise absolutely necessary, that the Sweeping the said Streets be performed at the Charge and Care of the Undertakers, for otherwise it will continue as now it is, that scarce any Three of the Inhabitants will sweep before their Door at the same time, and some will not be got to sweep before the Dirt-Carts be gone, whereby the whole Street will immediately be made dirty again. The Undertakers are willing to be obliged, to have the whole Work regularly and ornamentally done at One Shilling a Yard Square, for new Laying in all such places as are already paved; and for all such places as have not been paved, the same being at the Charge of the Parish first Cleansed, and Gravelled fit for Pavement, the Sum of 4 s. 6 d. for every Yard Square, that shall be paved with Scapel-stone; and 1 s. 4 d. for every Yard Square that shall be paved with common Pavement, each Inhabitant being to pay proportionable to his respe∣ctive Part or Share, as soon as his said Part or Share shall be finished: And the Undertakers are from time to time, at all times afterwards, to be at the Charge of Sweeping the said Pavement, and Gathering the Dirt in the Street into Heaps, ready for the Scavenger to carry away, and to keep the said Pavement in good and suf∣ficient Repair, and well and duly Swept, at Four Pence Half-penny a Yard Square, which is cheaper by far than it now stands the Inhabitants in, though in this rude and slovenly fashion, and though they themselves are at the Charge and Trouble of Sweeping the same. And by this means the Inhabitants will be freed from Indictments and Penalties they are now troubled with. This way will likewise prevent the many Disputes that will arise from the Inequality of Parish Rates. And the Undertakers are to be obliged at their own Costs and Charges, to carry away the Dirt, Dust, Ashes, and Filth of the Houses, Streets, Lanes, and Alleys, and at all times during the said Term, to keep clean the said Streets, and to do whatever relates to the Scavenger, at the Price is now paid for the same. In case there be any defect either in the Paving or Cleaning, if the same be not by the Undertakers immedi∣ately reformed, upon Notice, they are willing to be subject to such Fine as shall be adjudged reasonable; and besides the usual Remedy of Distress for the same, are willing that the Payments from the several Wards or Pa∣rishes, be stopped, till the respective Fines be paid.
