C5804 C.20.f.10[36] R229040 99888120 193178
The Confined Lover. No Prison like to CƲPIDS Goal, where some Confined be, When Sighs and Tears cannot prevail, to purchase Liberty: Till tender Females do apply a Balsom to the Wound; Some Lovers live, some sighing dye, and so the World goes Round. To the Tune of, The Charms of Love. depiction of young woman depiction of Cupid depiction of young man AH! how powerful is her Charming eye, which so strangely doth enslave me; Cupid I feel thy Tyranny, of all my sense thou dost bereave me: The more I strve for to get free, the stronger I find is my Desire, Thou art my Dear the only she, that to my burning flame still adds a scorching fire. Now now in Fetters i'le Delight, and joy to see my self thus Chained; For when thou art out of my sight, I find my self extreamly pained: While others sweetly take their rest, in secret I do mourn for thee; And then my sorrows makes me blest, my Silvia I delight my self in none but thee. Sweet Dreams too often vex my Soul, when waking I do find they flatter, Methinks I see her through a Hole, and yet by no means can come at her: Oh then I storm like one inraged, and blame that wanton winking Boy, No sooner is my heart asswaged, but Silvia is again my Love and dearest Ioy. But should she prove to me unkind, and give to me a flat denyal, No joys on earth could ease my mind, who whilst I live must needs be Loyal: No falshood shall be found in me, whilst I retain my murmuring breath, But Silvia i'le be true to thee, until I chance to meet with grim and pale-fac'd death. Then let the world on me look , and blame my fond and helpless passion, The wavering mind delights in change, and calls perhaps my Vow a rash one: But let man count me what he pleases, oh Love is a pain I now delight in, Nor can be any such Diseases, as Females angry frowns when they their Loves are slighting. Betwixt my pleasure and my pain, I am sometimes pleas'd, sometimes tormented, Though once I did love clear disdain, I now therewith am well contented: And thus I spend my Youthful days, in Doting and in fond desire, But when Loves passion I dispraise, immediately I burn and fry in endless Fire. Let none dispise the Winged Boy, whose Darts are of exceeding power, And those who Love do count a Toy, may loose their freedoms in an hour: And when they'r once lay'd up and chained, no sighs can purchase Liberty, Where Cupid finds himself disdained, his darts that are resistless then he soon lets flye. Yet to be Strangers to his Fires, is altogether hapless counted, For he that's fill'd with hot desires, to the heighth of joy is surely mounted: For if one minute brings him pain, the next doth bring him much more pleasure, Then let no man kind love disdain, for 'tis the best of worldly joys, and earthly treasure. Oh Mortals pattern take by me, that now in Love am so delighted, Methinks I gain my Liberty, when I perceive my self but slighted: And then my self I do recall, I chide my self who vow'd to love, When I poor Captive was in Thrall, I thought my self as happy as the Souls above. FINIS. Printed for J. Deacon, at the Sign of the Rainbow near Davids-Inn in Holborn.
