C6345 C6344A R17626 [ocm]11740368 48485
Pope Alexander the Seaventh I Chantry sculp portrait of Pope Alexander VII
ROME EXACTLY Describ'd, As to the Present State of it, Under POPE ALEXANDRE The Seventh. In Two Curious DISCOURSES. Written Originally in Italian, and Tran∣slated into English. LONDON, Printed by T. Mabb, for Mich Young, at the blew Bible in Covent Garden; and J. Starkey at the Miter near Temple Bar, and J. Playfere, at the white Bear in the Upper Walk in the New Exchange, 1664.
Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber. bookplate of Cambridge Library
A RELATION Of the State of the COURT OF ROME, Made in the Year 1661. at the Council of Pregadi. By the Most Excellent, the Lord ANGELO CORRARO, Ambassador from the most Serene Re∣publique of Venice to Pope Alexander VII. Translated out of Italian By J. B. Gent. London, Printed by T. Mabb, and are to be sold by Michael Young at the Blew Bible in Bedford-street in Covent-Garden; and John Playfere, at the White Bear in the Upper Walk of the New-Exchange. 1664.
Imprimatur Sept. ult. 1663. Roger L' Estrang.
To Mr MATTHIAS Van BEUNINGEN. THIS Relation, which cannot but divertise you may serve for Instruction, to many peo∣ple, who talk at present of the Court of Rome, and tor∣ment
themselves to disco∣ver the Causes and Conse∣quences of the Murther committed on the Ambassa∣dor of France. Truly, that act was very strange: a great King to be out-ragiously wronged out of a Frolick, and those Sage Worldlings seem to have renounced both their Ho∣nour and Judgment, since they yet speak of it scof∣fingly; they fancy and say, all will be made up again; that the business at last will come to a Negotiation, where the French cannot fail of having satisfaction:
How can those wise Heads ponder so long upon one thing? they will cut them∣selves out some other work; they will evaporate their Choller in singing fine Songs of us, their sury will vanish, and he that had the blows may bear them; the King shall be satisfi'd with the hanging up of three or four Catch pole Serjeants; and if at last, those rash ones should put the business home, the Emperour and other Princes, whom the Pope is sure of, will not fail their Holy Mother at her need: and then do they
count it nothing to have Eight Red Hats to bestow, and with the which they might—;But let those Ministers stand fast? If the wound can be healed with words, so much the better, those Bagatels will serve. However, Sir, I do not think I acquit my self of what I owe you, nor do I pretend you should be obliged to me, when I pre∣sent you with a Book that comes from your own Clo∣set, and can teach you no∣thing new. You are, Sir, of an Illustrious Family, where Virtue, Science, Politness,
Riches, Reputation, and the most Refined Judgment in Affairs of State,  Na∣tural and Hereditary. I can∣not be suspected of flattery herein, since I have Crown'd Heads and Sovereign Prin∣ces for my Witnesses; whom, as I may say, have found themselves honoured by the Embassies and Em∣ployments wherein your Eldest Brother acquitted himself with no less praise to him, than satisfaction to them: this is no more then was said by the Queen of Sweden, and is yet spoken of in France. Nevertheless,
I believed this Treatise, which is no less curious than sol deserved to bear the name of a Person that hath acquired so much Reputa∣tion by the Commerce of all the Learned, by Travail, by choice Books, by his good Nature, and the wel∣come Reception he gives to all Studious men. The Au∣thors name speaks his com∣mendations, it is the Il∣lustrious Senator Corraro, for whom there are no Em∣ployments too high in Ve∣nice, that Politique Astrolo∣ger, who judges of the Mindes of Men with a Sub∣tilty
worthy his penetrati∣on, and the judgment of a Man thorowly versed in the affairs of the world, and with that liberty of truth natural to all Republicans. I beseech you, Sir, to ac∣cept of my respects, and give me some tokens of your good-will by honouring me with your Commands.
A TABLE. AQuaviva 62 Aldobrandino 65 Astalli 70 ALbici 71 Azzolino 72 B Berenice 16 Bichi Card. 23 Bichi Prior. 24 Bandinelli 33 Barberino Fran. 38 Barberino Ant. 41 Brancaccio 44 Barberino Char. 63 Boromeo 69 Bagni 74 Bonvisi 76
C Corrado 32 Colonne 42 Carpegna 45 Costaguti 57 Cibo 62 D Donghi 58 E Este 56 Elci 75 F Fagnano 33 Franciotti 43 Filormarini 46 Facchinetti 48 Farnese 76 France 83
G Chigi Augusta. 24 Chigi Mar. 16 Chigi Flav. 17 Chigi Augustin. 20 Chigi Sig. 23 Ginetti 40 Giorio 48 Grinaldi 50 Gabrieli 58 Gondi 62 Gualtieri 66 Genois 98 H Harach 44 Homodei 59 The Cardinal Lantgrave of Hesse 72 I Imperiable 69 Empire 80
L Lugo 58 Ludovisio 60 M D. Mario 14 D. Medicis Charls Cardinal. 38 Maculano 47 Mazarin 50 D. Medicis John. 60 Maldachino 67 Modena 100 Mantoua 101 O Odescalco 67 Ottobuono lb. P The Pope 3 Pallavicino 30 Pallotta 45 Pio 64
Paulucci 75 Pologna 95 Parma 99 Q Queen of Sweden, 78 R Rospigliosi 29 Rossetti 49 Rondanini 57 Raggi 59 S Spada Virg. 34 Spada de Bresighele. 39 Sachetti 40 Santa Croce 61 Spada of Luca 66 Sforza 73 Sagredo 77 Spain 89 Savoy 96
T Triumvirat, vide C. A. I. Toscany 97 V Ʋrsin 55 Vidman 65 Venice 10
A RELATION Of The State of the COƲRT Of ROME. I Cannot but acquit my self of what is due from all those, who having finished the employment wherewith your Serene Repub∣lique hath honoured them, re∣turning back to their Country, bring home with them the Fruit they have gleaned in their Observations on the Forms of Government; the Designs and Maxims of
those Princes near whom they have resided, together with all such other things as they esteem most wor∣thy to be known, and noted by your Excellencies. I shall be brief in the quantity of things I have to say, reducing them to what is most essential, that thereby they may be the more firmly imprinted in your Memories, and shall make but three Chapters of them. In the First, I shall treat of the Nature, the Qualities, the Passions, the Inclinations, and the Designs of Pope Alexander VII, the Kindred of his Holiness who have part in the Government, and his other Confidents, to whom he is accustomed to com∣municate the most important interests of the Papacy. In the Second, I shall speak of the College of the Cardinals, and give an account in short of the Interests, and the good and bad Qualities of each of them. In the Third, I will declare the reasons, by which one may conclude, whether the Pope have any in∣clination to love one Nation more than another; And I promise your Excellencies, the same Sincerity and the same Indifferency, which in so many years Service as I have rendred you, may have made you know is become natural to me, and without which I can undertake nothing, without putting a constraint or force upon my humor. I should never have enter'd upon the particulars of the Behaviour, the Passions and Qualities of the present Pope, if any other had done it before me: But seeing the Lord Sagredi left Rome in the first year of this Pope's Assumption, at which time his Ho∣liness professed to have Sentiments quite contrary to what appeared the years following: and that the Lord Girolamo Giustincani, who was able to have
exactly observed, and sounded all these secrets, de∣ceased a few months after he had begun his em∣ployment, and so could not therein show the heighth and sagacity of his Wit. I find my self obliged to undertake so important a Work, so much the more difficult, as being extremly nice, and very easie to be mistaken, because of the profession every one makes at Rome to keep his inclinations so conceal'd, that it should be impossible to discover them. BEginning then with the Exterior parts, which are most easie to be known, for I shall enetrate into the Interior afterwards. Pope Alexander the VII, who at present sits in the Chair, was born at Siena, the sixth day of February, in the year 1599, so that he hath passed the one and sixtieth year of his age on the same day of this present year 1660. It is now the sixth year of his being Pope, which began on the seventh day of this present month of April. This Pope does not enjoy a health which can be called perfect, because it is subject to divers such alterations, as do not ordinarily give us any hopes of a long life. The first is a great Humidity of the Brain, which obliges him to keep his head ever very Hot. Nor does this suffice to hinder the bad effects of it; since his teeth being spoiled and lost by the continual defluxion which fell upon them, he hath so few left, that if he had not supplied that want, by causing Artificial ones to be set in their stead, it would be a great hindrance to his speech: Nor does he speak plain with all this Art, and not being able therewith to chaw suffi∣ciently, he is necessitated to eat onely Liquid things, which have no need of being chewed; and although they should naturally be of a more easie digestion, yet experience tells us, that they do not always suc∣ceed
with him, since he is subject to indispositions and qualms in his stomach, which can be attributed to nothing but indigestion, the debility of his natural heat hindring the concoction of such nourishing meats as they ordinarily feed him with. Exercise, however, does him good, for he walks in the Gal∣lery, and in his Garden, and sometimes a foot in those Streets that are the least frequented about the City. He finds case likewise in Purgations, for which purpose he ordains the Retreat he makes in the Campagnia of Rome, both Spring and Fall. From all which it happens, that being assaulted on the one side by the weakness of his Complexion, and upheld on the other hand by all that the Art and Industry of Man can invent, he may hold out possibly to the three and sixtieth year of his age, which will be his Climaterical, for at that time are those bad humors principally encreased and stirred up. He is not free from the pain of the Stone, which is so ordinary at Rome, being very often tormented with the difficulty of making Urine by certain little Stones, which are soonest bred in those of a delicate constitution, and who apply themselves to business. For it is certain, that none can tie themselves to it more than the Pope does, who hardly lets pass any morning with∣out giving audience, employing the remainder of the day in the discussion of the most knotty affairs. And although he does sometimes divertise his more troubled and wearied thoughts by Entertainments of Literature, as of Poetry, History or Policy amongst Learned men; it is nevertheless impossible but his Spirits must then likewise be very busie and intent, in making reflexions on the choice discourses have been held before him; to which must be added such things as sometimes disquiet him; so that it is no
wonder, if with all this a complexion of it self but feeble, cannot suffice to all that is necessary for the functions of his natural life. The Pope is of a stature rather low than midling, of a black hair, which never till now begn to turn gray, and, which is a sign of the debility of his natu∣ral heat, his skin is white, inclining a little to the Leaden colour▪ which is likewise another convincing proof of that disposition I have before noted. He loves neatness, and indeed an extraordinary decency in all things, but particularly in his diet and cloaths; and therefore the care and industry of those that cover his Table, and make ready his Viands, is so great, that they omit nothing imaginable, for the least fault, either in the Meats themselves, or the Dressing of them, were enough to anger him. But for his Cloaths, he is as curious of the best Linnen, as if he were yet in the flower of his Youth; nor does it suffice him to be cloathed in the most ex∣quisit Cloth, but he must have his Garments en∣riched with all the Adornments that can give them most lustre and price: as it is well known that when he goes into the Country, he wears some that are garnished with little Diamond Buttons, and other Ornaments, both Costly and Magnificent. He hath the same curiosity for the Places he dwells in, and pleaseth himself wonderfully in fair Houses, which are so contrived as to bring in the Light on every side, and where nothing more can be desired either in the Structure or the Ornament; which is the cause, that in the House whether he retires in Spring and Autumn, he was not contented with what Urban had done, but hath added new quarters to it, and changed those that were there already, that it might be magnificent and Royal. He hath
enlarged the Palace of the Quirinal with fair and long Apartments, for the use of such as belong to the Popes House, having had as little regard for the great expences required in the construction of those Edifices, as if he had Mines of Gold, or as if the Se∣curity of the Ecclesiastical State had consisted there∣in. But the Popes pleasure is not bounded with the enlarging and embellishing onely of the Papal Pa∣laces, he shows the same passion for the whole City. And thus it being in his thoughts and design to em∣bellish it in the same manner, as those Roman Empe∣rors formerly with much care and heat endeavoured to do, to wit, Augustus, Vespasian, Domitian, and others, he hath given full power to the Magistrate, who hath the office of surveying the Streets, to pull down Houses and Palaces, where he judges the con∣veniency and ornament of the City does require it. So that, in effect, one may see them very busie every day in demolishing of antient Structures, either to make some places the more spacious & uniform, or to open a fitter way to some new streets, and to that purpose there is a Tax imposed on the neighbouring Dwel∣lings, which obliges the Proprietors to pay to those, whose Houses have been pulled down, a sum pro∣portionate to their value. And the Pope does so much delight herein, that as long as his time lasts, he will not abstain from making these changes, there being never want of occasion, either to remove, or to rebuild in a City, where in the time the Bar∣barians possessed it, the Houses were raised without any Symmetry, onely for the convenience of the In∣habitants; and from this arises so many complaints in the City, that without any necessity, onely for the fancy and pleasure of the Pope, and sometimes of his Ministers, many Families, that have but mean For∣tunes,
should feel the weight of such grand Pay∣ments, which brings them neither benefit nor con∣veniency in return. But that which exceeds all these excessive Expences, is, what he hath bestowed upon that great and vast massie Portico which he hath undertaken to raise round about the place of the Basilique Vaticane, for having changed the Design that famous Architect Michael Angel Botaola had formerly laid, who wrought with so much success at the same Temple of St. Peters, and reduced this work to one range of Porticos, which without any ex∣cessive expence would have made it an admirable Structure, and very commodious for the Coaches, either when it rained or shined; having changed this design, I say, he follows that of some Modern Architects, who have made it of an extraordinary greatness, for it is to be of a Circular form, with three Walks or Alleys, and all of Stone of Tivoli. And although the Architects have found by their Calculation, that the expence will not exceed five hundred thousand Crowns; yet if we reckon accor∣ding to what the little that is finished already hath cost, we shall find, that what is proportionably to be done, cannot be completed hardly for a million of Crowns. These high and great designs are very certain marks, that the Pope has a Soul truly Royal; and truly he makes it appear in all the publick actions he undertakes, as may be seen by the reception he made of the Queen of Sweden, in which he omitted nothing that might add any glory or lustre to make it proud and equal, if it were possible, to the Ancient Roman Triumphs; and by his Magnificence he in∣oited the whole Court to shew the complaisance
they take in following and imitating herein the in∣clinations of his Holiness: But when we consider on the one side, that the Apostolique Chamber is drained by the insatiability of the preceding Popes, and on the other side, that the times are miserable and bad, the profusion of so much Treasure appears to the world to be ill husbandry and not in season, since it might have been employ'd with more praise and merit, and to better purpose, for the most pressing Necessities of Christendom, who looking upon Rome as the North-Star to guide them, and the Pope as their Tutelary God, cannot but be afflicted to be∣hold him, instead of healing their wounds and com∣posing their distractions, amusing and pleasing him∣self in raising and adorning of starely Walls. How∣ever, it cannot be denied, but such great Spirits do extremely thirst after Glory and Renown. The wisest men, who perceived it from the beginning, al∣ways scoffed at the Popes sparingness in the first years of his Reign, as not being willing to see his nearest kindred, much less inrich them: nay more, it was their opinion, that he affected this little glory of re∣nouncing his particular Interests, thereby to acquire himself a greater afterwards, as if already he had the ambition to do those things, which Popes of a most holy life could never do before: But since that the world has found the Pope extremely glad to be induced by the Cardinals and the Ministers of other Princes, to call those of his Family to Rome, while in so doing it might appear, that he was rather prompted to it by the earnest intreaties of all the Court, than by the latteries of his kindred. Rome  too subtle, and can dive too far into the designs of those that command her not to perceive this, and now rigorously soever they forbid them from judging of
the actions of their Princes; yet would they not forbear it on this occasion. And to say truth, they could not apprehend how the Pope, who hath so much ambition to revive the memory of his Ance∣stors, could suffer it to be buried in the oblivion of his kindred yet living; these were contradictions that could not in any wise be reconciled. But, however it were then, certain it is, that at present they are so well at their ease, that should the Pope die, they will have no cause to envie others riches: anon I shall give the reasons more particularly. But e're I go further, I will not omit to let you know the Original of this House, and by what degrees the Pope could rise to so high a Dignity. His Nobility is as considerable as could be in the City of Siena, where they are registred in the num∣ber of those antient Families, that have been ho∣noured with such Commands as that City is wont to bestow upon her Members, and have maintained themselves by their Alliance with those Families that were nothing inferior to them. But this is not the first time that they have made themselves known at Rome. In the time of Julius the Second the House of the Chigi had employments in the Court, not of Prelature, but Offices in the Chamber, which spreads the names of those that exercise them over all parts; and at that time the Chigi made theirs the more known, because they hapned to serve a Pope both passionate and turbulent above all others. Whence follows, that because of the profusion of monies those that are thus rash are forced to make use of to maintain the Wars they undertake. Augu∣stine Chigi, who managed the Treasury, had a fair opportunity to play his part, being naturally active.
But though he were very stirring, and that there was much jealousie about the administration, yet Julius never had the least distrust of his integrity, on the contrary he testifi'd the good opinion he had of him by those marks of Honor he bestowed, in ado∣pting both him and his Heirs into the House of the Rovere, whose Arms they bear to this day. Since that, in the time of Paul III, (as great employments are exposed to great dangers) those of the House of Chigi found themselves eclipsed a little of their first splendor, which was cause that the best of their means being alienated, and especially their delicious Garden on the Tyber, just opposite to the Palace of Farnese, which remained to the House that held the Chair, they returned to their Country, where in a moderate, but honorable condition, they quietly passed their time, till an opportunity offered it self to Fabius Chigi, who is Pope at present, and who was then a young boy of great hopes, to re∣instate himself in a better fortune, as he was encou∣raged by his Parents and Friends, who believed, that a person adorned with all manner of virtues would much wrong himself, should he hide those rich Talents, and let them lie buried in idleness, by not going out from the gates of his own City. But he was hindred by the little wealth he had, and also because his friends had not been able to advance themselves during the long interval that those of his Family had been kept from the Court: Nevertheless, where power is wanting, his confidence in putting himself forward by what means soever shewed it self. For being come to Rome, he got acquaintance of the Marquis Pallavicino, at that time a young man of great virtue, and for that cause ever very welcom
to Urbane. This is he, who since made himself a Jesuite, and who having been promoted to a Cardi∣nalship sometime since, will oblige us to speak some∣what of him hereafter. This Marquis then brought him to the Pope's feet, and presented him as a person capable to bring any business about with honour, when ever any oc∣casion profer'd to serve the Holy Chair. His manner of deportment pleased the Pope, so that how mean soever his establishment were at first, it was not long ere he was appointed to be Inquisitor at Malta, in which employment he having made his worth ap∣pear, was shortly after sent in quality of Vice-Legate to Ferara. There it was, that what had been conceived of his virtue being made known, he was sent Nuncio to Collen, in a time when the divisions of Christendome were at their heighth. And al∣though in this employment he did not succeed so well as to conclude the Peace, yet he performed his part and devoire admirably well. But because the Protestant Forces prevailed, with whom he could have no communication, being Minister to the Pope, it was not sufficient that he had induced the Catholiques to make a fair and just accommodation, whilst the others stood stifly on their excessive pre∣tences, so that he could not act as it might have been hoped he would have done, had he been to Negotiate between two Parties of the same Religion: but what is wonderful, is that the Spaniards and the Imperialists, who were both tired and discontented, being brought to this pass to make the best accom∣modation they could, the first with the Hollanders, and the others with the French, not onely without any advantage, but even to the prejudice of Reli∣gion,
and the Nuncio having expressed a great deal of his displeasure to both of them, he did it yet in such a manner as left no ill impression on either Party, but on the contrary they were much edified to find nothing but zeal in him, judging thereby that he was so much a better Minister to his Prince, by how much he disapproved what they had resolved to do, rather out of necessity than any good-will, onely to preserve both themselves and their Religion from greater danger. He behaved himself with the same prudence when he returned to Rome, for being called to the charge of first Secretary, though he succeeded the Cardinal Pancirolo, in whom Nature had assembled all the circumspection and craft that could be desired, and that he was to serve a Pope so difficult to be pleased, as Innocent was; yet did he carry things so well, as that Pope was fully satisfi'd in all matters that he negotiated; and above all things he shunn'd as a precipice medling with the interest of the Pope's Niece, who would have all the Ministers to ac∣knowledge she was both Lady and Mistris of that Prelate; and the Pope had so great a consideration for him, that being at the last extremity, where the heart speaks more then the tongue, and where all dissimulation is laid aside, he recommended him as a man very worthy to succeed him in the Papacy; so that it was not without reason that your Lordships from that time conceived for the Cardinal Chigi, that good opinion that ever since they have had of him, and amongst those you recommended to the Lords Cardinals Bragadino, Vidman and Ottobuono, I re∣member that he was the first named by those that re∣presented you in Germany, as having all those merits requisite to fill the vacant Chair: which also hath
very happily succeeded. And truly, if we consider the good conduct of his life, the integrity of his manners, and his knowledge of the Interests of all States, which are all qualities that meet in the Pope's Per∣son, there is no cause you should repent your wishing it, or your having laboured to raise him: but the mischief is, that what goodness and integrity soever the Cardinals have, they no sooner begin to taste the sweetness of being Masters, and having no Supe∣rior but God, but they change their natures, and think themselves no longer obliged to follow those Maxims they said were rooted in their Souls whilst they were Cardinals. Who would believe that Pope Alexander having so great a capacity, whereby he can truly judge of the dangers Christianity is in, should have assisted the Turk to advance and establish an Arsenal in Candia of all his Forces, and that he should have shewed himself every way so obstinate, as he did, in refusing those benefits which might serve in this con∣juncture? Who would ever have thought, that a Cardinal, who, before his promotion to the Cardinalship, breathed nothing but zeal, and seemed to languish with sorrow, to behold the miserable estate that Christendom was going to be plunged into by that obstinate War between two of her greatest Crowns, should not, being raised to the Holy Chair, burn with the like ardor for a general peace? Who would have believed, that when the most essential matters were agreed upon for the healing of our present miseries, he should seek to quarrel
for very slight reasons, which have no other object but either to amplifie his jurisdiction, or maintain his own Opinions and Sentiments? I shall hint at many of these changes in this discourse, that your most serene Lordships may consider, as they have ever done, what confidence they may put in the words and promises of these Cardinals before and af∣ter their Elevation to the Papacy, who because they cannot at first gainsay, what they have so lately de∣clared they would do, afterwards by degrees lay aside all manner of respect during their Reign, and onely knit themselves to what their own proper interests, or the suggestions of their flatterers inspire them with. But, in the mean time, not to omit what I promised at the beginning to make known, con∣cerning the Pope's nearest kindred; those towards whom his Holiness bears the greatest affection, are the Lord Don Mario his Brother, who married a Gentlewoman of Siena of the House de la Ciaa, and the Lord Flavio his Son, at this time Cardinal, and firnamed the Cardinal Padrone, that is to say, Ma∣ster. He hath a like, and perhaps a greater affection for the Lord Augustin, the Son of another Brother, who was named Augustin: and this was he who having two years since married the Prince Borghese's Sister, remained Head of the Family after the death of Don Mario. I think it therefore necessary to give an ac∣count of all these to your most Serene Lordships, since, as I have already said, the divers accidents that hapned, did not permit your Ministers to re∣late any thing to you of certainty. The Lord Don Mario, who is five years elder then the Pope, is beloved of his Holiness, as much as the tie and relation of kindred between them, and the
respect he hath ever had for him does require, with∣out having, however received any other favour: because the said Lord Don Mario having for the most part had but a mean fortune, could nor assist him, being young, any otherwise than by wishing he might arrive to that grandeur, and by presaging his felicity, the little wealth that came to his share be∣ing allotted to other uses. And as he nothing at all resembles the Pope in visage, so likewise are their manners and genius very different. The one is lean, and the other is fat: the one is great, and the other little: the one is slow and mild, and the other is prompt and severe: the one is addicted to study and learning, the other never applies himself to it: the the one is of a high spirit, and ever undertaking great things, the other burns with covetousness, and pleases himself with nothing but in seeking out the means to amass much Treasure: And because the Pope hath a good opinion of his integrity, he hath given him the Government of Rome, in what con∣cerns the means to maintain abundance or plenty, and to content the people. But instead of that, there is nothing else heard over all the City but complaints against his Ministers or Officers, who buy and ingross before the season, to retail and sell it to advantage, and who have other Monopolies, not onely of Profits, which none till his time had ever thought on or practis'd, but likewise all those which custome had allowed under other Popes, whose nearest kindred ever manag'd them. In the present Government there is this besides, that they do what they can to improve the Offices more than ordinary, which are us'd to belong to the Pope's kindred, by such ways and subtilties as were never heretofore made trial of.
In the Government of Borgo, where the Lord Don Mario exercising his jurisdiction, makes that of Governor of Rome to cease with a notable augmen∣tation of the Profits of his Tribunal, he makes use of so much rigour, that every day one hears nothing but lamentations, and by his inexorableness to shew favour, he makes the present Government to be∣come more and more odious. It hath seldome hap∣ned to me to have had any affairs with his Excel∣lency, because it belongs not to his Office to med∣dle with any matters which the Pope treats of with other Princes, unless he have an express Commissi∣on; yet did I not omit to wait upon him at those times we are wont to renew our complements; and I ever brought away particular assurances of the great esteem he hath for your most serene Lord∣ships. The Lady Berenice his Wife, although she were born in a City where they seldome live after the Court fashion, hath so admirably fashion'd her self to it in the short time she lived at Rome, that she is able at present to teach others: which we must not wonder at, since whatever the speaks is naturally ac∣compani'd with such a certain kind of modesty and affability, as gains the affection and attracts the re∣spect of all those that converse with her. She may be about 48 years of age. She is rarely admitted to the Pope's presence; nor does she seek very much to crave his favour, it being so enjoyned her at her first appearance in Rome, that so by her abstaining to intermeddle in things not concerning her, the Court might perceive how odious it was for the Niece of Pope Innocent to delight in the management of all affairs; wherein he that suffered it was much more blameable than her self.
The Cardinal Flavio Chigi, is a young man of 29 years, of a mean heighth, black hair'd, and his visage round and fat, of a constitution mixt betwixt a San∣gnine & Melanchollique. He would enjoy his health more perfectly were he but moderate in his diet, wherein he exceeds: for he eats much, & very nourish∣ing meats, without regarding the precepts given him for the preservation of his health. It is said likewise, that he's not so moderate as he ought to be in his plea∣sures of the flesh, which obliges him oftner than might be expected from his youth, to keep his bed: but the Physitians, because the Cardinal forbids them, do not tell the Pope the true reasons of his confinement, for fear his Holiness should have an ill opinion of him, and look upon him as a debauche', that loves both Wine and Women too much. I cannot affirm any thing with certainty of his ability in affairs, because if he be able to do no more than he does, I must say, that he can do but little, since one gets no∣thing from him but complements, fair excuses, or promises, which in the end turn to nothing, making all his answers speak either of the repug∣nance he met with in his Holiness, or some other motive, that was occasion of the refusal, or delay of an Affair. And for this reason, I thought it far better in any thing of importance to go my self directly to the Pope, than to make use of the intercession of the Cardinal, who being for the most part diverted by his Pastimes, either forgets some of those circum∣stances which are very essential to a business, which might make the success the more easie, or elso ac∣quiesces with the first denial, or difficulty the Pope makes in it; and this brings afterwards a double trou∣ble, first to inform him quite anew, and then to take off some prejudice or misconstruction it may before
have left on his spirit. I have been forc'd to steer the same course, when I hapned to have any Petition to present, to obtain the provisions of some benefits for any such person as had deserved well, either of the State or the Embassie it self, because if I reli'd upon the promise of the Cardinal, I commonly found my self deceived. He would send me back to the Car∣dinal Dater that Signs such Writings, assuring me, that the Pope referred himself wholly in matters of Collation of Benefices to him. So that perceiving it was pure weakness of judgment it proceeded from, or the little care he took to do me any courtesie, I never afterwards made any great account of his mediation; when I had occasion to treat of any thing that required dispatch: because this Cardinal, who is called the Master, does exercise his Mastership more in spending his time merily, and avoiding the most he can all troublesome affairs that disturb his mind, than in rendring himself considerable, as he might be, in an employment that gives him the greatest authority. This Cardinal does not show any great desire of heaping up riches, because, per∣haps, having no Nephews issued from Brothers, and finding his Branch ends in him, he little cares to ac∣quire much Treasure to enrich the Descendants of his Cousin Don Augustin, on whom otherwise all the advantages that Fortune can bestow on a Man, will fall. In things indifferent this Cardinal hath ever treated me very civilly, and hath shewed me a par∣ticular affection; and truly I believe, if he had but more courage to undergo the part he acts, by his means, one might receive greater favours of his Ho∣liness, than those which now come from him ordi∣narily but by little and little. He shows, that he is vers'd in our History, for he relates from time to
time our happy success, and he says freely, that Italy would be very unhappy, had she not had this Re∣publique for a Bulwark, which hath bounded the ambition of Strangers, and repelled the rage and incroachments of Barbarians. When I took leave of his Excellence, I could not desire greater expres∣sions of his affection than those he used, accompany∣ing them with protestations, that he would pass the bounds his Holiness had prescribed him, to give all kind of satisfaction to your Excellencies in the matters then in hand. These are his own words, It is not reasonable that the discontent for particular affairs should cause a prejudice to that which concerns the General, which is, to maintain the Grandeur of that State inseparable with the splendor of Italy. The Lord Don Mario hath no other Son than this Cardinal, but he hath besides two Daughters, married at Siena in noble Families, that have but moderate Fortunes, proportionate to the condition of the Family of the Chigi, in the time they were married: and these are they that showed themselves not long since at Rome, where they were exceeding well receiv'd and carress'd by their Father and their Mother, and the Cardinal Chigi: but they were not received with so many tokens of affection by Don Augustin, for the reasons that I shall declare: I can∣not certainly tell, whether they obtained a compe∣tency from the Pope to maintain them in the con∣dition they are in, because things were carried with a great deal of circumspection in not making known what was done, for fear the Court should think that the Pope wasted the Demesns of St. Peter, to put his kindreds Wives in a handsome condition; and for fear likewise of giving some cause of jealousie to
Don Augustin, who expecting hereafter to be Chief of the Family, could not but with trouble behold so many others, that were not of the Pope's Masculine Line, thus gratifi'd or enrich'd: It is certain how∣ever, that the Lord Don Mario and his Wife, did not let them return empty handed, but gave them a share of what they had stored up, and do endeavour to encrease with so much Art and Industry. But let us proceed to the other Branch descended, as I said, from Augustin Chigi, which consists of two Lords, Don Augustin and Sigismond. As for the first, who may be about 24 years of age, he is naturally merry, very pleasing and amiable. He never appli'd himself at all to study, but in those Exercises as befits a Gentleman. He loves to pass his time as well as any man, and cares very little to heap up any thing, because he knows there are those that do it for him: As soon as ever he came to Rome, they thought of providing a Wife for him, and cast their eyes upon the best Match in the whole Court, to wit, the Grand-daughter of the Prince Mark Antony Borghese. But they could not bring it to pass with that facility they imagin'd, because the Prince, being a man that was very wary, especially when it concerned the in∣terest of his Family, scoffed at the Proposition, say∣ing, That he should take that Alliance for a very great honor, but first desired to see Don Augustin have grea∣ter wealth and dignity, that so his Granchild might at least be able to keep a rank suitable to her quality and merits. These excuses the Prince made were not very pleasing to the Pope, who at the first word would have had him made more account of his Alliance
than any other consideration whatsoever. For this cause the business hung a long while in suspence, but still with repeated applications of Love and Courtship from the Lord Don Augustin, who follow'd it with the more heat, as having the Constable Co∣lonnes for his Rival, a young man of most excellent qualities, and towards whom the Princess seemed to have a greater inclination than for himself. But the Prince Borghese's death hapning thereupon, and the Tutelage falling to the Princess her Grand-mother, in a few days, by the mediation of the Prin∣cess Rossano her mother, this Match was concluded, considerable for her great Dowry, which was one hundred and fourscore thousand Crowns, besides what might hereafter fall to her by succession, the House of the Borgheses having but one more Heir, a young Lord of a somewhat melanchollique consti∣tution, who nevertheless about the same time, out of divers good considerations, would needs wed ano∣ther young Lady, having more regard to her Beauty and Virtue, than her Riches. Don Augustin, as well as his Holiness, thought, by the contrivance of this Match, which was celebrated with all the Pomp imaginable, that they had established the happiness of their Family on the best foundation that could be; In effect, the Lady being an extradinary Beauty, and brought up under the Discipline of her Grand-mother, a very Religious person, there could be nothing more desired upon that account; and he hath already begun to taste the fruits of it, the Prin∣cess having given him the marks of her fertility by the birth of a young Daughter she hath brought him. This does not, however, hinder Don Augustin from diverting himself elsewhere according as his temper and fancy leads him, and his great inclination to
pleasure, when it comes in his thoughts. This ful∣ness of all content making him forget his first con∣dition, hath so puff'd him up with pride, that he seems to take no notice of those who passing by sa∣lute him in the streets: which likewise makes him not so much beloved as his other fairer qualities deserve. Nay, it is not long since he made shew of the little respect or regard he had for persons of great con∣dition; for having taken some distaste at the pla∣cing or fitting of the Constable Colonnes, he ap∣pointed the Cavalier de la Ciaja his Uncle to do a very disobliging act, by thrusting the Constable out of his place at a Comedy, whereat the Colonnes be∣ing offended, the Pope was extreme angry, and would have it taken up by any means whatever; as it was afterwards done, but in the name of the Ca∣valier, who was but an instrument in that actions but this insulting left a great deal of discontent on the spirits of the Colonnes against Don Augustin, who was the principal author of it. A while after his Nuptials, he purchased in the Province of the Patrimony, for seventy thousand Crowns, the Principality of Farnese, which is said to be a Fief of the Empire of four thousand Crowns Revenue. He hath also purchased a considerable Palace for his Family: but besides these, he pur∣chases little, living at vast expences, but upon hopes that the Pope's long life will furnish him with ways enough to enrich and raise his Family to as brave a heighth as the greatest of the preceding Popes. I have had divers occasions to speak with him of his Marriage and other affairs; and he hath ever given me testimony of a great esteem and particular
affection, which proceeded, as he told me, from the Pope's good-will, from whom I truly never heard any thing, but what was much in praise of this Se∣rene Republique. I have observed likewise, that the Princess his Wife, though she were but a Novice in the way of treating the Ministers of Princes, hath now informed her self so far, as to let them know what satisfaction she receives by the devoirs they render her, and how much she is obliged to their civility. It remains now to speak of Don Sigismond, who arrived at Rome but a few weeks before my depar∣ture. He is a Youth of twelve years of age, and seems to have much of his Brother's way, and, forasmuch as can be noted in him at present, is very fair con∣dition'd, and of so much judgment, as promises he will in time prove somewhat. As soon as ever he came, the Pope delighted to reason with him some∣times, thereby to discover his vivacity; and was ever well satisfi'd. Don Augustine will do all he can to have him made Cardinal. But if the Pope fol∣lows his own Maxims, he should not favour him therein, having affirmed it a horrid thing to behold such Under-Branches in the Sacred Colledge. However, we may believe there is nothing but he may do, since he hath already begun to exceed all that he at first propounded to have done. In the in∣terim, this little Nephew hath already several Pen∣sions, and if the Pope survive his Infancy, it may then be easier to obtain a Cardinals Hat for him. There are two Nephews by the Pope's Sister, who married into the Family of the Bichi; the one
is he that was made Cardinal at the last promotion with the Father Sforza Pallavicino, and the other is the Prior, who having resided somewhile near your Excellencies, in quality of Receiver for the Religion of Malta, and having likewise been three times with the Squadron of the Popes Gallies at Candia, in quality of Lieutenant General, hath made himself fully acquainted to your Excellencies. As touching the first, I have no great matter to say of him, for having not been long at Rome, I could not perfectly know him: It is said, however, that he would have been a better Bishop than a Cardinal; for he hath made it appear that he can govern a Church well, which is that of Osime, where he is Prelate, but he hath not yet shown that he hath the Talent to go thorough any great affairs; nor did I trouble my self with any further information. I did reve∣rence him as I ought, when occasion profer'd to complement him, and I also took my leave of him at parting, very well satisfi'd with the manner of his reception, and the sentiments he hath for this Republique. But as for the Prior, whom common Fame com∣mends as a man of great merits, he never made me so happy as to know wherein that Virtue consists, since it is restrained within a perfect obedience to those that can do him good, or raise him to some degrees higher than he yet stands; for he is ob∣served to make such profound reverences to the Pope's Nephews, that the lowest of their servants would not perhaps do the like. But as for his know∣ledge in commanding at Sea, and taking his ad∣vantages either to attaque, or hotly pursue an Ene∣my, or in distributing the publick Treasure ordained
to that end, I shall not need to waste time in re∣lating it to your Excellencies, since it was your selves informed me how little benefit had been reaped by the Popes Galleys in these parts, when commanded by this Cavalier. It is certain, that the last year there was a great deal of Treasure put into his hands, and it is as certain by the accounts that have been calculated without his knowledge, he can∣not have expended the one half. But there are none so confident as to advertize the Pope of these mis∣demeanors, because he having so good an opinion of him, would think it all to be onely spleene and envy that could be alledged against him: and therefore you commanded me very prudently to abstain from all complaints, for fear of withdrawing the Pope's good will and forwardness in pursuing the succour you demanded of him, which, though it were not dispiseable, became so notwithstanding, by a not exe∣cuting of the Pope's true intentions therein. Which made me (though the Cardinal Chigi perceived some∣what of these miscarriages, to whom I might have opened my self with much freedom and assurance, and neither Pope nor Prior should have known what I said, that Cardinal having so little inclination for him) obey your Lordships most punctually in what you commanded. But the common complaints hav∣ing no been kept so close, but they came to that Car∣dinal's ear; he one day, perhaps to oblige me to speak, told me, That he admired that the Prior, who so much desired to gain honor and renown, bad not made some enterprize of himself, since he found it unfit to un∣dertake any joyntly with others: But lifting up my shoulders, I onely said, That it might be, the bad for∣tune of the Republique hindred such men, though very skilful in the Art of War, and valiant, from showing
any marks of their great courage; The Cardinal per∣ceiving he could get nothing else out of me, said smiling, That the Prior had had the good luck to be prized more than he diserved, but yet was unhappy in not being able to maintain that good opinion had been conceived of him. The two Branches of the House of the Chigi, who otherwise do not agree very well, united together to hinder his being made a Cardinal, and it seemed to them they had done much in ob∣taining their ends herein, they judging the Prior to be a man of a great wit, and one who, as soon as he could have had the power to have spoken freely, would have made a division in their House; they have more acquaintance with him than my self, and by consequence may know him better. As for my own part, I never could find any eminent virtue in him, nor do I believe, he deserves to rise to any great ho∣nor, to which he pretends to mount by his dissem∣bling humour. There is not among so few kindred as have com∣mand, and who are in a direct line, so great concord as there ought to be, and this proceeds from a vain spirit which makes every one of them aspire to rule. The Lord D. Mario pretended, that he, as the most antient, and next to him, his Son at this time a Cardinal, ought to be head of the Family, and that by right it belonged to him to encrease their num∣ber by marriage. But the Pope, who had a greater affection for his disceased Brother, than for him that is living, was of another mind, and from hence arose the ill-will that hath still encreased amongst them. The Pope never did any good to any of D. Mario's Family, but D. Augustin interpreted it partiality. He said, It appeared to Cardinal Chigi but a small mat∣ter
to have the quality of Patron, and the supreme Superintendence of the greatest affairs, unless they allowed him together with this the Authority of granting all Acts of Grace as he pleased. He added, That it was little benefit to him to be the Son of a Father, who with his purse had raised the Pope to that heighth of honor, if now, whilst he was in pos∣session, he might nor receive the profits and rewards deserved for his Father's former readiness▪ and libe∣rality. What will become, said he, of the heaps or of mony D. Mario gathers up, unless to enrich the Houses of Strangers? meaning his Daughters who were married at Siena, leaving those naked and un∣furnished which are of the blood of the Chigi, who ought still to abound in goods and riches. To which the Cardinal Chigi repli'd, That the Authority and Superintendence they had given him stood him in no stead, but to trouble his brain, for which he had a very great aversion; whereas they had left to the other the enjoyment of all the delights and applause of the Court: That D. Augustin tasted more con∣tent in the freedom he lived in, being disingag'd of the management of all publick affairs, than himself could meet with amidst all that power and authority they had invested him withall: And thus neither of them, because of these contentious pretences, which though but whispered, are apparent and known to all, do enjoy that entire satisfaction they might, were their minds but united, and they contented with those degrees of eminent Dignities which Fortune hath lifted them too. The Pope knows nothing of all this, they fearing very much to give him any cause of displeasure; and from this consideration his Holiness does sometimes confer favours upon the one, sometimes upon the other, thereby to keep
them from all kinde of jealousie. He permitted D. Mario to let his Daughters and their Husbands come to Rome, and would have them there attended and served as became those of his own blood. He consented that D. Augustin should send for his little Brother to abide with him; but neither of them will remain contented when their Authority ceases, which disquiets them far more than a necessary ser∣vitude would do. The Pope hath now at Siena, as I have already said, many others of his kindred, who are not con∣sidered much as yet, because they are of more re∣mote degrees. They may, after the others are suf∣ficiently inriched, hope for some good from his Ho∣liness, if he continue long alive, he being natu∣rally much inclined to favour those of his own Coun∣try, by employments proportionate to the abilities of his fellow-Citizens: there are already some that have principal Offices at Court, who are design'd for Cardinals, and there are other places reserved for others, when an occasion presents: To which no∣thing can be said, but the Pope deserves a great deal of praise, in that he forgets not to do well for his own Country, to which, next to God, we owe our selves; and in that he does not imitate the pride of such, who being once absent loose the very remem∣brance of it, and never take the least care for any one that had a being there. But forasmuch as the Ministry of the Pope's kin∣dred serves onely for splendor and state, and not in any thing essential; and that in pressing and weighty affairs it is requisite he be fortifi'd with the assistance of such as have a clear insight into the management
of great Negotiations, from whom, upon occasion, prudent and solid councel may be taken. I have esteem'd it fit to joyn, to the Potraict I have made of his Holiness kindred, a Character of those who are made use of, in the most important interests of the Popedome, and such on whose will depends most com∣monly the resolution of what is of the greatest con∣sequence. THe first that presents, is the Cardinal Rospigliosi, born at Pistioe, who is Secretary of State; One cannot speak so well of him, but he will deserve more, nor can I think there could be found a man worthier of that Office, and the Pope, who knows him well, hath often said, that he had found a Se∣cretary according to his own heart. He hath a great deal of judgment, and is sincere and disingag'd from all interests; He is not obstinate in his opinions; when he hath deliver'd them, he takes pleasure in having them moderated and censured; according as the ser∣vice of his Master does require; He is indifferent in his sentiments, and although it be the common be∣lief, that having been Nuncio in Spain, where he be∣came extremely beloved of the King and Court, he might bias that way, and cherish some inclinations for the advantage of that Crown; yet it is false, be∣cause in my time there were some troubles in that Court, which might have been appeased by the Me∣diation of a Minister so much in credit; but the more they believed he took the Spaniards part, the more he abstained from medling with their interests. He did all he was able not to give audience, not desiring any other employment than his own charge, to
which he applies himself with all the exactness possi∣ble, carrying every night to his Holiness all his af∣fairs digested, and taking himself the pains to exa∣mine the Letters, which relate to any interest that may be any way considerable. I can say, that he never seemed to be displeased or unwilling to hear me speak; But it is true, that I had a care never to demand audience of him, but in pressing and earnest occasions, and always had the satisfaction that could be expected from a Minister, obliged to swerve the least that possibly could be from the will of his Prince. Now this ought to be the more considered, because if the Holy Chair should happen to become vacant at this time, I esteem his hopes very well grounded, having the Spaniards and the Great Duke on his side, and probably too the Heads of the Fa∣ctions that would predominate in the Conclave, that is to say, Barberino, who in Urban's time first moved the wheel of his fortune, and Chigi who cherishes him most, as being his Creature. The second is the Cardinal Pallavicino, of whom the Popes make great esteem, as well for the reasons I pointed out before, as because of the very good opi∣nion he hath of him, holding it for certain, that he would never give him any counsel, which were not good and advantagious for the Church. To tell the truth, he is a man that hath very good intentions, and knows much, but he fails in what all those or∣dinarily do, that have devoted themselves to a solitary life, and who profess a different way of living from those of the world, being extremely obstinate in their opinions. I have discoursed with him on several oc∣casions, even when he was a Jesuit: and although for the interest of his order, which is now received
into the favour of your most serene Republique, he seemed extremely desirous to do me some pleasure, yet I never could truly obtain any thing from him. He hath a thousand excuses to defeat one of those good offices he might do. Since he was made a Car∣dinal, though it were expected one might hope for somewhat more, yet I have found him standing upon his guard more than ever, pleading the pretence of some command the Pope had laid on him not to intermeddle in any affair that were not agreeable to him. In a word, I am not satisfi'd with him, al∣though he often mention the deserts of his Ance∣stors from this Republique, and the obligations, which those of his Order do in particular owe unto him. The Pope refers much to him in matters of Theology and Conscience, and confers with him, too, about those of State, but rather to know than to fol∣low his advice, because most times he looks upon things according to the rigour of the Ecclesiastical Laws. The Spanish Ambassadour was not very well pleased with him, who when all the other Cardinals had been to visit his Wife, he would not, upon a pretence, that although he had changed the habit of his Order, yet he hath not changed the Rules, which prohibits them to be amongst Women but in cases of great necessity. This kind of behaviour, which is an affected singularity, renders him odious to a great many people. He did not oblige your Lordships, when he put forth his History in answer of the Book of the deceased Padre Paul of the Order of Servants, wherein speaking too freely of a Mi∣nister whom you have so much cherished, he gave you cause to oppose him, as you did at the publica∣tion of that History, of which having said something to me by way of excuse, I presently shifted the dis∣course,
that I might not be obliged to enter upon such tetchy subjects, upon which if we had pro∣ceeded, he might have alledged many Metaphysical distinctions, which it is not my profession to answer; but had he treated of that business in a way more suitable to that subject, I am confident I should have been too hard for him, and put him at a stand. In divers things the Pope makes use of the Car∣dinal Corrado, a Ferrarian, and principally in those differences which Secular Princes have concerning Ecclesiastical matters, wherein his Holiness is but ill served, for that Cardinal is a pure Legist▪ that hath no knowledge in the affairs of the world, who alleages a decisive Text on any matter in question, without any regard to the decency or respect is to be had towards a State, or any moderate inter∣pretation where required; for he never makes any account of this certain Maxim, Summum jus summa injuria. This man hath, and does continually give distaste to the Cardinals and other Ministers of Princes, because he keeps himself still to the rigour of the Canons, and will distribute the Benefices ac∣cording to his own fancy, and always upon pretence that it is the Pope's will, which he turns as himself pleases under a fair appearance of Sanctity. But the disgusts he practises, and is accustomed to put upon all the world, does more hurt to himself than to any one else, for having been so unadvised as to discover his base humor, it hath drawn the hatred of all upon him: So that for the Chair there is nothing to be expected on his part. I never had but little satisfa∣ction from him. And indeed, since I began to know his defects, I never took the pains to do him any courtesie that might acquire his favour, those kind
of persons thinking they do in same manner sacrifice themselves, whensoever they do but in the least act against their own opinions to do  man a little pleasure. I must also bring into this number Signior Ban∣dinelli, of Siena great Master of the Apostolique Pa∣lace, an old Courtier, refined in the Great Duke's Court, from whence the Pope called him, and took him to his own service, knowing the noble manner of his acting. He is not a man of a very profound knowledge, but of great experience; which makes the Pope take great delight in conferring with him, who is ordinarily well satisfi'd with his advice. Amongst other qualities that makes him considera∣ble, there is one that is a very particular, which is, that he is descended from Alexander III, who ha∣ving been forced to she, and quit his ordinary abode, made his retreat in this Republique, who received him in their bosome, and gave him their protection, which he made use of to repress the audaciousness of the Emperor Frederick, that persecuted him. He glories more in this, than in any thing besides, and hath a particular veneration for the merits of your Serene Lordships. There is no one more certain of a Cardinal's Hat than he. It is due to him, for ha∣ving quitted his own Country, where he was very much in favour, to go to Rome. When he hath a Cardinal's Hat, the whole Court, who already be∣lieve he deserves the supremst degree, will be ra∣vish'd for joy. Signior Fagnano, of the State of Urbin, a Prelate well known at Court for his being blind, but much more for being so clear sighted in the Superinten∣dence,
which the Pope hath given him over the affairs of the Regulars, deserves that I should make mention of him in this Treatise, because thorow his means, I have sometimes made an end of a difficult business, which otherwise I should scarce have over∣come. This Prelate hath a great deal of affection for this Serene Republique, as having been the first that found out the invention to draw mony from the suppression of the unprofitable Religious Or∣ders, as also from the Scandalous; so is he likewise still of opinion, that since the same necessity still remains, they should make use of the same means of supply, there being possibility and reason enough to continue it. But that design having been inter∣rupted by certain zealous persons, upon some other pretexts which they found out; he endeavoured to seek out some other projects to assist your Serene Lordships therein. And truly he might have found out something effectual, did they as well see the dangers at Rome, as they do in these places that are so near bordering unto it. However, I did not omit to give this Prelate many thanks for his great good∣will, and I believe it will be very fit that you should return him thanks likewise: I think also, that his Ex∣cellency Sagredi, who carries several Curiosities to present to the Pope's Family, should bestow some part of them on the good man, who hath, and may yet render upon all occasions, all those good Offices which can be expected from the confidence his Holi∣ness puts in his advice, and the great credit he gives him. The Father Virgilio Spada, one of the Order of the Congregation of St. Philip Neri, and Brother to the old Cardinal Spada, hath some power with the
Pope; and upon this perswasion I have sometimes endeavoured to get him to serve me upon occasion, but I found him armed with a thousand excuses to evade doing me any good: whereat I did not after∣wards very much wonder, knowing he onely sought the advantage of his Family, being very greedy after his own interest, and more ready to put the Pope in mind of filling his own purse, than seeking any largess for others: This made me forbear to solicite him, guessing the little profit that was like to re∣dound, to make trial of other ways which your Lord∣ships are not unacquainted withal, although they all proved fruitless, and too weak, when it concerned his Holiness to disburse any monies, which is not kept closer in his own Coff5ers, than it is by all the Court Prelates, who think to gain credit and repute from his Holiness, by exhorting him to preserve that Metall, which above all things makes the Ecclesi∣astical Principality be highly esteem'd, as if it were not rather the Dignity and Sanctity of the Sove∣reign Priesthood that render'd the Papacy Maje∣tick, than the reputation of having great riches. But we need not doubt but their abuses being ar∣ived to the heighth we find them, the Ecclesiastick Authority would be very weak and languishing, were  not sustained by a Temporal Power; whereas if hose Priests would lay aside their vanity of agran∣zing themselves, and onely make good their just egrees and privilege, the Church would soon be ed above all other Powers whatsoever. For to ay truth, Whosoever beholds the Court of Rome sur∣assing in Magnificence and State, the Courts of l other Princes, cannot but wonder by what means, pon so slender a foundation, and so far from the esign and intentions of her first Founders, she should
have raised her self to so proud a heighth. And al∣though every one knows it proceeded from the Li∣berality and Magnificency of Temporal Princes, yet it cannot but appear strange to see the Roman Church turn those Benefits, she hath received from them, against themselves to their prejudice; the Ca∣nonists and other Emissaries of that Court studying nothing more, than how to strengthen and extend their Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and abase and di∣minish the Secular, if they possibly could. This point, wherewith you have been so often enter∣tain'd, deserves yet still to be put into your memo∣ries, because without any diving into the depths of a profound Speculation, it may be observed, that considering the by-ways the Popes do tread, and withal reflecting on the sincere conduct of Secular Princes, of necessity it must follow, that the Eccle∣siastical Monarchy will become Mistris of the World, and the Secular fall and become her Servant. Your Serene Signioy hath a great deal of Piety, and a particular Veneration for that Holy and Apo∣stolique Tribunal; who likewise hath a singular good-will towards her: but yet she knows well how far she ought to show her veneration; and herein she carries her self prudently, being very well ad∣vertised of those things which do insensibly lead the Court of Rome to enlarge her Phylacteries more and more: And this Note shall suffice by the way. And since we are now upon the discourse of the Grandeur of the Court of Rome, it will not be amiss to show what it is, because as it appears great by looking onely upon those things which makes the Courts and Dwellings of other▪ Princes considerable, yielding, in effect, neither for number of Ministers
or Officers to none in Christendome, it will seem yet far greater, by having for Assessors and Counsellors seventy Kings, for they give that Title to the Car∣dinals in the Act of their Creations; and therefore it is that they are vested in Purple, and are served almost like Kings: and when together with this Dig∣nity they have acquired a great Reputation, their Amity is sought by the most puissant Princes, who by publick or private Pensions endeavour to make them their friends, because of the privilege they have of Electing a Pope, and what by consequence must follow thereupon, the Soveraign Dignity lights upon one of themselves; and this is in short the cause of all their arrogancy, which otherwise is often re∣duced to contempt enough, besides the vexation of not being able to obtain any grace, unless they be the Pope's Favourits. It may be expected that a Pope, who hath so excellent a judgment to discern how those persons ought to be qualifi'd that are fit to be aggregated in that Sacred Colledge, as Pope Alexander hath, should promote none but persons worthy of his choice: and, indeed, the Court hi∣therto hath no reason to complain, since he hath ad∣mitted none but such as deserved very much, and it is hoped it will be so stll for the future. Now, though it would be needful to make an exact search and in∣quiry into the quality of the present Cardinals to know them thoowly; yet that your Lordships may have some knowledge of him; that shall one day be raised to the Chair, I shall make no difficulty to un∣dertake it; and I shall acquit my self with much bre∣vity, because there are many other things to be ex∣amined, which your Serene Lordships will be glad to know.
The Cardinal Charls de Medices, Uncle to the Great Duke of Toscany, is the Dean of the Sacred College. He never shows himself at Rome but when the Chair is vacant, he takes more pleasure at his own home, being free both from clamour and ex∣pence. He leads the Spanish Faction, not without a great deal of hopes from the Great Duke, who long∣eth for nothing more than to have a Pope that may favour him, because of the troubles and traverses the Popes put him to, who little consider him. He was not at the Court whilst I was there. But the oblige∣ing humor of that Prince is not unknown to your Lordships by other means, as likewise the great joy he ever expresses at the least news of your prosperity. He is a man that speaks little, hath a good wit, and ardently desires the advantages of his Family: to serve whom he rather suffer'd a long while in the Conclave, then gave way to elect any person that might not be pleasing to the Great Duke. Francis Barberino, who in the time of Urban and his Domination made some escapes, being hurri'd thereto rather by the impetuosity of his nature, than out of any evil intent, perceives at present that it is in vain to trouble the world, having extremely pre∣judic'd himself by discovering the violence of his passions. He hath lost all his hoes of ever attain∣ing to sit in the Holy Chair, which his Uncle Urban held, though otherwise both for his knowledge, and the candour of his mind, he is worthy to be placed therein. Which evidently shows, that innocency of life is no sufficient motive to oblige the Cardinals to chuse a Man for Pope, it hapning very often, that together with the greatest Sanctity there may be joyned some other such defects, as were able to put
the whole world in a confusion. Nevertheless Bar∣berino hath a little recover'd his credit under Inno∣cent, they having noted the inconveniencies hap∣ning in that Popes manner of Government, which they also found in Urban's time; but with more mo∣deration. Although his Family inclines towards the French, yet he hath ever shewed that he hath more regard for the Spaniard, his humor suiting better with the Genius of that Nation. As for the affection he hath for your Serene Republique, I cannot speak so fully of it, but I shall leave somewhat untold. Spada de Bresighele, which is a place in Romagnia, is a man more considerable for his Virtues than his Birth, and who for this reason deserves more ap∣plause than he yet hath. But it seems they do not look upon him with so good an eye because of the prosperity of his Family, who are lately in possession of much riches, which some of the oldest amongst them have acquired by their Farms and Marriages; and which have also been since multiplied thorow the industry of this same Cardinal, and the Father Virgilio Spada his Brother, who hath not been want∣ing in striving to acquire wealth, and raise his House, though he make profession of a retired life. This Cardinal hath many very good qualities be∣sides, which make him worthy of a higher degree▪ but that which hinders him from rising, is the envy many have against him, and the great number of Nevous he hath, which are like to be encreased by those Marriages they have of late contracted. I must add to this the little confidence the Spaniards have in him, who think him a very subtile man, and one that hath a great inclination towards the French. He hath a high esteem for this Republique, and hath as
much resentment in all her troubles and dangers as any one whatsoever. Sachetti, a Florentine, hath entred Pope twice into the past Conclaves, but still came forth again Car∣dinal, to the great regret of good people, and such as are acquainted with his virtues. The Spaniards did not murmr so much against his elevation, as the Florentines, who endeavoured all, they could to thwart his Election, and I believe t now proceeds from no other cause, but onely they having been once engaged to exclude him, imagine that he will for ever resent the injury they had done him, al∣though he may have served them much since. In∣deed, there are few in the Colledge so worthy, if we consider all his good qualities. He hath made himself the more fully known, by that constancy wherewith he hath undergone those disappoint∣ments, and the sollicitations he made to Mazarine, to lay aside all those jealousies which might make him oppose the exaltation of the Cardinal Chigi, whom he esteemed more worthy of the Chair than any other, in a time wherein his own hopes were not desperate. He keeps the same reputation still at Court which he had formerly, and if his advanced age would let him survive the present Pope, he would ever have the same applause as formerly. He is commonly very indifferent in his affection to other Nations, seldome favouring one more than another; but I dare confidently say, that he is partial for your Republique. Ginetti of Vlrye is a Cardinal, who though he be rich, and have a great deal of experience, yet does nothing that gains much commendations, or
that makes him esteemed worthy to be raised higher than he now is. There is no other reason than the poorness of his spirit appearing in all his actions, and his insatiable desire to nich himself; whence they draw this consequence, that should he be mounted higher, few should partake of his Gran∣deurs or Bounty; add hereto, that having been one of Urban's greatest Confidents and Creatures, he is entirely possessed with those Maxims which are no∣thing convenient for the good of Christendome. He omitted nothing within his powe to make himself Pope the last times the Chair was vacant, but al∣though he found some Cardinals his fiends, who listned to him in hopes of partaking of his favours, yet he found no body for him amongst the Princes, who cannot promise much good to themselves from a person so wedded to his own interests, and so little inclined to favour others I know no, indeed, what to say of him. He makes profession of much devo∣tion, but I should hardly ever trust a man, who be∣sides his other defects, hath the reputation of per∣fectly knowing how to dissemble. The Cardinal Antonio Barberino is a man, who all his life time hath ever been even gentility and gene∣rosity it self. He is engaged as much as can be possi∣ble to France, but in such a manner however, that he does not make himself odious to other rival Nations, because he seaks of all the world with a huge deal of respect; and brings his affairs so about, that none can justly complain of him. He reaps many ad∣vantages from the Crown of France, which never∣theless does not make him the richer, but rather the contrary, since he consumes more money for them than he receives, as well in entertaining his friends
perpetually whilst he is in France, as in advancing the interests of that Crown. And by reason of the great inclination he hath for that Country, where they live according to his humor after a very free manner, he would rather make his residence there than in any part of the world; but it is observed, that Mazarin does not look on him with a good eye, perhaps out of jealousie, because his carriage, which is so fair and pleasing, might be a disadvantage to him, while he is more than any man alive in favour with his King. He was the first who, at the publica∣tion of the Peace, manifested the good-will he hath for France, and that in such a noble and splendid manner as was thought wothy of his generosity. The affection he bears that Nation does not make him, however, forgetful of what is due to the Princes of Italy, and particularly to your Serene Lordships, whose merits he never mentions but with admiration. Colonne, a German, is the Head of his Family, by the disposal of the deceased Don Pbilip Colonne his Father, who having cleared his debts by his good husbandry, thought sit to recommend the direction thereof to that Son who seemed to be most wary and sparing: Nor was he deceived in his choice, since this man, considering his riches, which are great, especially if we reckon what he hath from the Church, is so reserved, when any mony is to go from him, that it is presumed, during the long time he hath managed their Estate, he hath heaped up a very great quantity, taking much delight in hoarding up continually, but never expending any thing in a superfluous manner. To which the Suits he opposed by Law, which the Spaniards and Mini∣sters
of that State had for a long time maintained till his Fathers death, have not a little contributed, who thinking themselves most unjustly deprived of those Honours pretended to by his Family disputed it very obstinately against him, but in the end yielded up all his antient prerogatives to him, which much augmented his Revenues, and hath gained him a very great esteem. At that time when his Holiness exhorted all those that were rich, to con∣tribute somewhat towards the assistance of your most Serene Republique, he was the onely Cardinal that excused himself, alleaging the dammage which the Plague had done him in his Estate: Nay, it hath been propounded to him onely by way of trial, to give out Mony at the highest Interest, as your most Serene Republique is wont to allow, but all was in vain; although he seems to glory in his affection to∣wards you, by which profession he thinks he hath fully compleated his devoie. Franciotti of Ica is an honest man, and of some understanding in most affairs; but these kind of ho∣nest people do not succeed so well when they have the Government in hand They take a licence in all extravagant opinions, and become obstinate and punctilious, not caring how they trouble the world, provided they can but maintain their own fancies. This man imagines that he should behave himself well enough were he in command, although he show himself but of a mean ability in ordinary matters. He was born in a Republique, and the Prelateship of his Country lighting on him, he soon put them in a condition of falling out with him, yea, and of con∣testing and quarreling with the Pope too, and that for very slight reasons. In the end, all these bro∣villeries
ve disputes having constrained him to quit his Church, he left his Family involved in such trou∣bles as have much perplexed, and brought many great losses upon him. To repair this, he lives in hopes of being Pope, but he expects it in vain, for I do not know any one that desires it. Brancaccio, a Neapolitan, though he were made a Cardinal when he thought not of it, and, as it were, by an unexpected accident, does not for all this omit any possible endeavour to mount higher: He is re∣conciled with the Spaniards, to whose shame he at∣tained that Dignity: He hath made a strict Amity with the Great Duke, and is on good terms with Barberino: in a word, he does all he can to make good, and increase his credit, which is as yet but small, because his thoughts soar too high. Some have said, that there was nothing resting but a good un∣derstanding with the French, but that being equivo∣cal, I shall take it in the best sense, from whence one may inser, that he treats with them in such a manner as may dispose them not to be against him, if he should happen to be mention'd. He seemed to me to be passionate for you, nor shall I believe he dissem∣bled much therein, having wit enough to know what your most Serene Republique hath done for the li∣berty of Italy. Harach of Bohemia comes to Rome onely when the Chair is vacant: There are few other things can oblige him to stay there, all his interest depending on the Kingdome of Bohemia, and the Imperial Court. And being a Cavalier of a very frank Na∣ture, he makes it appear, that the arts and desi∣mulation, used ordinarily in the Court of Rome, are
not pleasing to him. He hath ever testifi'd a great deal of affection for your most Serene Republique, for ought that ever. I could learn from those that pre∣ceded me in my employment; but having never been at Court in my time, I cannot tell what judgment I should have made of him, had I been acquainted with him my self. I cannot affirm any thing of the Cardinal Palotta of the Marcha: those reports which I have heard of him being very various: Some have told me that he hath strange fancies, which being paliated with the zeal of Reformation, cannot but cause a great deal of trouble and disorder. Others describe him to be a very honest man, of a good conscience; yet all this is the same onely diversifi'd, because the resolutions of these kind of spirits, or their whimseys rather, do still clash themselves: And therefore he was very little lookt upon in the last Conclave, where he con∣cealed as much as possible his desire of being Pope, yet could be not carry it so close but his Confidents discovered the extreme passion he had for it. The Pope makes no great account of him, although he have had some Legation: and there is some likeli∣hood of reason for it; because those that are lifted to the dignity of Pope, can better judge of the defects of their inferiours, than such as are their equals in authority or degree. In his Legation of Ferrara, he gave some occasion of contest to your Signiory, and therefore although he spake much of her commenda∣tions, I should never confide in him. Carpegna, of the State of Urbin, had reason enough to hope in the last Conclave, because the Great Duke and Barberino did not reject him, nor are his
qualities to be despised. But, in a word, when a Cardinal wants a certain credit which is given by popular approbation, he seldome ever attains to the Chair It cannot be denied, but that both probity and simplicity of manners do meet together in this Man. He understands and can do as much as is re∣quired in the managing of publick affairs, but as for the pressing of them on, or, if I may so say, the refining of them, he is not much applauded for being happy therein: nor during the last Conclave was there any one that could promise himself more than very mean resolutions for the publick service, under his Government: and therefore as soon as ever he was spoken of, they found that he had not a spirit great enough for so high a dignity. Nevertheless he shewed himself worthy of praise, in that whatever his hopes, and the resolutions of the Conclave were, he never seemed to trouble himself. He loves your most Serene Signiory well enough, which I have gather'd from the discourses he hath held with me, as also from the reports of such as have beard him in parti∣cular conversations, when mention hath been made of publick affairs. Filormarini of Naples hath made known his autho∣rity in those disputes he had with th King's Mi∣nisters, during the last troubles in that Kingdome. He shew'd an invincible courage upon the threats which were like to have succeeded to effects of vio∣lence against him, to make him quit that Country? But he likewise shewed a very great humility towards the Catholique King, thereby to let him know, that he was disturbed wrongfully; and his plea herein carried it against all that the greatest Ministers of that Crown could oppose against him. But by how
much he hath encreased his reputation thereby, so much hath he also therein prejudic'd himself, as to the thoughts he might have had of hopes and greater dignity, thorow that obstinacy apparent in him not to change, or remit any thing of his first resolutions, how dangerous and violent soever the attempts are against him. He was a confident servant of Barberi∣no's in the time of his prosperity, whose services have been very well rewarded. But I do not know what thanks those can promise to themselves that should help him to be made Pope, he being a man that hath a marvolous good opinion of himself, and one that believes every thing is due to his own merits. I never treated with him, he not having been at Rome in my time. Maculano, or St Clement, a Dominican, is a small Brother, who under his poor mean Frock huggs am∣bitious and high thoughts. He builds fine Castles in the aire, fancying, that as he came to be a Car∣dinal without mriting of it, so he may as well rise to the Pope's Chair. There is no quality to be found in him that can distinguish him from the vulgar. He hath little or no experience in State-affairs. He is learned as a Monk, but excells not their ordinary capacity, and hath some skill in Fortifications: But with this he is very covetous: and loves his Nepveus exceedingly, who are young people of very ill behavi∣ours: if he had the command, which God forbid, there would be matter enough of scandal. This was taken notice of, by him that could have assisted him, to wit, Barberino, who hating a licentious life, would never speak one word for him, though Ma∣culano had friends to second what he should have said, and were aged enough to pretend to the Place.
Nevertheless he may live very well at his ease, if he will content himself with the condition he is in possession of, which truly ought to satisfie him. He hath named himself for Candidate, which is to say, he aspires to the Chair, though amongst those of his own Fraternity, he could never have attained to be General of their Order. Giorio de Camerino, a servant to the House of Bar∣berino in business of small consequence, found a way by his handsome manner of serving, to gain so much upon the good-will of his Nepveus, and afterwards on Pope Urban, that having gotten much riches in his long service, he was reputed worthy to be a Car∣dinal. He is very little esteem'd at Court, his be∣haviour not being noble enough to correspond with his dignity. He keeps closely united to Barberino his Soveraign Benefactor, and in that shews he de∣served to be advanced He hath never been nomi∣nated for to be made Pope, nor is there any great hopes he should be in election, because, besides the meanness of his birth, those qualities are wanting in him which should make him worthy to stand in the rank of such as pretend to that Supreme Dignity, unless they should push him forward purposely to make him fall, and get time in the interim to nego∣tiate another's preferment with more security. Facchinetti, of Bologna, hath been employed in the highest Offices of the Court, and Nunciator of Spain, with a constant reputation of an honest man, and very able. This is a Cardinal, of whose repu∣tation they have very advantagious opinions, which when time suits will make them willingly reflect on his good qualities; and this fair opinion they have
of him he preserves, by making his ordinary residence at his Church of Spoleta; and avoiding all occasions that might forfeit it, by not concerning himself with the present Court interests, for fear lest in medling therein, instead of increasing his reputation, he should give some cause of disgust and rupture; He is a Lord of a very sweet conversation, and speaks passi∣onately for the interests of your Signiory, from whom I dare promise effects corespondant should he attain to a higher degree. Rosetti of Ferrara is a creature born, bred, and ad∣vanc'd in the bosome of Barberino, who loved him by accident, and after helped him to employments, which raised him up to be a Cardinal. He was in danger being in England during those troubles, which have encreased so long as to arrive to the strange heighth of misfortune they were then in: But a more wary Minister might have withdrawn himself without forfeiting his devoir. Being at Collen in quality of a Nuncio, he could not avoid being sus∣pected of partiality towards the Spaniards, and did together with them, breed some disorder in their af∣fairs. At Rome he did not shew himself very grateful to his Benefactor, having subjected himself to the Spaniards. In the Conclave he was almost the onely man that disapproved the Election of the present Pope. So that all these things being heaped to∣gether, one may infer, that he is not a Cardinal of any eminent vertue, although he hath been wise enough to make such good use of his time, as to have freed his Family from those inconveniences which attend a mean Fortune. He keeps himself at his Church at Faense, without any design of shewing himself much at Rome, where till those evill im∣pressions
are taken off, or forgotten, he would not be looked upon with any great good-will▪ Grimald, a Genoese, shows by his looks, that he is a man of great undertakings, from whom no other effects can be expected, but such as usually proceed from pensive spirits, which are quarels, jealousies, bold and daring enterprises, with all kind of sub∣tilties to make good his designs. This man hath had some great designs on foot already, to the prejudice of the publick peace, and that onely for some ad∣vantages to himself, without regarding the incon∣venience of others: and this was the cause, that finding he was mounted as high as he could pre∣tend, which was to have a good Church in Franc, where he might say, Here is my rest; imagining that he should be a second Mazarin, he was deceived, Mazarin desiring to reign alone, that the world might know they owed the good success of that Government to his direction. He was not at Rome in my time; those that were acquainted with him have described him to me, to be as crafty a man as any one, but yet a person wanting that address or discretion, which like Salt ought to season all the parts of Policy. I should not confide in his words, when he commends this State, because we ought not to give belief to such men, as propound no other end but their own interest. Here I should speak of Mazarin, and there might be much said of him, but your most Serene Lord∣ships are so well informed of the Person and Maxims of this great Minister, that I could say nothing which would not fall short of the knowledge you have else-where had of him; yet shall I not omit to let
you be acquainted in what esteem he is with the present Pope; which I believe is a thing worthy your knowledge, because you may from thence guess the true reason of the difficulties in those affairs which must necessarily be treated of in either Court. The Pope had very ill impressions of the Cardinal when he was Nuncio at Collen, for observing atten∣tively the reasons the Mediators alledged for a Ge∣neral Peace, he found the French had always some reservations in their answers, which did not corre∣spond, as he judged, with the equity of the Spaniards propositions; which made him fully perswaded, re∣flecting on some other inconveniencies hapning when they came to confer, that all the obstacles which re∣tarded so great a happiness for all Christedome; proceeded from the Cardinal Mazarin. But, as the ends he then propounded requir'd him not to discover his opinions therein to those Nations that were in∣teress'd, so he negotiated still with so much caution, that few or none knew what was in his thoughts. Being returned afterwards to Rome, and the place of Secretary of State being given to him, he was for∣tifi'd more than ever in the ill opinion he had con∣ceived against the Cardinal, being thereto induc'd, not onely by an increase of the difficulties in the Treaty on the French side, but likewise by the in∣jurious speeches of Pope Innocent, who had a parti∣cular aversion for Mazarin, and who always blamed him as the onely cause of the dammage and ruine which Christendome suffer'd under. Which made Alexander, being raised to the Papal dignity, (al∣though he had some reason to forget his hatred, since Mazarin condescended to his Exaltation) to become more envenom'd, because amidst the hopes he had, that his mediation might produce some good
towards a General Peace, he understood, that the ways leading thereto were more blockt up than ever, France being Leaged with England without any re∣spect to the interests of the lawful Successors of that Kingdom, or any consideration that they were of the Blood-Royal of France, not minding, as the Pope said, the Reputation of the most Christian King, which by this base alliance was even od under∣foot; whence followed, that laying aside all the Mo∣deration he had till then shewed in speaking of Ma∣zarin, one could not so much as mention the affairs of France, or those that treated of them, but his Ho∣liness would flie out to stinging injurious expressi∣ons, discovering what he had with much art con∣cealed so long before; That he took him to be the foun∣tain and spring of all the miseries in Christendom, That in him alone had the Heretiques founded all their hopes to predominate over the Catholiques, And that there was a just cause to apprehend, that from him would arise a general disturbance against the publique Peace: That this doubly displeased him, because of the wrong he did to that Dignity which he unworthily sustained; And though his Predecessors had not considered the shame that reflected on the Sacred College, in suffering this man to be the first Author of all those mischiefs, he hoped that God would give him both courage and power enough to resent, as he intended, the prejudice that was thereby done to Religion, and the advantages the en∣mies thereof had procured. If some body, under the pretence of seconding the Popes Resentment at that time, had not by a discourse suitable to his humor, endeavoured powerfully to moderate his passion, it is to be feared he would have proceeded to some greater violence and anger: But he that heard the Pope's complaints made a very prudent use of them, en∣deavouring
to wipe all those evil opinions of him out off his thoughts and memory. As for my own part, though at the beginning of my Embassie, I found the wound yet open, I omitted not, on every occa∣sion, when I thought it convenient, to insinuate to his Holiness, that these times oft required, that particu∣lar persons should in their counsel oversway Princes, and that it was an effect of great prudence to lay aside all bitterness when we treated with them, unless we would have that wound, which perhaps would heal up of it self, to become incurable by often rubbing of it: that he might have his reason likewise, which being heard, would justifie or, perhaps, expose him less to censure for such resolutions, which sometimes do not depend on his will alone, but the result and incli∣nation of other Ministers, with whom his Maxims would not suffer him to disagree. And if it were otherwise, yet however, France did not enjoy so great a happiness as to desire a War, unless it were appa∣rent that those who counselled it had very powerful motives to continue it, till they could find out a cer∣tain way to make both a good and lasting peace. These reasons sufficed to moderate the Pope's com∣plaints a little, yet was he not so well satisfi'd, but rejecting him he said, That when ever he had a mind to obtain any thing of his King and Council, that con∣cerned his particular favour or interest, he knew how to obtain what ever he fanci'd, it being known to all to what a height and grandeur he had by his subtilties raised his Family, and those that had joyned their in∣terests with him; but, when ever it was required that he should act for the good of the Publique, his power was weak and languishing; which was a very clear argument, that he saw the augmentation of his fortune depended on a continuance of the War, which afforded
him a thousand opportunities to make new friends and creatures by the distribution of Offices, which he be∣stowed, according to his own will, upon such persons as gave him much applause, which he preferred, though it lasted but a moment, to the immortal glory he might have acquired, by delivering Christendome from so great and continual troubles, as put it in danger of being a last made the prey of Heretiques and Mahometans. In the mean while, the times of Audience appointed, were wasted in thse and the like Discourses, which troubled me exceedingly, because I foresaw, that from this Antipathy, which daily encreased, we could not but expect some great and notable prejudice would accrue to the Publique. After this, upon the first slight rumors, which were whispered of the Peace, the Pope suspected it was some new artisice of Mazarin's to lull the world asleep, and take off his hatred against him, with in∣tent to renew the War afterwards, when during the Truce he had justifi'd his pretences; but having been certainly informed that the Peace went roundly forward, and that things were brought to such a pas, that none could doubt of a good success from this Treaty; then he declared both to me and all others that he was highly pleased; but every one knew this content of his was mixt with an allay of dissatisfa∣ction, to see that Mazarin had made himself the Ar∣bitrator of Peace and War by this act, and attributed to himself alone the honour of doing both the one and other. I shall reserve what I have to say here∣upon, till I come to treat of that Chapter which shall treat of the Intelligence betwixt the Pope and France. But all the aversion the Pope made appear against Mazarin, did not take off the Court from admiring the capacity of so great a Man, who if he
truly did embrace more than the natural heat of France could well have digested (and in that respect some of his designs cannot be excused of temerity) yet it is observable, that Fortune hath ever been his Second, who fighting for him, he can never be want∣ing of means to overcome the greatest difficulties; For the world hath taken notice, that those Parties he hath sided with have rarely miscarri'd, which makes divers confess, That how great a States-man soever the Cardinal of Richelieu was, yet he never had so much skill and policy in discovering and countermining the designs of Strangers, and bring∣ing whatever he design'd to pass, for the advantage of the Crown of France, as this Man who was his Scho∣lar and Successor; who if he succeed as well in times of Peace as he hath done in time of War, his name will be so much the more unmortal. Usia, a Roman, is of a Family known to your most Serene Lordships, as for the Services which his Grand-fathers have done for your State, which hath ever held them in great consideration. They are, however, a little declined from their former Repu∣tation, by the misgovernment of some of the Suc∣cessors of those, who by their brave actions had raised it. That which hath caused no small dimi∣nution to their Honour, was, their bargaining for more or less with those who made use of them to in∣vade the liberties of others; to which may be added, that the number of their Family is diminished. The Cardinal of whom we speak, is more addicted to his pleasures than to any serious business, which makes some desire he had that ripe and stard judgment which shone so in his Ancestors. The Family does however but begin to recover it self, at a season
wherein it may happen to come to its period for want of issue; for having taken Wives rather rich than fruitful, out of a desire to repair their losses, they are in a way of losing their name by an over∣sight greater than the former. They all make pro∣fession of continuing still in the good affection they have so long preserved towards your most Serene Republique. But they are worth little, and can do less. Este, Uncle to the Duke of Modena, hath made the world speak of him, both in Peace and War. I cannot tell whether he were much pleased to see me at Rome, by reason of the little satisfaction his Bro∣ther had of me, whilst I was Commissary for your most Serene Republique, at the beginning of the War you had with the Barberino's. Although he can dissemble, and is well enough skilled in the Art of concealing his resentments, yet cannot I believe him satisfi'd with what I did, though the thing went not on so far as those of the House of Este pretended for their interest. The Pope, who hath not been ve∣ry well satisfi'd with the Duke, who studi'd to ob∣serve the will of Mazarin in every thing, as if he had been his slave, and perceived that this Cardinal is of the same inclination, looks upon him as a per∣son more inclined to trouble than quietness; which he does not however divulge, because he hath grea∣ter pretences than ever to that portion of Estate which was not annexed to the Dutchy of Ferrara, when it fell to the Church, as I shall show in ano∣ther place. It will be difficult for him therefore to be looked on favourably by the Pope, who hath made it appear, that he can right himself by the Sword, when they deny him Justice. This Cardinal
keeps a Palace at Rome, where there are much Peo∣ple and Nobility, that are punctually paid: which evinces, that the late Wars hath impoverished the Subjects, and very much enriched the Master. Costaguti, a Roman, but born of a Genoan Father, is one of that sort of men that can easily heap up wealth, by which they have raised this House to its Nobility and Purple; but to judge of their fortune, as we are wont to judge of all new begun prospe∣rities, one may say, That so great riches acquired in so short a space of time, are hardly compatible with any lawful means of obtaining them. But not∣withstanding all this, the Cardinal is a very agreea∣ble man, and he did hugely satisfie me, in showing me he was so well informed of the interests of this State, and had so full a knowledge of the merits of your most Serene Republique. Donghi, a pure Genoese, came forth of Genoa, when he was not expected, with a very considerable stock of riches, which hath since opened the way to his greatness; having been much furthered by those qualities he hath, which are so deserving, that he that raised him hath no cause to repent the doing it. The Court does generally praise him: But he was ever absent all my time, so that I can give no judg∣ment of him, but from the reports of others, which however do tend to allow him the quality of a Man of merits, and one that is very affectionate to your most Serene Republique. Rondarini, a Roman, though he be originary of Romagnia, is worthy of the degree he stands in for the goodness and simplicity of his manners. But he
is otherwise no great man, for he hath but a weak judgment, which would easily lose it self should he apply himself to business. He deserves, however, the good-will of your most Serene Signiory, for the many things he speaks in her praise, and for the many Services his Family hath done your State, whereof the blood of the Marquis his Brother was a testimony, who would needs signallize himself in an Employment as worthy as a War for Religion and Liberty. Gabrieli, a Roman, is a man that endeavours to conceal what is in his heart; for instead of disco∣vering himself, he makes a great Apology of Com∣plements. There are some of opinion, that his Ar∣tisice may help to raise him higher, but I do not be∣lieve it, because the manner of acting of Pope Inno∣cent, which is that of the Romanes, hath opened the eyes of the world too much, the present times re∣quiring rather a person that will prefer the publique good than his own. He abides the most part of his time at his Church of Ascoli, feeding himself with this Maxim, That the less a Cardinal is at Court, the easier is it for him to get into the Pope's Chair. But, though that may be true in general, yet it hold: no water amongst the cunning and refined Roma Wits, who by this very retreat discover his mind soonest that would thereby hide it, and who ever pre∣fer that Man first, who is most skilful in the manage∣ment of great affairs. Lugo, a Spaniard, and Jesuit, is a man very learned in Divinity, but since he forsook the Pulpit he hath shewed himself no less skilful in State mat∣ters. He acted with great success in the Conclave
for the election of the present Pope, and though Bar∣beriao were cried down for desiring to make him Pope, out of a certain fancy that came in his head, yet did he use his utmost endeavour to advance Chigi, whom he knew to be very favourable to his Con∣gregation, as he hath since shewed himself. He can do no more than he now doth to make it appear to your Signory, that he hath a great esteem for you, and that he is extremely troubled to see her op∣pressed by such fierce and potent Arms. I believe he speaks frankly, being a consciencious man; but perhaps, too, the great desire he hath to make those of his Order more acceptable amongst you, prompts his tongue to say more than is in his heart. Raggi, a Genoese, who succeeded Raggi his Uncle, was made a Cardinal by the Genoeses means, who to raise him to this Dignity expended twice as much as is usual. But it is very just that the mony, which they squeeze from all the world, should be afterwards turned into that smoak which the Court of Rome daily sells. This Cardinals endowments are very proper and fit for a Minister of the Chamber, as he hath been a long time: and indeed, there are few that do succeed better in that employment than the Genoeses, who are most active in running about to fill their purses, I am told, that since he is made Cardinal, he hath shewed himself somewhat more gallant, and hath pretty well studied the affairs of the world, which may be soon learned having a very present wit, if he do but apply himself as much to it, as he did in his Office of the Pope's Treasurer. Homodei, a Milanois, hose rather to follow the Prelacy, and attain to the Purple, th to preserve
his Family, which is in hazard of perishing for want of Issue. It is nevertheless considerable, full of wealth, and alli'd to the greatest Families in Spain. He hath obtained what he pretended to, after he had made himself known to be a man capable of every thing, tying himself strictly to the things that belong to his profession. He is of a very free disposition, as the Lombards generally are, so that one may conside in him. He let something fall in the Conclave which did not please the Spaniards; but there were several in the Conspiration, so that they could not lay the fault on him singly. He says plainly that he is a Venetian, as much as his fidelity to his King will suffer him, which is to say in good English, he is a good Italian. The Prince John Charls of Medces, Brother of the Great Duke, is ever inseparably united with the Cardinal Charls his Uncle, the Dean of the College; in this, however, his reputation is the greater, as having carried himself with much heat to the ex∣clusion, and with much skill to the inclusion of those, who being either partial, or his friends, were in∣cluded There can be nothing expected from this Lord, who is perfect in Reasons of State, but such actions as shall be favourable, and for the good of Italy, wherein likewise the good of his own Family is comprised. Ludovisio, of Bologna, who was grafted into that Family by the Mother of the Prince Ludovisio, hath the reputation of an honest man, but he hath those defects to which all such kind of men are subject; for they are obstinate and indiscreet; and sometimes too they have a grain of folly. It is difficult to Ne∣gotiate
with him, for if in any business it come once into his mind, that there is some case of Con∣science in it, it makes him so obstinate, that nothing is ever able to make him change his opinion, and that most commonly without any reason, as the Officers of the Penitentiaries themselves have con∣fessed, of whom he is the Chief: Whence it follows, that although as a Soveraign Minister he might dis∣patch business, seeing he hath the power, yet one must necessarily return to the Pope, and be at a dou∣ble trouble to obtain his command for the expedition of it. I dealt the least with him I possibly could, it being hard to come fairly off with such men, on the contrary, there is nothing to be gained most com∣monly from them but ill-will and discontent. Saacta Croce, a Roman, agreed with Pope Inno∣cent's genius, in the easie and clear method wherein I have heard him express the most difficult and knotty affairs, and that was it which gained him the favour of Innocent: for although that Pope were a great Lawyer, yet he did not very readily understand a difficult case: and therefore he loved those that made things out easie and clear to him, and fit for his apprehension: besides, he had taken a fancy to raise the somewhat depressed antient noble Families of the Roman Nobility, as was this of Sancta Croe, that they might owe the obligation to him. He had accomplished this design, had not his Niece with her much importunity diverted it. It is certain, that the inclusion of this Cardinal was highly praised, he having added both Virtue and Merit to his No∣bility, which good opinion he confirms by the daily proofs he gives of his good-will in all publick affairs.
Cibo, who is one of the Lords of Malta of Carrara, hath a great reputation at Court, because of the in∣tegrity of his mind, his good life, and great know∣ledge of the interests of Princes, in which he hath signaliz'd himself in two Legations. He is adored, if I may say so, in the Church of Jesi, where he re∣sides, and the Pope, who otherwise would have need of men of his parts, does not call him thence, as un∣willing to deprive that City of so worthy a Pastor. And were it their rule to reward Merit, there is no∣thing so great and good but would fall to his share, but private interest denies it him. I should readily give him my vote, were it required, knowing I should therein at the same time both satisfie my conscience, and serve my Country, which I under∣stand how really he loves. Aquaviva, a Neapolitan, was preferred before an∣other whom Pope Innocent desired, for some consi∣derations represented to him by Donaa Olimpia, who foreseeing the Pope could not long survive, thought it good policy to strengthen her Family by the ad∣vancement of such noble persons as might protect her on occasion But she deceived her self, regarding one∣ly the merits of the persons, and not considering whether she should receive all those acknowledg∣ments and retributions which men of honor are en∣gag'd to return at need. He hath, however, a po∣pular applause, but I cannot tell whether the Spa∣niards are satisfi'd with him, since he did not seem to give them any content in the Conclave. But I am very much taken with his expressions, which ever tend to the publick good. Goudi, or as he is called at present, de Rets, hath made the world talk of him, both before and since
his promotion to be Cardinal: before, because he was as it were the Scourge, that excited troubles in all occurrences, that admitted of the least pretence to thwart the present Government: and since, be∣cause his authority being increased, he presumed his importunities against Mazarin and his Partisans would become more effectual, and that onely for his particular interest, and to make himself famous in the administration of affairs. It cannot be denied but Mazarin was in a kind of dream when he named him for that Dignity, and committed a very great error therein, not forecasting the event of it. And indeed, Pope Innocent reproached him highly for de∣spising and dealing unhandsomely with one of that Dignity, whom both himself and all France had pre∣sented to the Court of Rome, by their recommen∣dations. But this does not make good the too bold pretences of the Ecclesiastical power, which pre∣sumes, it is unlawful for great Princes to restrain the exorbitancies of a Cardinal, that endeavours to trouble the peace of the Country. There were di∣vers Assemblies at Rome to consult a way, whereby, without prejudice to the Cardinal Dignity, they might allay his discontent, but it was very difficult, since those of France required security that he should breed no disturbance, and those in Rome could not resolve to do it, because the means propounded was to give away his Church at Paris to another, and keep him out of France, without leaving him desti∣tute of what was necessary for his maintenance. Charles Barberino is the third Cardinal of that Family, which is rarely seen; but that which de∣serves more admiration, is that this excess of favour proceeded from a Pope, who had made it his task to
eclipse, not to say destroy, that House; so evident it is, that self-interest over-sways the minds of men, making those that were the most inveterate enemies to become the most endeared friends. This recon∣ciliation, and the alliance that was made betwixt these Families, was the work of Donna Olimpia, who prudently considered, that if the Pope suffer'd this enmity to continue, he would be exposed thereby to the same inconveniencies they had brought upon others. This reflexion pleased, and was seconded by a most advantagious reciprocal union. Nor was there any cause of scruple that the Pope joyned Purple to Purple in the same Family, considering the excellent qualities of this young man, who shewed an extra∣ordinary wit and modesty to all men, and who ap∣plying himself wholly to the noblest studies, re∣nounced his birth-right in favour of his younger Brother, to make himself a Church-man; and in∣deed, is a very good Clergy-man, who never medles with any other kind of business. He depends absolutely on the Cardinal Francis, and conforms himself wholly to his manner of life. Pio, a Ferrarian, is of a Family known to your most Serene Lordships for its Nobility, and the me∣rits of its Branches, which shall make me say the less of him. He does not enjoy his health perfectly though he be but young, and may perhaps leave his Church at Ferrara, because the air of Rome better agrees with him, where he hath acquir'd a great deal of wealth, and intends to settle himself altogether. He glories in the natural affection he hath towards your most Serene Signiory, as of a thing he much values and most highly esteems.
Aldobrandin, a Roman, but originary of Florence, is the onely remainder of a Papal Family, founded upon seven Great-grand-children, Nepvews of Cle∣ment the VIII, who were so extreme robust, that one would have judged their Line eternal, and yet this Branch is withered. To find a Cardinal of this Family, as the Princess Rossano desired, who is the sole Hegress of all that Estate, they were fain to seek out this small Courtier, who springs from the same Stock indeed, but by reason of his poverty was neg∣lected even of his own kindred. This example, to∣gether with many others, should make the Pope's clearly know, as well as their kindred, that what ever care and pains they take to raise their Family, it ne∣ver succeeds or continues long, God not being pleased to suffer those Grandeurs, which are founded on the Church's Patrimony, to stand as they would have it. And who ever would be pleased to look over the History of the Popes, where their Families are registred shall find this an infallible Truth: for one shall discover, that either they were quite extin∣guished, or such as were left remaining became re∣duced to a condition below a mean Fortune: This Cardinal doth acknowledge, that all he hath came from that Princess, who was willing to show her ac∣knowledgments to the blood of the Aldobrandinos, and now, by showing himself worthy, as he hath done, of the honour conferred upon him, and gain∣ing a good opinion of every one, upon all occasions, he patiently expects the time which may prove more favourable to him. Vidman staid longer here than he said he would do when he went from Rome, where he was sur∣prised with the immature death of Count David his
Brother, for whom the whole Court was very sor∣rowful; because those Lords, besides the good for∣tune they have had to see their Family so well stored with all sorts of riches, do so win the affections of all people by their sweet converse, that there is none but are ravish'd at their prosperity. The Cardinal is also an excellent natur'd man, who, to all his other good qualities, adds a most tender love towards his Country, which is reciprocally obliged to make their acknowledgments to him upon every occasion. Spada of Luca, is a Prelate who was emploi'd in Urban's time in the affairs of greatest confidence, and he held the same credit in the time of Pope Innocent, which is an evident testimony that he hath excellent qualities. In his Legation to Ferrara he did you all the good Offices that you could expect from that good Neighbourhood; and when your Ambassadors were received in that City in their passage to Rome, he out-did all the Ministers of the Apossolique Chair in expressions of civility; whence I draw this consequence, that he very perfectly knows your Lordships worths, and the great obligations which are due to you from the Court of Rome. Gualtieri D'Orvicte is Donna Olimpia's Creature, who having power to do what she would, brought this man and another that depended wholly upon her, to promotion, by casting dust in the Pope's eyes that he might not see what she did, not caring whe∣ther he were pleased or not, after she made him com∣mit the sault. This Cardinal was not at Rome during my abode, he resides at his Church at Fremo, where he can yet, himself, hardly believe he is awake, and really in possession of what he holds. There is
little good to be said of him, and that you may judge this a truth, it may suffice to tell you, it was a work of the Brain of that Woman. Odescalco de Como hath the Lombard way of acting, which is to say, ingenious and franck, and truly he is held to be without malice. He does not profess any skill in Politiques, but wants not for judgment, and makes good use of it; in time and place convenient. I have nothing to alledge against him, since the Court finds no fault with him; when this man is mention'd they speak briefly, without making any reflection of his good or bad qualities, which is a con∣vincing proof that there is more good than hurt in him, because at Court they pardon none they can except against. I believe your most Serene Signiory may conside in a person of his humor, when he makes protestation of his affection towards you, as he hath done every time I was with him. Our Ottobuono for his sweet and charming con∣versation is beloved of all the Court, nor are there any but do wish him a greater dignity than he hath: and truly he hath rendred himself worthy of it by his continued labours and vigilancy: and the rather, because by his actions, accompani'd with so much civility to all the world; and his judgment in man∣aging business of consequence, he hath made it ap∣parent that he deserves one should conside in him. The City of Brescia is too narrow a limit for the ex∣ercise of his Virtues: and the expences he makes would have been better employed in some Legation, or some considerable employment at Court, where, to speak truth, such weak men do reside, that either for the success in an affair, or for want of choosing
the readiest and safest ways, they do even displease those whom they most favour. But as for his exile from Court, which we may tm honourable, the cause thereof can be attributed to nothing else, but the knowledge they have of his eminent virtues, as well for that ordinarily Vir∣tue is looked upon with an envious eye, as because he did in the Conclave endeavour earnestly to unite the opposite parties, who wavered and obstructed all other designs. All I can say to your Excellencies of this Lord, is, that the affection he bears his Native Country is the most tender and hearty that can be desired in any of your most Serene Republique's Subjects, and whatever favours you bestow, you can never place them better than on a man, who, like this same now mention'd, is wholly disposed to prefer the publique interest in all occasions before his own. Maldachino is very well, the Pope was very careful to make him go and take the aire of the Campagnia for a good while, whence he returned at the intreatics of the Cardinals, who took that absenting for an exile: The Spaniards were not much allarm'd at his change, and declaration for France. Yet must it be said in his praise, that he did very wisely, in seeking the support and gaining the favour of a great King. Nay, there is some generosity in it, because there is no appearance he was moved out of interest; since Mazarin is not a person likely to bestow any great reward upon him, whether it be out of his natural inclination to parsimony, or some fixed design to re∣gulate and reduce the vast expences of that Nation, drained by so long a War, or some more hidden and refined politique consideration, it being certainly a
pure folly to waste the Exchequer in Pensions for the Court of Rome. Besides, nothing is more apparent than this, that the way to gain those people is to neg∣lect them. Interest and Fear would soon reunite them, and make them look towards France for suc∣cour, did they fear they were abandon'd to the dread∣ful power of Spain: all the humility of submission, and art of compliance would then be put in practise to make sure of, and draw the French to their side to oppose that ambitious Neighbour, who surrounding the Pope with Millan and Naples, may devour him when he hath the mind to it. I have visited him ur∣on some occasions, but never much regarded his discourse, which still tended to make me believe he is very much a servant to your most Serene Lord∣ships. Borromeo, a Milanois, a Lord of a considerable Birth, hath ever given testimony in those employ∣ments he hath had, of a strict secresie, great mode∣sty and sincerity, which are qualities rarely lodged together in a man that is in power or command. He doth at present exercise the charge of Lega in Ro∣magnia with much praise, not giving any cause of complaint under his Government. I cannot but give a fair judgment of his Sentiments for the publique good, on which that of your most Serene Republique is necessarily depending, which he assured me of the last time I visited him. Imperiale, a Genoese, is a man sit for Govern∣ment, who quickly apprehends where any evil is, and hath capacity enough to apply the remedy. He hath also a free heart, which will not easily yield when he finds on which side there is more reason.
Yet cannot I tell whether he would succeed well if he had the Soveraign command, because he is a Ge∣noese, and prepostess'd with the Maxims of his Coun∣try, which pretend to attain to that in a short time, to which other Potentates could not arrive but by a succession of many ages; and this may perhaps be one of the causes will exclude him from any higher advancement. In the mean time, he makes very powerful protestations, that he will ever side with those who stand for the Liberty of Italy, which is to say in good English, that he will side with your most Serene Republique. Astalli, a Roman, hath acted several parts at the Court of Rome in a short time. He was a Prelate of a mean Fortune; since that he was made a Cardinal. He was of kindred, and supported by Pope Innocent's Niece, who would speak all, and do all, at that time when he was made Cardinal He was in Pamfilio's Family in quality of a Nepvew: a while after he was rejected as unworthy of that Title, exiled from Rome, and almost cast into the Precipice: but a little after the death of Innocent he somewhat recovered himself again, yet could not make them restore what they had taken. In fine, he found relief in the prote∣ction of the Catholique King, who hath bestowed some Largess upon him, which hath set him in a pretty good posture. The History of the strange turns he hath been subject to, would be very curious, but it being too prolix, I shall pass it by; because, likewise, ere this Writing appears, no doubt but the Relations of those times will set forth the truth of it. There can be nothing more intricate than the con∣dition of that Family, which then governed; for on the one side, the Pope's Niece and her Confederates
were ever making some enterprize, and on the other the Cardinal Panciroli, who was then the chief Mi∣nister of State, countermined them, and either of these scoffed at that Pope before his face; because, although he had wit enough, yet he had not the judgment or way to make those stand in awe of him, who were the most obliged to him. In the mean time, this Cardinal, after he had un∣dergone so many different Fortunes, attained to his case and quiet, yet without any great repute or esteem, being more addicted to follow his own in∣clinations, than to serve the Publique; and therefore I cannot inform you what his affection is towards this Republique. Albjci, of Cenata, is a man, who finding he can raise himself no higher by the ways of eminent vir∣tue, is resolved to try what he can do by his extra∣vagancies; and this it is makes him speak so freely against the corruptions of the times, which he is not satisfi'd in doing in private, but taking delight to shew his Eloquence, which is not the highest that ever was, he discourses of it in publique Oratories, and sometimes with biting expressions, which seems to aim at the Popes creatures, who are in command. This is ill resented at the Palace, but they let him go on, as if they understood him not: and yet not being free from failings himself, it is wonder'd he should be so apt to censure others. He hath rather I know not what kind of commerce with the world, than any considerable knowledge; and having been chosen by Pope Innocent, as a person fit for Go∣vernment, he made him a Cardinal, having more respect to his being an enemy to Maculao, who was hated by this Family, that so he might oppose all
that favour'd him, than to any merit was found to be in himself. He speaks very fine things against those that shew themselves slow and cold in their present assistance of this Signory; but his importu∣nate and tedious discourses are but little regarded, nor indeed esteemed sincere, because they are always Satyrical. Azzolino de la Marca was brought to be Cardinal by those means that prevail most at Rome, that is to say, by discovering the defects of others; I shall not stand here to repeat the story of Astalli's fall, caused partly by the reports, true or false, of this man. It is certain, there are no eminent virtues in him, and if you except but some pretty little flashes of the Pen, which he learned in the exercise of his Office of Se∣cretary, I see nothing extraordinary in him. He spends most part of his time in amorous entertain∣ments, while all he does, brings little benefit to the Publique. I never much esteemed the great care he takes to express the devotion he hath for your Signio∣ry, because I know any thing pleases his mind more than thoughts of business, thinking all his time too short to recreate himself. The Cardinal Lantgrave of Hesse, who is a Lord of a high birth and a generous spirit; might have made better use of his Talents, as it is believed, in the profession of a Souldier, than of a Gown-man: not but that he hath given some good tokens, by proving himself a good Catholique, and a good Disciple in the Maxims of the Court of Rome; but when it concerns his taking any advantage, as he pretends much, reflecting on what he is, every one withdraws, even the Spaniards themselves, who other∣wise
being wont to shew their largess towards those of his quality, are yet sparing to him, not well ap∣prehending what service they can expect at Rome from a Prince, who hath laid aside his Armour to take up a Cardinal's little Gown: and that which makes them perhaps more distasted with him, is his leaving the Protestant Religion to become a Catho∣lique without any study or learning, which are most necessary Ornaments in a Cardinal; especially a stranger, that intends to gain any credit near the Pope. Nevertheless he does not dispair but the time may come, when he may settle himself at Rome in the condition others are in there, without any need of seeking abroad for assistance, as he hath been forc'd to do when he staid there after the creation of this Pope, being still put to his shifts, by reason of the few assignations he had, insomuch that he was forc'd to be gone for fear of intangling himself. He is a Gentleman of a good judgment, who, following the candour, so natural to his Country, either blames or praises as he finds people deserve. He speaks of your Signiory in the same terms as a very good Italian should do. Sforza, a Roman, hath given himself to the Span∣yards, being easily drawn to their party, not so much for the rich benefices they bestowed on him, as out of the hatred he bears against Mazarin, with whom he could never have agreed, had he remained for the French. There accrues no benefit to the Span∣yard by the gaining of this Cardinal, but onely the reputation of having a man on their side of a great birth, and a bold spirit: for he hath otherwise no great gifts, nor any considerable adherents besides the Great Duke, towards whom he shows himself very
reserv'd. His genious ever inclined more towards the French than the Spanish; yet hath he moulded his humour to the Spanish service absolutely, since he found how much more certain the Spanyards assign∣ments are than the French, and more beneficial than the others could be. This Family hath ever pro∣fessed to have a great deal of affection for your pro∣sperity, and many of them have had employments under you, which they have performed with a great deal of applause from your most Serene Republique, This Cardinal does not forget to profess oftentimes, that his affection hath the same bias. Here ends the old College. It remains now that I should speak somewhat of Pope Alexander's Crea∣tures, of four of which, viz. the Cardinals Chigi, Rospigliosi, Pallavicini, and Bichi, having discoursed enough in the beginning, I shall add what may be said of the other five, whom he hath made Car∣dinals. Bagni is a Cavalier, as noble as he is understand∣ing in the things of Peace and War. The Spanyards were doubtful of the Defunct Cardinal his Brother, nor do I believe they put any great confidence in this, whom they know to be very intimate with Ma∣zarin, which they discovered by the reproaches of Pope Innocent, who found by Bagni's Letters in read∣ing of them, that it was Mazarin had dictated them, for which he was very ill treated during his Nun∣ciature in France, the Assignments belonging to that Charge being then taken away from him, as an useless Minister: But the present Pope, whilest he was Secretary to Innocent, having more wit than he to judge of the actions of a Minister, had still an
esteem for him; and the time being come to discover his mind, he declared it more by effects than verbal expressions, honouring him with the Cardinal Pur∣ple, and admitting him amongst his Confidents, and that with reason, because his Brother and he have served the Apostolique State the space of three-score years. He is antient and unhealthful, This Honour falling to his share in a fit time to attend him to his grave. Paulucci of Romagnia hath attained to a great age, thorow many troubles and fatigues, which have gained him a recompence in a time, wherein he hath little other advantage but his hopes, those advance∣ments onely excepted which his friends have pro∣cured him: which hapned very seasonably at this time, he not being fit to perform the Functions of a Cardinal, as being blind. He was never endued with much patience, and much retarded the progress of his Fortune by often speaking publickly with too much liberty. Otherwise he is a good man, but one that is more knowing in the Canon Law, than prudent in his converse in the world. Elci of Siena had not the Title of Nunclo before he was a Cardinal, but he was highly approved by the Pope, and besides that, of his kindred. And it was easie to discover by the tenderness of the Pope's expressions to him, before he brought him to pro∣motion, that he was enrolled amongst those he most loved. Your most Serene Lordships know him far better than I do, having had him there as Nuncio a long while amongst you, with such satisfaction as you may well remember. His qualities makes him worthy of the Purple and the Papal Mitre; and I
believe he may come to it in time, unless the Court grow weary of the Sienans, whereof there being al∣ready three in the Colledge, it is to be thought the number may yet increase, if the Pope live as long as he promises to himself. The thought this Cardinal hath of your most Serene Republique could not be more advantagious than they are. Bonvisi of Leuca, hath passed through all the Offices at Court, shewing sometimes a constant re∣solution of fixing there, and otherwile an inclination to quit it, as it seemed in his long absence he had intended. In this Pope's time, his hopes renewed afresh, considering he had a respect to the merits of deserving persons: and truly he called him of his own accord, without being courted to it. He was at first Master of his Holiness Chamber, and in that Office he improved the good opinion the Pope had of him, so that he was comprised in the first pro∣motion together with five other men, who had all parts necessary to attain to the Dignities of Cardi∣nals. He hath none but good qualities, and knows how to gain the love and esteem of others, as well as to love and esteem others himself, and especially those Princes that deserve most, in which number, to my knowledge, he places your most Serene Signory. Farnese, a Roman, was under Innocent for a time the fifth Evangelist. That Pope followed his opinion in all things, and esteemed and made great choice of them, as proceeding from a man very learned, prudent, and of great integrity: afterwards he di∣sliked him, because he spake not according to his fancy, and made no more use of him, but spake of him even in a kind of a despising way. The present Pope, who judges of the merits of men perfectly
well, raised him to the Office of Majordom, in which he discharged himself exceeding well, although he had a thousand other occupations, there being no Assembly held to which he was not called, if they treated of any business of importance. He helped the Family at present in command to the purchase of the Lands of Farnese, being his jurisdiction, and sug∣gested the means to exclude the Duke of Parma, who in default of this Branch was to succeed therein; in fine, having had the Hat for a reward, they com∣mitted the Legation of Bologna to him, which he performs to the Pope's great satisfaction. He is a great Wit, and perhaps greater than were fitting for the Publique, were he Pope: but should he pretend to it, he would find opposition, and the greatest would be the Duke of Parma, with whom he hath never kept any good correspondence for the interest of his Family; therefore the Spanyards, out of a com∣plaisance they have for the Duke, and because they have prejudged he hath some inclination towards France, will do all they can possibly to obstruct his being made Pope. The time of the promotion which is to be made in consideration of the Princes approaches, and since it is already made known who shall be promoted, I leave that care to the most excellent Sagredo to in∣form your most Serene Lordships of their condition and qualities, and shall onely add, that as for him that pertains to your Republique, who is to be made Cardinal, I would not say any thing of it to the Pope, knowing this favour lights still on those who are most agreeable to his Holiness; it being suffi∣cient that your Signory does herein receive an ho∣nour equal to those other Crowns without pointing
out the inclusion, or the exclusion of any one in par∣ticular, provided you have no diffidence of the per∣son they shall promote. I could here shut up the List of those that make up the grandeur of the Court of Rome, but since the Queen of Sweden hath made choice of it for her or∣dinary residence, and that I hapned to communicate sometimes with her Majesty, I shall add some small matter which I have to say concerning this Princess. At her first coming to Rome she had so little know∣ledge of the grandeur of your State, that she thought it strange your Ministers should be treated equally with those of the greatest Kings in Christendom: and therefore when it was told her, that my Predi∣cessor intended to give her a visit, she seemed in the beginning unwilling to allow him the same Honour she granted to the Ministers of other Princes; but being informed that she mistook, she condescended to do it in the same manner as was usual at Court. She was afterwards fully acquainted with the great service this Republique did to all Christendom, in opposing singly the dreadful Forces of the common Enemy. And this made her shew more complaisance in often conversing with me; and to have the better occasions, not regarding her little power so much as following the sentiments of her generosity, she proffer'd to find out the means to raise a Regiment of Infantiy for the service of this State, and gave the charge hereof to Sentinelli her favourite. But afterwards the difficulty of getting her mony out of Sweden being encreased, the first great heat of her good-will grew cool, so that after the order she had given for the receipt of a thousand Doublons, she made no other assignment; all the rest vanishing in smoak, as well through the death of Sentinelli, who
was usually there to pay the Soldiers, as the disgrace of another who till then was thought to be in favour with her Majesty. However, I omitted not to pay her my respects from time to time, in token of my acknowledgment, to which she ever corresponded by actions of great civility. But to say truth, that Princess is possessed onely with vain speculations, which are the foundation of those great undertakings she designes. And being unwilling to venture the hazard of misfortune, hoping for all she desires, so she thinks every thing that comes in her fancy is very easily brought to pass. And if the news of the King of Sweden's death, which I heard of in my journey homewards, proves true, her want of mony will yet be greater. Indeed, Pope Alexan∣der voluntarily engaged himself in those great ex∣pences were made for her reception at Rome, but no man doubts but he repented him of it since, when he perceived there was not that solidity of judgment in her as had been reported; for she hath made it appear, she is a Woman like others, and by conse∣quence as subject to defects as any other of that Sex. She hath at present begun a course of life somewhat more moderate, and therefore more durable; and if she would have really perswaded the world, that it was a knowledge of the true Religion which obliged her to quit her Crown and Kingdom, and pass into the bosome of another Church and Country, she could not have taken a wiser resolution, than to have made her retrear into some Monastery where she might have been at ease, and lead a quiet life free from trouble, and suitable to her condition, not as to the greatness, but the conveniency of it, and with a liberty to have come out again when she pleased. She did not much praise the Pope, but said, she was
promised by him, that he would put her in a con∣dition to live handsomly; whereas on the contrary she perceived, that his Holiness kindred had not that esteem for her they ought to have. She added many other things, which shews her to be of a querulous humour, that is, just like a Woman that cannot tell what she would have. When I took leave of her, I found her pensive enough at the news of the dange∣rous condition of the King of Sweden; which makes me believe what I heard since his death, that she hath left Rome and is gone into her Country, the better to secure the payments they were engag'd to make her. When she hath done that, if she return to make her abode in Rome, many people will be glad of it, but, very few will have any cause to be jealous. And now, having made know the internal and external qualities of the Pope, and his Kindred, to∣gether with those that serve him, for aid and counsel in his Government both Politique and Ecclesi∣astique, it is time to examine the internal Senti∣ments of his Holiness towards Christian Princes, and so to conclude by examining what his thoughts are concerning the good and advantage of your most Serene Republique, upon which, having made a most serious reflection, I dare believe that I shall be but very little or not at all mistaken. ANd to begin with him, who holds the first and highest rank, and hath most authority amongst Secular Princes, viz. the Emperour, we cannot say but the Pope holds very good intelligence or corre∣spondence with him, since at the Election of his Ma∣jesty
to the Imperial Crown, he did all he was able to overcome those difficulties the Electors made, who would hardly comply, unless some satisfaction were allowed them which they pretended were due to them: and his Holiness had much adoe to gain the favour as well of the Ecclesiastique as the Secular Electors, not to name the Protestants, who being on the one hand perswaded by the Sollicitations of the French, and on the other with-held by the certain knowledge, it was then the onely time to make their conditions better than they had been; for it was much impaired thorow the long continuance of that great Dignity in the Austrian Family: and therefore the Pope speaks very load of the high services he therein did to his Imperial Majesty, having just rea∣son to expect he should in retribution do any thing for him again that lies in his power: To which pur∣pose it is evident indeed, that they take all the care imaginable to please him. Thus at the beginning of this Pope's Government, it was chiefly upon his sollicitation that the Emperour attaqued the King of Sweden, by the invasion he made upon Pomerania, notwithstanding the many difficulties might have hapned, by reason of the danger of breeding new troubles in Germany upon pretence of a breach of the Peace at Munster, which the Friends and Allies of the Swede might allege: and which, is most con∣siderable, this was undertaken in a time when the Court was empty of mony, which is a thing that ought still to be had in readiness upon any sudden commotion. Nevertheless the Pope's perswasions prevailed upon the promise he made, that if any urgent occasion required, and they called upon him, he would remit them a good sum from Rome; but al∣though
they did much want it, and craved it with much earnestness, they were put off with many ex∣cuses to evade the promise, as it is the custome of that Court to disingage themselves, and leave those others engaged who confide too much in them. And though this were hush'd up by the Imperialists, yet it hath made them somewhat forgetful of the obliga∣tion the Pope pretended from this Court, espe∣cially considering besides this, that the Pope's en∣deavour for the election of Leopoldus, was not so much to hinder the choice of any other, as out of this respect the Pope had, that if the Imperial Dignity should fall on any other Prince, it were not certain whether the Authority of the Court of Rome would be still continued over the German Catholiques, or whether the Pope's Constitutions would be observ'd with the great reverence as now they are, under the Government of the House of Austria, which hath been ever very observant in the Customs and Man∣ners of that Court. I therefore hold it for true and certain, that the Pope and Emperor will at present keep a fair agreement, and the more, because in the Treaty of Peace between the two Crowns of France and Spain, their interests were little considered, since amongst all those that were mentioned and com∣prised, these were placed last of all, at which they were both displeased and mmured to themselves; yet both dislembled this discontent, which did in some manner help to tie them the more strictly to their former considence, and made the Emperour give ear more readily to the Counsels of the Pope, When the troubles in the North increased. The Pope knows, that in the Emperor's Court perhaps he hath more credit than in any other in Christen∣dome,
which will make him put those designs in execution, he hath told me of more than once, which is, to put the Emperour upon a War that will prove advantagious to Christendome by an easie way, but wholly reserv'd to himself. Perhaps the present juncture of affairs may render the thing more feasible than at another season; yet when his Holiness told me his design, whatsoever reflexion I made, yet could I not apprehend either how or when it might be brought to pass. Nor do I be∣lieve he would find much repugnance on the Empe∣ror's part, having a lively spirit, and great dispo∣sition to engage upon any good counsel: but if there should be much mony required to carry it on, it would be esteemed a Chymera, because the Princes of this age have an aversion to all propositions of rupture that are made, and the Emperour more than any, especially now his Coffers are drained, and part of those under his power obey not their Supe∣riour very willingly, whilst others would be glad to see him fall, and every one is unwilling to disburse. The Emperour hath no other Minister at Rome but the Cardinal Colonne, who bearing ever a great re∣spect to the Pope for the Interest of his Family, cannot do his Imperial Majesty any great service in his Negotiations, but all passes thorow the hands of the Lord Caraffe, Nuncio in the Imperial Court, who exercises that Office with as great satisfaction to either side, as he did with profit, when he resided near your most Serene Lordships. The French Nation does, perhaps, best of any apprehend the Genious of the Court of Rome, and knows the readiest ways to withdraw themselves
out of such inconveniencies wherein other Princes do insenfibly engage themselves. They esteem and revere the Apostolique Chair in a Souvereign de∣gree, and tender all the respect that can be re∣quired from a Prince truly Catholique and pious; but for all this they are very clear-sighted and wary to maintain their Prerogatives, and prevent the Ecclesiastiques, who at present endeavour to extend their power over all, from bringing any prejudice upon them. No sooner is any decree made in the Sanctury of Rome which relishes of ambition, but it is carefully examined by the Par∣liament, who oftentimes, without any qualifica∣tion, gives judgment against such decrees, and after lets the Court of Rome cry out against them as they please. Many times also upon the dis∣cussion and negative of what it contains they tell the Popes their Lesson, when they go beyond their bounds in seeking to diminish the Royal Autho∣rity, so that they are most commonly constrained to bow, and give satisfaction. Which happens ve∣ry rarely, when the Popes have to do with any other Princes, how great soever they be, for out of divers respects they dare not use that liberty of speech which is natural to the French; which makes the Popes less hasty to innovate the Prerogatives of that Kingdome, knowing that by bringing in some Novelty they do not advance their business, but rather wrong themselves, at least in their Re∣putation if no other way, they being still obliged either to relax, or not to see that put in execution which they had resolved upon. I could not find that the Pope had any aversion for that Nation, as some have believed, I onely
perceived that he condemned their new form of Government, because he thought it was invented by Mazarin, the onely object of all the injuries I ever heard from his Holiness mouth. But at the same time he complained of Mazarine, he ever in∣termixed some praises of the King and Queen, and somewhat in commendations of the flourishing state of that Kingdom, to whom that unhappiness was befallen, as he said, to be governed by one single Man, who, without any regard to the publick good, sought onely his own private interest; but when the first news of the Peace was spread abroad, he was a long time very pensive, and of opinion, that it was fit to take good consideration of what passed; still doubting that Mazarin, by this pleasing and wel∣come news, had a design to lull other Princes , according to his usual policy, and afe some parade of his good intents, to avoid the world's blame, be∣gin again a War with more fury than ever. After∣wards, finding there was really a Treaty, and being confirmed in it by his own Ministers, he could do no less than express some signs of content, and de∣clare, that having never asked any thing of God with more affection and desire than the making of this Peace, it was indifferent to him whether it was brought about by his or any other means, he having this comfort at least, that the Articles could not differ very much from those, which he a long time before by his many consultations and cas had framed to the same end. But, for all this, the Pope was somewhat notled, though he would not shew it, that it should be said, The Peace was now brought about by that same person, he had in all companies accused as the onely dissenter and o∣poer
of what he undertook to make them agree upon: and that the Spanyards should now come to acknowledge him the Author of the peace and quiet of their State, that had ever been their Anta∣gonist, and oppressed them, to the great prejudice of the Catholique Religion: And although the Pope made a large discourse in praise of Mazarin, to the Gentleman that came to Rome about the Dispensation for the Marriage, briefly running over all the particulars therein, and making it pass for one of the greatest and happiest actions that ever was effected by any of his Predecessors, or Ministers; yet upon some occasions hapning since, it was easie to take notice, that his Holiness still retains part of his old jealousie; and were there no other proof, that which passed concerning the Arch-bishop of Ambrun, Ambassador from the King of France to your most Serene Lordships, were a sufficient one, which hath occasion'd the great discontent that hath lasted so long time, and can∣not yet be composed. For the Pope still pleads this, that although there were many other men in France of greater probity, and sitter for that em∣ployment than he, yet Mazarin would put it upon an Ecclesiastique, that so because of the integrity required therein, and the inconveniencies which would follow, he might be sure to find out some oc∣casion of discontent when he pleased. Your Lord∣ships cannot believe how much heat the Pope shewed in maintaining this opinion, for although the difference were a trifle, the action not being in it self so considerable as the Church-men would have it to be, yet I have been more puzzled about it than in matters of the highest importance, having
had much ado to perswade the Pope, not to believe your most Serene Lordships took part rather with the French than him; who by your refusing to receive his Nuncio in a habit different from the ordinary garb, you shewed how little you cared the Aposto∣lique Chair should maintain its Prerogatives, and that Authority that God alone can limit, I omitted not to shew his Holiness, most sincerely that the end and onely aim of your Lordships was to pre∣vent greater discontents that might have followed, and to abstain from those kind of Novelties which in time might have been made customary. I in∣treated some of the most considing and judicious Cardinals, to mediate about it, that so small a matter might not make dissention, but that your Lordships sincerity might be looked on with a pru∣dent eye. But the Pope would not be satisfi'd with reason, who continuing his first complaints, re∣plied, That it was a premeditated business of Maza∣rin's, who had not been content to trouble the whole world by blowing the coals of dissction and war, but would now, if he could, make them find bitterness, too, in the very beginning of a Peace. He wasted a great part of the Audience before his anger could be abated, in these and the like kind of discourses. And I doubt whether things can stand long as they are, unless the French resolve to recall their Am∣bassador from hence, as I think all the world is bound to do what they can, to maintain the Peace by such common satisfactions, hoping that here∣after things of so small importance shall not inter∣rupt our greater joy and quiet. However, I think, notwithstanding this I have related, I may truly tell your most Serene Lordships, it is most likely, that
although the Pope and the King of France are not always absolutely satisfi'd with each other, yet they would scarce be brought to such terms as should cause a rupture: they being likely to keep and con∣tinue their amity, not onely during the life of this Pope and King, but of their Successors. And there are two reasons that oblige me to believe so; the first is, that the Popes finding they cannot intro∣duce their Innovations according to their own fan∣cies, by force and rigour, into that Kingdom, to the prejudice of the privileges of the Gallican Church, and the notable diminunion of their Tem∣poral Jurisdiction, will forbear it, that they may not undergo the contempt of seeing their Decrees re∣jected, and their Authority despised. Whence it will follow, that the Cause ceasing, those Disten∣tions, which are the Effects, will cease likewise. The second, which is purely Politique, may be re∣duced to this, That although the Popes have ac∣quired great power over the Spanyard, by their having several times extremely obliged them, and do in their Country exercise an Authority not at all disputed, nevertheless they cannot but have some jealousie and fear, lest that Monarchy should one day open its eyes, and endeavour to ease themselves of those great burthens the Clergy have insensibly laid on their backs; and because if that should happen, it may be the thunder of the Censures, and Temporal power of the Church, would prove insufficient to oppose that danger. The Pope's have therefore made it their Maxim to keep the Amity of the French, as a means thereby to help themselves in case there should any change or stirs happen on the House of Austria. Some Cardinals have at
times entertained me with discourse on this subject, not in such plain terms, but however in such a way, that I could easily perceive that they see clearer and farther then some Princes imagine they do. When ever the French, laying aside their suspition of the Clergies covertousness, shall endeavour or desire to be at greater amity with the Court of Rome, there is no cause to fear but it would succeed, because of their conformity in Religion, and because of their own interest: who, if they should trouble the peace of Rome, would compel them to unite themselves more firmly with the Spanyard, a thing the French will endeavour to obstruct as much as possibly they can. If we should judge of things according to the interest of the Court of Rome, and Pope Alexander's inclination, we need not doubt but the Spanyards possess the affection of his Holiness more than any other. The interest of the Court of Rome consists in this, that for the most part, the mony wherewith it is glutted above all the other Cities in Italy, comes in greatest abundance from the States of the Catholique King, where the Ecclesiastical Tri∣bunal is held in Sovereign veneration, all the States of that Monarchy having their recourse thi∣ther, to the great profit of the Officers, who have a share in the First-fruits and many other things, according to their Quality, and their Offices. And as for the Pope's inclination, provided he otherwise have a general zeal for the good of Christendom, and the propagation of the Faith, and that he re∣main stedfast in these two things, as I believe he doth, I think he may and ought to have a more
particular affection for that Nation, whose Maxim it is, Not to admit of any other Religion in their Dominions but the Roman Catholique, and employ∣ing all the power they have to advance it: But in truth, things are not carri'd thus, for whether the Court of Rome believes that all the Spanyards do in pretence of Religion is rather out of self-interest, or whether this Court is perswaded they ought ab∣solutely to rule over those that will never fall foul on her, how great soever the inconveniencies are they lie under, it is ever observ'd in all the diffe∣rences arising betwixt Rome and Spain, that after a great and long contest, the Agreement is most com∣monly made to the Popes content, and the diminu∣tion of somewhat of the Catholique King's pre∣tences; and when businesses have thus hapned to the disadvantage of that Monarchy, other Princes have also received a notable prejudice thereby: for when the Pope or his Ministers have once car∣ri'd so high a hand over the Spanyard as to make him yield, they presently make use of the opportunity to quell or confound those that would do otherwise, or at least to induce them not to refuse that, to which so great a Monarchy as Spain hath acquiesc'd. This stratagem may be effectual when they treat with inferior Princes, who are not able upon every contest they have with Rome to take Arms: but both the Pope and his Ministers decline all these ways, when they have to deal with the French, who, when the Clergy press'd them, by this example of the Spanyards, to condescend to things which were pre∣judicial to them, soon gave them an answer which stopped their mouthes: Nay my self being once earnestly sollicited to press your Lordships for a
revocation of the Ordinance, which prohibits the Clergy from purchasing any immovables, upon an example alleaged of the practise of Spai, and the other Territories of his Catholique Majesty, did give for answer, That the reasons which oblig'd that great and vast Monarchy to suffer it, were not current here, because this Republique being but a petty or little State, and the Clergy extraordinarily encreased in wealth, if they were suffered still to purchase and never to alienate, our posterity could expect no other than to be one day driven out of this Venice is built on a Marsh. Marsh, and and perhaps out of all her Terri∣tories on the firm Land. And to this are all those Principalities reduc'd, who, not content with that subjection they owe the Church of Rome, as the Universal Mother of Christians, have submitted to, and followed the Pope's desires in things indifferent: not that they do at once de∣mand several things of difficulty, but sometimes one thing and then another, and thus by little and little they gain so much as doth both diminish and limit the Temporal Power: and so when Princes shall think themselves Masters, they will find their Au∣thority so eclips'd and manacl'd, that they will be astonish'd to see another master them at their own homes. Those who are acquainted with their ex∣tortions at Naples, and perhaps in all the other Dominions of Spain, of the Officers of the Roman Treasury, as well in matters of A certain Fee levi'd by the Ecclesiastical Cham∣ber at the death of a Clergy-man that hath no power to make a Will. Despoiling, as in
the gathering up of what is raised for the Fabrick of St. Peter, which they also impose on meer Laicks, cannot but admire, that the Ministers of Spain should be so drousie, as not to observe with what Empire void of all discretion, and with what insolency they treat the Persons and Goods of their Subjects Let your most serene Signory, therefore, give thanks to the Divine Bounty, that hath preserved her from these confusions, and given her the pur∣dence and courage to defend both her self and Sub∣jects from the violence of such Strangers, confirm∣ing her ever in the antient and true Faith; but also giving her at the same time the judgment to discern what is due to Caesar, and what to God. It is cer∣tain, that if the Spaniards still keep their eyes as close shut as they have hitherto done, they cannot expect so great a Tempest from any other part as from the Court of Rome, when upon any acci∣dent there shall arise dissention amongst them, be∣cause those people that are Subjects to the Austria Family being hugely possessed with Religion, and fully perswaded, that the Sanctuary of Rome is that alone which can either bestow or deprive them of Eternal Salvation, if in the commencement of a rupture the Popes should proceed to Excommuni∣cation, or a Revocation of Indulgences which they have liberally allowed the Catholique Kings, it is beyond all doubt that a general combustion would follow thereupon, which might occasion the revolt of all the Subjects of that great Empire, and so the forfeir of the peace and security of the Spanyards would flow from his too great obedience, wherein they imagine their chief strength and power does consist. But perhaps likewise the good
Genious of those Kingdomes will suggest such means as may prevent these inconveniencies, and (the present Age not having been happy in that Monarchy, by reason of the few virtuous Men that have been her late Souvereigns) fu∣ture Ages may produce more excellent ones, and compense her past disorders, by preventing those which might happen probably to her hereafter. In effect, if with attention we consider the present posture of things in the world, it greatly con∣cerns Christendome to have a Potent Prince, who in such dangers, whereinto the power of the Turks may in an instant and unprovided cast her, might suddenly make head against them without making of Leagues and expecting Foreign aid, which cannot be compessed but by length of time, and is a great retardment. And if Chri∣stendome had had in this present juncture of things a powerful Prince to have thus succour'd her, per∣haps your most Serene Signory had not been re∣duc'd to the condition she is now in: And, not∣withstanding, on her security depends all what the Monarchy of Spain possesses in Italy. But to re∣turn to what I said, Pope Alexander is not igno∣rant of all those reasons he hath to make him love Spain and her King; and does often tell this to the Ministers of other Princes; but in such a manner however, as if it seemed that the benefits which the Court of Rome receiveth from the Span∣yards were not so considerable, as to hinder the Pope from denying them from time to time those favours which they crave of him, as having au∣thority not to grant all to those Children he most tenders what they shall desire, but onely that
which will be for their greatest good, and highest, spiritual, advantage. His Holiness hath made complaint, for that the Spanish Ministers have been too reserved and secret towards him, i not communicating to him the Treaty of Peace, pretending that having ever believed the Pro∣positions on their part were more plausible than those which were shaped in Mazarin's Closet, they did him wrong in observing so rigorously that Seal of Secresie which Mazarin had im∣posed on them: And although they endeavour all they can to calm his discontented thoughts there∣upon, urging that it was conceal'd in the same manner from the Emperour; and even from the Republique, which had been so long time employ'd about the Treaty. He is not, how∣ever, satisfi'd with this excuse, but replies, That they ought to make a difference between Se∣cular Princes and a Pope, who aimed at no other thing but to find out the means to give that con∣tent to all Christendom, and not have left that ho∣nour to a man who had studi'd all the devices ima∣ginable to obstruct so great a happiness. After all this, I conclude, that the Pope hath just reason to love the Spanyards, not so much because they contributed to his Exaltation, as because th Arms have put a stop to the fury of Heretiques, and their Country brings in the Riches and opu∣lency to the Court of Rome; and I believe he doth truly love them, but having found that his Predecessors had taken the way to have most commonly some contests with the Catholique Court, he will not swerve from it, esteeming these disputes do in some respects encrease the
reputation of the Court of Rome, and from thence hath a fair opportunity to gain an esteem of other Princes; not declining my for∣mer Proposition, That the more the Spanyards condescend to the Pope's will, the more will they prejudice themselves, and the Obliga∣tions they do acknowledge to be due from them to the Apostolique Sear, may one day produce most dangerous effects, unless they fore-arm themselves by such precautious means, as they shall judge most proper against the pretensions of the Ecclesiastiques, thereby to put their Monarchy in a better posture of se∣curity. The King of Poland subsists because God hath assisted him: For otherwise, had he reli'd on those hopes the Court of Rome had given him to supply him with Money, his enemies had triumph'd over him, and the total loss of that Kingdom would have been such a leading to other Provinces, as might have wrought the manifest danger of establishing a Power in those parts which would have be∣come formidable to all Europe. God be praised that we are so happy as to see every one return∣ing to his own home again, his neighbouring Princes beginning to stickle in that War, as they ought to do; whereas nothing to purpose could have been expected from them, had the pressing affairs of Christendom summoned them to the defence of their own States. The Pope talks loudly of the good Offices he did for the Religion and Countries of the Catholique
Princes at that juncture. But the Polonians and Imperialists speak otherwise; they profess, that at the heighth of all the War they found no great benefit in the exhortations of his Ho∣liness, which served for nothing else but onely to perswade their Enemies they had not so little amity for them, but that they would send them succour from Rome. And it was this noise and nothing else that made it believed, the Catho∣lique Forces were so much greater than indeed they were. In the mean time, King Casimir, a good Souldier and good Catholique, finding at present his losses are nothing so great, as he had cause to fear they would prove, gives the Pope thanks for what he hath done, and to please him the more tells him, That the very words of his Holiness were not ineffectual for his assistance. The Duke of Savoy hath had no Minister at Rome since some discontent given him in Pope Innocent's time: and, indeed, considering the little busines he hath there, he needs not entertain any. The present Pope, who seeks by all means and ways to add lustre and glory to that Court, which he thinks does consist much in the number of such Ministers as re∣side there on the behalf of other Princes, hath declared, that he should be much pleased to have an Ambassadour from that Duke, as from a Prince to whom the Church is much ob∣lig'd: This he made known obliquely to Ma∣dam and the Duke her Son, who found it fit∣ting to content his Holiness herein, who would
be willing likewise to add lustre to that Fa∣mily, were there any of them at present wor∣thy of the Purple, to lay the furer foundation for the posterity of the Chigi, upon which a certain Marquis, de la Mojette, a very com∣plete Cavalier, presenting himself at Rome in quality of Ambassador, the Pope express'd a great deal of satisfaction thereupon. The name of the Grand Duke of Toscany is agreeable to the whole Court, the Pope esteems him, and in the Consistory hath more than once spoken of his Highness with a great deal of honour, perhaps because being born his Subject, and the most part of his kindred being within his jurisdiction, he believes, that as well out of the respect to his birth, as from the consideration of what may happen, he ought to have all that esteem for him which he is worthy of. In which this Pope is more praise-worthy than the three Popes his pre∣decessors, which were Clement VIII, Pa V, and Urban the VIII, who although they were born in Toscany, did so utterly forget what they owed to their Country, and those who were the Princes of it, that they could not be excused of ingratitude; but because it is the natural vice of Priests, few men reflect upon it; and nevertheless this is the cause that Princes themselves do not know whether they ought to be glad that one of their Sub∣jects is advanced to the Sovereign Ecclesiasti∣cal Dignity.
These two Princes for some other kind of interests receive not that satisfaction which they ought to have, he that commands at Rome never failing to clash sometimes with one of them, and sometimes the other Prince, and that perhaps to shew they are treated alike, and so the one hath no more cause to ap∣plaud the Government than the other. But for all this they negotiate confidently, and as both have the repute of being prudent, they communicate and consult together when those two Courts have any thing of difference, which doth not a little serve to preserve and maintain their amity. Although the Genoese, after they had been some time without a Minister at Rome, because in this Pope's time they had been, as it were, excluded from their pretences, have of late sent one thither with some hopes of being bet∣ter heard for the future: yet I can hardly be∣lieve the Pope will inovate any thing in their favour, for fear of causing some disturbance amongst the other Princes, who not thinking themselves inferiour, would not suffer them to enjoy greater Prerogatives than themselves. Every one said at Rome, that this Republique desiring more grandeur than she already hath, would suddenly disburse some great sum to obtain it, which might thereupon be granted, by covering the Contract they might make by some specious pretence. All this may be; but the fairest and the honestest way, in my opi∣nion,
would be to engage them to succour this Republique with their Squadions, provided they did not require a greater acknowledgment for this than were due. The Duke of Parma, after the fair words they have given him, finds they do in effect deny the satisfaction due to his just desires, which tend to furnish him wherewith to re∣deem his Estate of Castro again. I did not omit, having your Lordships Orders, to ac∣quit my self of those devoirs to which I was oblig'd, both by the justice of his cause, and your commands. But after they had turned me every way with ambiguous words, I found that somewhat more effectual was required to bring it to pass. It cannot be deni'd in truth, but they do very much wrong this Duke, for though in the Apostolique Chamber they have made an Act which adjudges this Estate forfeit, if he redeem it not within a certain prefixed time, yet this Pope, of a milder and more temperate humour than Innocent was, ought rather to follow the rules of Equity than the rigour of the Law, by considering, that this Estate is worth two thirds more than what it is engaged for, and that it could not happen in a worser time for him to do it, than since the Contract was made, all Lombardy having been in Arms, and he moreover necessitated to secure that Estate at his own charges, al∣though it were a Feof belonging to the Church, which hath been a very great expence to him.
But when one treats with those of the Apo∣stolique Chamber of any thing that concerns their interest, one can neither be heard, nor ever get any thing from them upon the ac∣count of reason. It is is therefore the inte∣rest of all Crowns, having consider'd the ∣nour of the clauses of this Contract, to find out some way to relieve the Duke of this enor∣mous gievance; and this would be best done by the Spanyards, to take away all those seeds of discord from Italy, which might arise from the like discontents: which should it happen, the panyards would receive the greatest pre∣judice thereby, as having most to loose. But one good word from the Pope makes them pass by any thing, and keeps them from doing or saying ought that may displease him in the least: and I perceive already, that the new Ambassadour from Spain, D. Lewis Ponze de Leon, is come with a design not to negotiate any thing but what shall please the Pope; and for this reason will permit the Duke to owe the whole obligation of this business to Strangers, who afterwards, and that with reason, shall be recompensed for it upon oc∣casion. This which I have said of the Duke of Parma may be appli'd likewise to the Duke of Mrlena, who alleges the greatest reasons in the world upon the Subject of Comacchio and what is annexed to it. This process hath been depending before the Court Tribunals
above sixty years, and yet they cannot obtain a Sentence that the demands of the House of Este are unjust, although the greatest Lawyers of our times have used all their Art to find out some plea that might make them let fall their pretences, or at least weaken and invalidate them, and support the Chamber's claim. All that the Counsellors could do, who never want evasions to spin out a business, hath been to prolong this same. And it hath hapned several times, when they were brought to terms of concluding it by some fair composition, at the very nick of time when they were just ending, they have started some new exceptions to unavel it again, insomuch that this Suit hath lasted al∣ready, as I said, above threescore years. But it were convenient, that at this time when the flames of an universal War are extinguished, these sparks, which might perhaps bring all into a combu∣stion again, should be put out likewise: and it were reasonable too, those Crowns should em∣ploy their authority and power to make them leave of that base and vile avarice which is dis∣pleasing to the whole world. But unless they go about it roundly, and speak to the purpose in express terms, laying aside all civility, it will be difficult to bring this about, the affairs of the Chamber of Rome being a Gulf that swallo vs all one hath, and whence nothing can be re∣deemed no more than from Hell. The Duke of Mantoua is held in some consi∣deration at Rome by reason of the Estate
possesses, which should oblige all Italians to wish him prosperity, as the Pope doth, who does herein agree with the other Princes of Italy. But otherwise he cares little for this Court, by reason of the little businesses he hath there. Nor does the Court on their side make any great reflexion on-his person. They con∣sider or look upon him as a Prince, who cannot do better than to follow the stream with others, that is to say, accommodate himself to the Gusto of those who are most puissant in Italy, and particularly your Signory: for in keeping close and well to hor, he does at the same time do well both for himself and the general good. We are now come to the last, but most im∣portant Chapter of this Relation, in which I am to discover, both what is in the Pope's mind concerning the interests of your most Seren: Republique, and what good may be hoped for from him, or what hurt may be feared, if it should please God to allow him a longer life than his constitution seems to promise. And if from the Confident and familiar conversa∣tion of a great Prince with the Minister or another, one may make a certain judgment of his intentions, I cannot believe any other but that your Signory may hope much from him, not things of that imortance or quality that you have just need of, but at least such things as may suffice to maintain a peaceable co∣respondence, and beget mutual Offices of Amiy, still accompani'd with the beauty de∣sires
of beholding each others prosperity; For, in truth, I cannot say but his Holiness treated with me with all kind of civility and good will; and as for those things which be judged blamable, as such actions, as having been per∣haps misreported, he thought worthy of cen∣sure; he hath ever done it with so much mo∣desty and circumspection, that I fear I should erre should I think otherwise: because his Ho∣liness hath ever spoken of your sage Govern∣ment in fair terms, having declared it was guided and administred with much Ju∣stice and Honesty. Yet I took notice that he every day made some steps towards the design he had to oppose your Lordship's wills; and though he never changed his tone of speech in treating with me, yet it was easie to see that he had given place to some sinister im∣pressions, which abated the good opinion he was wont to have naturally for this State. His first words were upon my representing to him the great and pressing necessities your Repub∣lique underwent by the expences of the War; That your most Serene Lordships would not accept of those Propositions that might in part have eased you, as that in suspending some useless Religious Orders, which being once ef∣fected had much diminished the Publique charge, there being yet a new way to bring about this benefit, if the Republique would but suffer the Ecclesiastique Order by little and little to repair the losses they now sustained by the alienation of their lates, which might be
done by revoking the Ordinance which forbad that Order to purchase any: upon which I shall not deseant any more, having written so much already thereof, that your most Serene Lordships have just cause to be tired: But whatever I could say, it was impossible for me to perswade him, but that this Ordinance would produce the bad effects he imagin'd. Sometimes he would take occasion to complain, that there were such disputes and practises be∣tween the chief Commanders of the Army, that it hindred the Republique from being well served, and that the moneys were not well administred, for that those that manag'd it made so much profit themselves, that it much damnifi'd the Publique, and that the same Commanders less careful of doing their duty than of making advantage, by way of Trade, of those Commodities they transported to the Levant, were the cause that the Publique, which required the entire application of her Commanders, received a great prejudice there∣by. All which things without doubt proceeded from the Mouth or Pen of the Prior Bichi, who to hide or cloke his own defects, exposed those of others. From thence the Pope took occasion to complain, that the Republique in her ne∣cessities made her address to none but the Apo∣stolique Chair, and he for his part had no greater care than to furnish them with assistance, and that if every Prince, according to the proportion of his power, would but do as much as the Court of Rome, your Republique would be suffi∣ciently
provided both for the Defensive and the Offensive: and hereupon he began to make a long enumeration of those Charges the Aposto∣lique Chamber was subject to, and in this dis∣course, which was full of equivocations, as I sent word to your most Serene Lordships, he was larger than enough to tire any one. He said moreover, that at present the Peace was made between the two Crowns, and if they could formerly find out Treasure enough for a War whereby to ruine one another, they might bet∣ter do it to assist this Republique, which was become the Frontier of all Christendom against the Turks: That your Signory ought to have a great and particular confidence in the French, seeing the partiality she had shewed for them, when she gave them all the satisfaction they desired, tacitly alluding to what I related that hapned about the Ambassador's Rochet. And thus we onely lost time in these discourses at the last Audience, with little benefit to the Pub∣lique: but it hath now been certainly made known to me, that if the Pope hath been hither∣to flow in performing that devoir, more incum∣bent upon him than any other whatsoever, he will be yet flower hereafter, since he believes he hath gone farther than any other in his obli∣gations of opposing the common Enemy. This is that which makes him unwilling to hear of the sending an Extraordinary Ambassador to Rome, imagining he would go with the de∣sign also of obtaining some extraordinary suc∣com: which, to say truth, I see the Pope very
little inclined to grant, not to say, obstinately resolved to refuse it, because, indeed, there is no mony. If they think he will erect any Banques to get it for them, I do not believe it; for be∣sides, his Holiness pleases himself in expending what arises from the few there are in such things wherein he takes a great delight, as in Build∣ings, and adorning of Churches, together with all accommodations for his Dwelling-house: and if he should dispose himself to do somewhat more than ordinary, I do not think he would use any other liberality but what costs him nought, which is an increase of the Impositions of the Clergy of this State, which is known to be already so bare, that it hath nothing left but the bones: and that is just a helping of us with our own proper goods, although it be not desired that we should say so at Rome; for they would have us believe, that whatever belongs to the Priests in what Country soever, apper∣tains to them. When the time of my depar∣ture approached, I found the Pope somewhat more mild. He gave thanks to God again for the Conclusion of the Peace, and testifi'd, that he had a better opinion of the affairs in the Levant for the future, alleaging the reason which I have noted, which was, that his heart told him, that your Republique would never lay down their Arms till they had defeated the Turks, and obtained some signal Victory over them. I guess, that he said this to me, onely to encourage your Lordships, that so they might refuse any kind of Treaty that might be pre∣judical
judicial to Christendom; or perhaps he pro∣pounded some League to himself, either with the Imperial Court, or that of Poland: I can∣not aver this, but I incline to believe the first rather, because the Pope would hardly find any Princes in those parts that would con∣fide in his promises; nor would they en∣gage themselves in any enterprize without a sum in hand, that might assure them not to be deserted, when they were once enter'd up∣on it. At my departure, after he had stood much upon my praises, wherein I had rather he would have been more sparing, provided he had shewed himself more liberal in his favours towards your most Serene Republique, he en∣joyned me to remember, to represent these four things to you: The first, That you should en∣deavour to suppress, or take up those diffe∣rences at the Tribunal of the Inquisition at Padua, which are still in contest, to the great scandal of all those that hear of that matter: His Holiness told it me just so, without any reflexion on it. But when your Signory resolves to meddle with those interests, there must be some important reason that shall induce you thereto. This order was very unpleasing to me, because it concerns a matter nor suiting at all with my genious, and about which much noise hath been made. The second, That the security of the Navi∣gation in the Adriatique Sea should be more Carefully look'd after, for he complained, that there was no Trade in the port of Ancona, the
Merchants not being secure in their passage with their goods, by reason of the Reprisals those Pirats of Dulcigno do make, their robberies, allarming the whole Coasts of the Marca He added, that if during the continuance of the War with the Turk, your Signory would suffer them to keep two Gallies in the Port of Ancona, it should be done as soon as the Squa∣dron returned from the Levant. The third, That it would please your Lord∣ships to forbear interposing their judgments in matters Ecclesiastical, as they do from time to time, which offends and infringes the Ecclesi∣astical Jurisdiction, and makes them run them∣selves imprudently into censorious inferences, not minding the disgraces hapning daily there∣upon: He pressed me much to oblige you likewise to moderate some of your Ordinances. The fourth, that your Signory would fa∣vour the Father Jesuits with their protection in those occurrences that may happen, be∣cause the seeds of that hatred conceived against them, remaining yet in the hearts of some that do not well know them, it may be easie, but it would prove no act of generosity, said the Pope to me, to lay some ambush by ca∣lumny or impostures against them, which are to be look'd upon with an indifferent eye, and being found out should be repulsed. I pro∣mised to observe punctually what his Holiness had commanded me, and to represent what he desired to your Lordships. You may be pleased
to see and consider wherein you can favour his Holiness, having so great judgment as cannot erre; which concluded his last Audience, adding thereto his Paternal Benediction which he be∣stowed upon your Lordships and my self, with his best wishes, and a presage of victories and perpetual prosperities. FINIS.
Imprimatur Novem. 9. 1663. Roger L' Estrange.
A New Relation OF ROME. As to the Government of the City; The Noble Families thereof; The Revenue and Expences of the Pope; The Courts of Justice; The Of∣fices; The Congregations of Cardinals, and other Par∣ticulars very Curious. Taken out of one of the Choi∣cest Cabinets of Rome; and Eng∣lish'd by Gio. Torriano, an Italian, and Professor of the Italian Tongue. London, Printed by T. Mabb, for John Starkey at the Mitre between the middle Temple-gate and Tem∣ple-Bar, in Fleet-street, 1664.
TO THE Truly AFFECTIONATE, UNTO THE Italian NATION, AND LANGUAGE. I Have made it my bu∣siness ever since his Majesties most bles∣sed and Glorious Re∣stauration,
to range our Proverbs, Proverbiall Metaphors and Drol∣ling Similies into a facile and ready Method for present search and per∣usal, when occasion should serve, beyond any Me∣thod yet extant. And accordingly to get the work into the Presse, I began by way of Sub∣scriptions, a Method Practised by several of my Betters, in Books of
great Bulk, Labour and Cost; But before I had gotten together thirty pound, which is not the tenth part of the charge, (though I met with no re∣pulses,) in regard it took up most of my time; I declined that Way, and undertook (since Engaged) to Print it forthwith, upon my own account, for it was im∣possible for me to con∣dition with any Stationer, the whole Copy not be∣ing
ready to be shown, (as yet there being but three parts of four done) and also by rea∣son of sickness, or morta∣lity, uncertain to finish it; This small Peice since, nay very lately coming to my Hands, and being of Italian Concern, though not as to the Language, yet as to the Nation I thought it significant to Translate it, that it might serve as a Prepa∣rative unto the other, for
the better understanding of several Proverbiall Traditions that may con∣cern Rome, or other parts of Italy. Such as have personally been tra∣velled in Italy, specially Rome; I presume must needs be delighted in it, as being a help unto their Memorys in several par∣ticulars and others upon several other accounts. I have kept Terra Ter∣ra in the Translation, something near the shore
of the Letter, because being Narrative, it would not so well admit of any jetting out into Para∣phrases, or other Flou∣rishes. In Fine, the sub∣ject hath need of no Pa∣tronage, being able to Buye up it selfe as He∣roick, but the Translati∣on may have need of your Such as have alrea∣dy subscri∣bed, when the book is finisht shall have a pun∣ctual return and who yet shall sub∣scribe be∣fore the book be fi∣nisht, the like. Pardon, for the meanness of it, and that I trust you will not Deny unto Your Gio. Torriano.
The Authors ADVERTISEMENT To the Reader. THis Relation contains the Government of the City of Rome. The Revenues both certain and un∣certain of the Pope; The Names and Dignities of all the Houses and Families which have or pretend to Titles of Nobility; and wherein their Estates consist. The State and Description of the Datery and Chancery.
The Forme, Quality and Num∣ber of Courts of Justice; to∣gether with their manner of administrating of Justice. The Names, Value, and Revenue of all the Offices; as well salable as not. A Discourse of the Congregations of Cardinals. The Qualities, Wages, and Salaries, of the several Officers of the Popes House; also the Ceremony which is observed in the payment of Rents, Tri∣butes and Homages due unto the Holy See, and other par∣ticulars, very Curious. The Reader may be pleased to take notice, that the summs specified in the present Relati∣on, are computed according to
the currant Coyne of Rome, viz. By Crowns and Baiocco's. One Testone is worth three Julio's, and every Julio is worth ten Baiocco's, and by consequence, one Crown is worth three Testons and ten Baiocco's. So much hath been thought necessary to be specified here for the satisfaction of such as have not the knowledg of that Coyne. This may be observed; that an English Crown and an Itali∣an Crown is all one, An English sixpence and a Julio all one.
Books Printed for and sold by John Starkey at the Mire, betwixt the midle Temple Gate, and Temple-Bar in Fleet-street. Folio's. THe Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holeins Ambassadors in∣to Muscovy, Tartary, and Persia, begun in the year 1633. and finisht it 1639. con∣taining a compleat Hystory of those Countries; whereto are added the Tra∣vels of John Albert de Mandelslo from Per∣sia into the East Indies, begun in 1638. and finisht in 1640. the whole illustrated with divers accurate Maps and Figures, and written by Adam Olearius Secretary to the Embassy. The world Surveyed, or the famous Voy∣ages and Travels of Vincent de Blanc of Marseilles, into the East and West Indies, Persia, Peru, Fez, Morocco, Guinny, and through all Africa, and the Principal Provinces of Europe. A Practical and Polemical Commen∣tary, or Exposition upon the third and fourth Chapters of the latter Epi∣stle of Saint Paul to Timothy, by Thoma Hall. B. D.
Brevia Judicialia, or an Exact Collecti∣on or approved forme of all forms of all sorts of Judicial VVritts in the Com∣mon-Bench, together with their re∣turns, by Rich Brownlow. Thesaurus Erevium, or a Collection or approved forme of Original and Judi∣cial VVritts in the Kings Bench, with their special Directions, by J. C. Action upon the Case for Slander, or a Methodical Collection of thousands of Cases in the Law, of what words are Actionable, and what not, by William Shepheard, Esq; Guillims Display of Heraldry. Blundels Treatise of the Sybells. Quarto's. Lawsons Politica Sacra & Civilis, or a model of Civil & Ecclesiastical Govern∣ment. The History of Gavelkind with the Ety∣mology thereof, containing a vindica∣tion of the Laws of England, together with a short History of William the Con∣queror, by Sylas Taylor. Octavo's. An Historical and Geographical de∣scription of the great Country and River of the Amazones in America; with an ex∣act
Map thereof, Translated out of French. The Shepherds Paradice, a Pastoral, by Walter Mountague. Aminta, the famous Italians Pastoral, translated into English. Plowdens Queries, or a Moot-Book of choice Cases in the Common-Law, Eng∣lished, methodized, and enlarged by, H. B. An Exact Abridgment of all the Sta∣tutes in force and use, made in the 16th. 17th. and 18th. of King Charls the first, and in the 12th, 13th. and 14th. of King Charls the second, viz. from the 4th. of Jan. 1641/2. to the 18th. of Febr. 1662/3. by William Hughes, Esq;. Finche's Discourse of the Law in four books. Engl. Tho. Hall Apologia pro Ministerio E∣vangelico. —Translation of the second book of Ovids Metamorph. —Treatise against the Millenaries. Twelves. Tho. Hookers Missellanies in Divinity.
A New RELATION OF ROME. ROME, Is Scituated twelve Miles from the Thuscan Sea, and thirty miles from the Ap∣penin Mountain, on that side which extends it self into the Abruzzo, being ever covered with Snow, which serv's for a Refreshment unto the City all the Summer long. It is washt with the Tyber, a Famous River, but more famous in regard of the Imperial City, then for any Greatnesse it hath; or any other
considerable Property. It springs at the foot of the Appenin on the Thuscan side, and very near unto the Sourse of Arnus, in so much that all Winter, the waters of those two Rivers coming to swell, do joyne their Streams to a wast de∣triment, not onely to the Neighbouring Coun∣tryes, but also to the very Cities themselves, Rome, and Pisa. The Grand Duke, Ferdiaand, the first of that Name, who was no wayes a Friend to Pope Clement the 8th, that he might do him a displea∣sure, and benefit his own State; caused to be built in the Plains of Arezzo where those wa∣ters joyn'd, certain Banks, with great Walls to support them, that so they might run either into the Tibr, or iuo Araus, according as the con∣veniency of Thuscany might require. And by that means it, came to pass, that, those Banks having been opened by the Dukes Order a little before Christmas Anno Dom. 1599. on the night of that Festival, in which punctually the Year of Jubilie was to begin, for the oening of the which, Pope Clement was purposely re∣turn'd from Ferrara, Rome suffered an Inunda∣tion like unto a Deluge, which caused the death of an infinite of Cattel in the Fields, and donded abundance of People in the City, for∣asmuch as that Flood came so on the sudden, that it was very difficult for any to escape. Clement the 8th, had not time to revenge him∣self of that injry; but Paul the 5th who suc∣ceeded him after having sent unto him; (though in vain) several Prelates, at last he sent Ma∣signor Veroshi. (who afterwards was Cardinal) who with the assistance of three hundred Soul∣diers,
Corsi; and five hundred Pioners, in the very sight of the Grand Dukes Deputies, caused those Walls to be level'd; since which time, Rome hath not been subject to any Inundations in winter time, and the Tiber hath ever had water enough to carry the Boates and Vessels which come to Rome. The Pope is absolute Lord, as well of the Tempo∣ral as of the Spirituall, all over the State Ecclesi∣astical; Nevertheless with some restriction of Au∣thority in some Cities, by reason of the Priviledges which have been granted them, or which they have reserv'd unto themselves, when they became Subjects to the Holy See. And Rome, though she hath some, or should have many, render him obedience as to an absolute Prince that governs her by the means of several Courts of Justice. The first is that of the Auditour of the Chamber, who purchases his place at fourscore thousand Crowns, and brings him in yearly twelve thousand Crowns; He intermedles with causes by Appeals from the Places and Cities of his Province, which is the Campania of Rome, and in the first place with those of Rome. He himself judgeth the most im∣portant ones; but for the rest, and for the proceedings in Law, he refers them to the administration of two Deputies; He judgeth also in Criminal Causes o∣ver Strangers, having to that purpose a Lievetenant Criminal. From Sentences of the Auditor of the Chamber, appeal is made to the Signature of Justice, which is a Court of Justice, whereof a Cardinal is ever Pre∣sident, and out of the most considerable of the Col∣ledge in 1661. Cardinal Sacchetti, perform'd that Office, and the Popes, Urban the 8th, and Clement
the 8th. both of them held the same Office, during their several Cardinalships. He who is their Presi∣dent hath for his Assistants a great number (but un∣limited) of Prelates, which are called Referendarii Dlle Signature, della Gratia, & della Giustitia, a∣mongst which there are twenty, which are called, Vo∣canti de signatura, who give twelve thousand Crowns for their Places; When as Causes are come to their Court, the Parties present a list of the Judges of whom they have no suspition, among which there is chosen a Spokes-man, who having set his Cause in good order, declares the same before the Cardinall President, and the rest of the Prelates, who give final Judgement, if it exceed not five hundred Crowns, but when it doth exceed, one may appeal from their Sen∣tence unto the Rota. The President of the Signa∣tura buyeth not his Place; and it is to be observ'd, that not any which are possest by Cardinals, are sale∣able. The Rota is a Court of Justice, consisting of twelve Prelates, their Places are worth at the least unto each of them, two thousand Crowns per annum (be∣sides the great Benefites which they obtain of his Holiness;) but they buy them not; They come by Nomination, one by the Emperour, one by the King of France one by the King of Spain, one by the Common Wealth of Venice; the King of Eng∣land had the nominating of one by Course, the King of Poland may likewise, but he neglects it; the o∣thers are taken out of several Cities of Italy who have that priviledge, nevertheless at the Popes choyce, who places therein whom he best likes, pro∣vided he be of one of those Cities. That Court akes notice, by appeal, of all Civil Causes of the aiks, of those of the Church-men, and of all
that concern Matrimony or Benefices from all parts of the World, who acknowledge the Holy See, and who have no Indulgence or special License for to decide them before their own Judges. There is no Appeal from Sentences which the Rota hath once pronounced. The Governour of Rome is a Judge of Criminal Causes; but for to take himself off for the most part of the care; He hath under him four Criminal Judges, from whom they Appeal to himself; yet so, nevertheless as that the first Sentences of those four Judges seem Soveraign, and that the Governour doth nothing but revew the Cause. It is to be ob∣served, that they never condemn to dye, if the cri∣minal (though convicted by sufficient Witnesses) confess not his crime with his own mouth, Torture however is given him proportionable to the greatness of his Crime, and the conviction of the Witnesses, and thence is sent to do Penance. The Governour takes notice also of Civil Causes, where the Salaries of Work-men or Servants are concern'd, and of differences which arise twixt Ma∣sters and Servants. The Clergy-Men own for Judges the Cardinall Vicar of the Pope as Bishop of Rome, he hath under him three Officers; The first, with Title of Vice∣gerent, who is alwayes a Bishop, to whose care it belongs to give Orders to govern Monastries, Pa∣rishes, and other such like Churches, and Functions. The second is a Prelate, not a Bishop, with the Ti∣tle of Lievetenant of the Vicar; to whom the cog∣nizance of Juditiary Causes belong. The third is over the Crimes of the Church-men of Rome, with the Title of Judge criminal of the Vicar, under whose subjection are Priests, Monks, Nuns, Courtezans
and Jews, so that, that Court is very great, for there are abundance of those People in Rome; the Churches though, and Monasteries which have Ti∣tles, or which have the Protection of some Cardinal, acknowledge that Titular Cardinal or Protector for their Judge, having an Indulgency to that purpose granted them. Besides the Courts aforesaid, the Roman People have a peculiar one in the Capitol, which taketh cog∣nizance of Causes amonst Citizens, and others which depend on the Senate with Authority, as well in the Civil as in the Criminal. This Court is com∣posed of one Senator, two Collaterals, and one Judge Criminal, all which do judge each apart. They meet twice a week, and that Court is called Assittamento, to which appeal is made from Sentences, which those Judges have given in private, and from the Sentences of that Court or Assittamento Appeal is made unto a Magistrate called Capl'itano dl Ap∣pellatio, and from him Appeal may be made again to the Senatour, which seems the most intricatest pro∣ceeding in the World. All these Officers have Lodgings in the Capitol. The People also in the same Capitol have their Conservators, appointed formerly, for to have care of the good Government of the City; But it hath been taken from them in great part, for since the erecting of Clarks of the Chamber, who create a∣mong themselves the Prefect of the Annona or of the Coin, and such like Offices which in former times were all in the hands of the People, ther's nothing left them, but onely to provide that the Bakers, Butchers, and Fishmongers, and Fruiterers have their measures just. The City of Rome is divided into fourteen Wards
or Regions, as they call them by a corrupt word, Rion. Near upon the Festival of Christmas they put in an Urne the names of divers Citizens, some for Conservators, others for Caporioni, or heads of the Region according to the quality of the Person, and the first Names that are drawn out of that Urne, are admitted into Office after having taken the Oath of Allegiance unto the Pope. The Conservators are three, who have a fourth Associate, in equall power with them, who is the Principal of the Caporioni, elected amongst them with great Ceremony's, and as they are ever mindfull of Grandeurs past, they subscribe them∣selves still Consuls, as if they were subrogated unto the Ancients. They have a very fair Palace in the Capitole, a∣dorn'd with Statues, and very Beautiful Pictures, where they assemble themselves, once or twice a week for to give audience, and on those dayes they eat together, making a sumptuous Banquet, where they envite their Friends, and are serv'd by the Of∣ficers of the Magistrate, Cup-bearer, Esquires, Stewards, Cooks, Footmen and Others. They en∣joy five or six good Towns with great Revenues, which they consume in that expence. Under the Palace of the Conservators, every kind of Trade hath a Consul; where account is given of what is transacted by each. The Capitol hath another Magistrate called,  Piacere, who judgeth of the satisfactions which are to be given to such as have been offended, either in word or deed. That Office amongst the Romans was executed by the Magister Equitum, and ev'n to this very day, he is still Mastro Giustiario, which is in truth an Office very Pis, but little practis'd.
There is also in the Capitol, another Magistracy of four Marshals, who in the times that the Ro∣mans retain'd as yet some small Authority, com∣manded their Troops in the Field; but since that the ordering of Peace and War is wholly in the Power of the Pope, that Office is no longer given unto men of the Militia, but onely unto young Gentle∣men, in so much that there is nothing left them, but the naked name, and without any Power. The same hath hapned unto the Office of the Prefect of Rome, who formerly hath govern'd that City, under the Greek Emperours, a very long time after Constantine, whence one may discerne the va∣nity of the pretended Donation made by that Em∣perour; In fine, that Office hath no longer any function, and I do extreamly wonder, that the Popes have not as well supprest the Name thereof as the Power, since it still shews in Rome the Imperiall Authority, whence it proceeded. Rome hath as yet another Magistrate, which is not made by the Capitol, no by the Roman People, but by the Prince, viz. Two Masters of the Wayes, who as well within as without the City, have a care of the Wayes, of the Bridges, of the Walls and Publique Buildings, and who judge of the confines of Inheri∣tances. That Office is ever consu'd upon Gentle∣men of the first Nobility, in Years, and of a good Repute, it was called by the Ancients Aedelitia, and those who did exercise it Aediles, of whose edicts we have a full Title in the Codex. They have likewise a Care of the Aquiducts and Fountains of Rome, which are in very great number, but I shall not de∣scribe them here, any more then the rest of the Ra∣ities, and Antiquities of the City, for asmuch as they are discourst of sufficiently at length in the Books ex∣tant of the Wonders of Rome.
Of the Principal Fami∣lies of ROME. THE Principal Families of Rome, are those of the Ursini's, and of the Colonna's, declared to be such by Sixtus Quintus, who gave them place in the Chappel, near the Papal Throne, among the Royal Ambassadours; but the Conti's, and the Sa∣velli's do not any wayes submit themselves unto that Declaration, impugning the same as wicked, and made by Sixtus Quintus, because he had contracted Alliance with both those Families, indeed both of them are of a very Illustrious Nobility, and from se∣veral Ages, and both of them do evidence that they are come from Germany; But for to speak in the first place of that of the Ursini, the Duke of Bracciano Chief of the Ursin's, produceth indeed a Pedigree which derives his Family from Germany, but not that which makes him derive from Italy, for fear perhaps that he might not find his Account in Sansovino, who writes not very favourably of the Ursino's. And as the Conti's and the Savilli's will not give up the Precedency unto the Ursino's, and unto the Collonno's in lke manner the Ursino's and the Colonna's do not agree among themselves, not being willing to stand to the decrees of Sixtus Quintus, who orders that the eldest of them ought to precede the other; which is the cause that when the Chief of the Ursino's is
eldest, Colonna never appears in the Popes Chappel, and reciprocally, when Colonna is eldest; Ursini never appears there. The Grandeur of that Family of Ursini, appears sufficiently in that, that the Kings of Naples, and the Grand Dukes of Thuscany have oft married their Daughters unto them; The Romans for the most part give it the Precedency; because that it is the first mentioned in the Statutes of Rome, whereas upon the Alphabetical account, that of the Colonna's should be mentioned before it. The Chief of the Family of the Ursini's is the Duke of Bracciano, formerly known by the name of the Duke of Santo Semini; for he was so stil'd before the Death of Don Paule Giordano his eldest Brother, not long since deceased without Children Legitimate. He is Father of the Cardinal Ursini, and of the Duke of Meruli; who is married to a Lady somewhat in years, by whom he hath not, nor never will have children; And of Don Lelio, who is unmarried: He possesseth eighteen or twenty good Towns, which bring him in well near an hundred and forty thou∣sand crowns of Revenue, but the excessive liberality of his said eldest Brother Don Paolo Giardano, and of Don Virginio his Father, and of his Grand-father also, Don Paolo Giordano, have left him very many Debts to pay, instead of ready money, whereby to make himself greater. The Dukes of Petigliano, and of Monte Rotondo did make up two other Branches, but they are extinct not long since. The Duke of Gra∣vina in the Kingdom of Naples is of them also, there he possesseth forty thousand crowns yearly Revenue, and hath Children as well as the Duke of Amatrice, who is of the same Family of the Ursini's, and is Prisoner in the Castle Santo Angelo, for having kil∣led
his Wife the Sister of Cardinal Caffarelli; It seemeth that the Name Ursino of that Family is corrupted of Rosino, for they bare a Rose in their Armes, and likewise in Germany they call him of Bamberg, which signifies a Mount of Rome. They hear about their Scutcheon two Bears which support it, which is not seen in those of Germany, an evident Argument of Equivocation of Rosino in Ursino. As to the Family of the Colonna's, competitor with that of the Ursini's as well in Grandeur as in Nobi∣lity; it also boasts that it came from Germany, but that is certain, that if it did come from thence, it hath not brought thence that Name, for it hath as∣sum'd it from a small Town near Rome called Colonna, and so we read in the History of Cola of Rienzo, Giovanni and Sciarra of the Colonna, who are there nominated; orasmuch as that Sciarra of the Co∣lonna gave a sound box on the ear unto Giovanni of the Colonna his Cozen in the Senete; as being great Adversaries, where it appears that they have not gi∣ven the Name to the Town, but have taken it from it; as the Farnesi the Cesi and others. Those of that Family say, that they can shew Titles of above seven hundred Years standing; but it is certain that in the year, nine hundred ninety five, there was not any cognizance in Rome, either of the Ursini's or of the Colonna's, because Maa Sina, and Alberti, Histo∣rians of that Age, setting down all the Noble Fami∣lies of Rome, which did adhere unto Pope Gregory, and for the Anti-Pope John, created by the means of Crescentus Citizen of Rome, dividing them, as it were into two Classes, make no mention neither of the Ursino's nor of the Colonna's, an evident proof that they were not as yet in Rome, or else that they were certain Persons whereo little or no account was
made of; but be it as it will, their greatness appears sufficiently, in that of a long time, there hath been no Peace made betwixt the Italian Princes, but the Heads of those Families have been comprehended therein. This House of the Colonna's is divided into several Branches, whereof the first is that of the Dukes of Paliano who are also Princes of Marino, and of many other Towns, as well in the State Ecclesiastick, as in the Kingdom of Naples, The Cardinal Colonna is the eldest; He possesseth above a hundred thousand Crowns Revenue, as well in Lands, as in Church-Livings, which have been conferr'd upon him by Urban the 8th, by reason of the Alliance which Don Tado Barberini, that Popes Nephew, contracted with him in Marrying Dona Anna Colonna his Sister. The second is Monsignor Colonna, who had borne Armes in Germany, and in Flanders under the Name of Duke of Marsi, and after many Exployts, at length turn'd Monk of the order of St. Bennets, whence to with draw him, because he proved trouble∣some to all the rest of the Monks; he was made Bi∣shop in Partibus. The third is Don Mare Antonio Co∣lonna formerly Married unto a Sicilian, of whom he had two male children, Don Lorenzo, ready for Mar∣riage, and Don Filippo designed for the Church, and five Daughters, whereof the Eldest is Married unto Duke Spinola of Genova, and the other four are ei∣ther Nunns or design'd to be so. He stiles himself Duke of Paliano, Prince of Marino count of Taglia∣cozzho, and High Constable of the Kingdome of Na∣ples. The second Branch, which formerly was the first, is that of the Dukes of Cartoniano, the Father of him who is yet living, was Prince of Palistrina,
which he sold unto the Barbarins, to the end that he might live plentifully. They possesse still well near five and thirty thousand crowns Revenue, and they save as much as they can. His Eldest Son, who is a Church-man, hath bought an Office of Clark of the Chamber; The second is called Duke of Bassanello: There is a Third, who hath no Title. The Prince of Gallicano makes the third Branch, but he hath no children, and small hopes of having any, and having almost all his Estate in the King∣dome of Naples, the Spaniards have Sequestred it by reason of the treacherous correspondence which he held with them during the Troubles of Naples. Let us come to the Family of the Conti's; it is possible the most Antient of all, or at least formerly it was the most powerful; Platina, relating that the Counts of Tuscoli or Frascati (in Italian Li Conti Tus∣culani) did cause frequently Popes to be created to their Interest, by reason of their Power. Its belie∣ved that the Conti's this day living, are the same with the Counts of Tuscoli or Conti Tusculani. A certain person and very Intelligent, saith, that there is some kind of flaw in the Family; be it as it will, it is now Reduc'd to two Branches, the Dukes of Car∣pineto and of Poli, and neither of them have any great Estate. The Family of the Savilli's is Esteem'd by some in Rome more Antient than that of the Collonna's, and the Ursini's; there are some who will have it to be Descended from that Sabellus, of whom Cicero speaks, but I hold that for a Fable, though in another respect it is held very Antient, and it is realy so, as it ap∣pears in severall Inscriptions, and Antient Monu∣ments which are obvious to be Read in Churches, and other Publique Places.
The Power which fomerly they have had in Rome may be proved by the Power, which they had not long since, of keeping a Court of Justice in Rome by the Name of Torre di Savelli, in the which notice was taken of certain causes, as of affronts done unto the Courtezans; but Innocent the 10th took it from them. The Sardi relate strange things, extracted out of the Records of their Kingdome concerning that Family, whence there have issu'd several Popes. The chief of this Family is the Prince of Albano, and Duke of the Riceja, the Eldest is a Clergy-Man, the Younger Brother who bears the Name of a Prince, hath been Married to a Sister of the Dutches of Ceri; of the Family of the Aldobrandini who died in child-bed, of a child which is still living; The deceased Cardinal Montalto their Uncle of the Mother-side, hath left them an ample Patrimony, which hath very well restor'd them, and had not that been, it was reported that if they had sould the best part of their Estate they would hardly have been able to pay their Debts. They have an Uncle who is Cardinal, and who was Arch Bishop of Salerno, but he hath resign'd that Church unto Mosignor Torres his Nephew, his Sisters Son. There are three more Gentlemen of this Family, who have no Title at all. I have observed that the Savelli, and the Conti expose the Pictures of the Popes of their Fa∣mily, whereas among the Ursini's we see not that of Nicholas the third, nor among the Colonna's, any but that of Mart the 5th. It may possibly be, because that the Ursini's, and the Colonna's cannot reckon up so many Popes as others or because they would show that their Greatness derives not from Popes. To these four Families, the People add four others which succeed them in greatness, among which the
first is the Gaetana which derives the Origen of it's Nobility from Boniface the 8th, near upon the Year 1300. It hath had in less than within these forty Years four Cardinals, and several others before; It possesseth many good Towns in the Campania of Rome, with the Title of Duke of Sermoneta for the chief of the Family, and the Principality of Caserta in the Kingdom of Naples. There are three more Gentlemen of this Family, who have no great mat∣ter of Estate, nor are they Titled at all. The Fa∣ther of Boniface the 8th, was a Doctor at Law, he came out of Spain, and staid first at Gaeta, and from thence he went to Anagni, where at that time the Court of Rome was kept, and where he became a good Advocate; There was it that John his Son was born, who was afterwards Boniface the 8th, and because he came from Gaeta, he was called Gaetano. The second Family of these four seconds, is that of the Cesarini, called formerly Montavano, which hath drawn that Name, according to the common opinion, from the place called S. Cesario near Bo∣logna, there have Issu'd out from it five Cardinals, within the space of an hundred and fourscore Years; The first of which was called the Cardinal of S. Eu∣stacchio who was slain in a Battel against the Turks in Hungary, the Year 1562. This Family possesseth a Good and Rich Town in the Marca of Ancona, with a Title of a Dukedome, by Name, Civita Nova, and three more in the Latium or Campania of Rome. The third Family of these four seconds, is that of the Cesi's so called from a Castle of the Dukedom of Poleto; It came to Rome near upon the Year 1400. The Romans say, that it hath had its Origen from a Physitian, called Simo di Csi, who purchast a Lord∣ship in the Latium, unto which he gave his Name,
which it bears still to this day. There have been many Cardinals of this Family, all very devout, as it appears by their Magnificent Churches which they have caused to be Built. This Family is at this day devided into three Branches, whereof the chief is the Duke of Acqasparta, who of late is become Heir of that of Ceri his Brother, who deceased without Issue. The second Branch is that of the Marquess Csi, Brother to the deceased Cardinal; and the third is of a private Gentleman, Rich in abandance of chil∣dren, which the Marquess wants. The fourth of the four second Families, is that of Altemps lately come out of Germany, where the Eld∣est bear the Title of Counts of Altempts in Suaube, by the means that one of those Counts having es∣poused the Sister of Pius the 4th, he had a Son a Cardinal, who was very Rich, but very Dissolute, Solasing himself with a Spanish Lady, with whom he got a certain Disease which did not hinder him, though from getting a Son, who because of his Riches Married with a Lady of the Family of the Ursini's; whence issu'd Giovanai Angelo Father of the present Duke, who is far wiser than his Father, or his Grand-father either, who were banisht a long time to Avignon, not for their good behaviour. Next unto these Families, we may reckon up some, who owe all their Greatness to the good Fortune that they have had, to have some Popes of their Families; which are the Dukes Bonelli, who have been advanc't by Pius the 5th their Uncle. The Compagni, Dukes of Sona Enrich't by Gre∣gory the 13th their Uncle. The Peretti, come from Sixtus Quintus, whereof the Name is extinc't by the death of Cardinal Mon∣alto the last Male of the Family.
The Aldobrandini of Clement the 8th also extinct their Riches, dissolving into the Families of the Borghesi, and Pamfilii by the means of two Marriages contracted by the Princesse of Rosana. The first with Don Paulo Borghese, Father to the now Prince of that Name; The second with the Prince Pam∣filio, from whom there hath come many Children. The Prince Borghese, is Prince of Solmona, & is worth three hundred thousand crowns of Revenue, by the means of Paul the 5th their Uncle, and the Thrift of Don Mare Antonio Borghese last deceased. The Loduisi take their Greatness from Gregory 15th, Native of Bologna. Nicolo Lodovisio now li∣ving had taken, in his first Marriage the Princess of Venusa, of whom having had no Issue, he hath been nevertheless invested with the same Principality by his Catholick Majesty; In a second Marriage, he took the Princess of Piombino of the Family of the Appiani, of whom also not having any Issue, and remaining Heir likewise of that Principality by the Death of the Emperour; he took in a third Marriage, the Neece of Pope Innocent the 10th, of whom he hath had one Male Child, called Don Gioanni Battista Duke of Zagarola and Prior of Capua, an Office which brings him in six thousand crowns Revenue; He hath a Daughter, which is Stiled Princess of Piombino, of Venusa, and of Gesualdo, and Dutchess of Fiano. He hath in Revenue threescore thousand crowns out of the Principality of Piombino, thirty thousand crowns out of the Principality of Venusa, thirty five thousand crowns out of the Dukedom of Eagavola, Gallicano, and Colonna, and sixteen thou∣sand crowns out of iano; he hath in Revenue Yearly one hundred and forty thousand crowns. The Barbarini now Princes of Palestrina, are
Originally come from Florence; they have been ad∣vanc't by the means of Urban the 8th, who hath made them very Rich, his Pontificat-ship having continued one and twenty years full our. The Prince of Palestrina hath fourscore thousand crowns Re∣venue. The Pamfilii are come by Innocent the 10th; They have had but eleven years to make themselves great in, but Do ma Olimpia, Mother of the present Prince Pamfilio, and Wife of Innocent the 10ths Brother, hath known so well how to mannage her business, that She hath heap'd up Innumerable Riches; He is thought to have near upon a hundred and fifty thousand crowns Revenue, being Prince of S. Mar∣tino, and Duke of Chiusi in the Campania of Rome. The Ghigi, Relations of the Pope now Reigning, have bought the Principality of Fernese, and en∣deavour to put themselves in the Rank of others, and to have wherewithall to support themselves. To these Families, one may add, if not prefer the Family of Anguilara, formerly very Power∣full, and which did possesse an Infinite of Towns in the County of the Patrimony, of the Dukedome of Spolta, and of Gvarina, all which are gotten into a third hand by way of Dowries, Alienations, and Sales, part to the Ursiu's, Csi's and others, and the greatest part to the Savetti's. Anguilara is a Place indifferent Great, Scituated on the Lake of Bracciaro, which is round, excepting that it makes an Angle of one side, whence it came to be called Angulia, and by a cot word Anguillara. There is a Gentleman of his House, who is Lord of two Towns, by Name, Stabbio, and Calcata, smal remarks of the past Grandeur of their Ancesters. I shall divide the other Familes of Rome into three
Classes, according to the Order of their Seniority, and by Alphabet; It being to be observed, that allbeit Constantin carried away with him to the Bisan∣tium, the greatest part of the best Families, there are yet left several Branches behind. The Families of Rome, which boast of their Nobility, of above five hundred years Standing. ALbertoni. Astalli, Marquesses. Altieri. Anibali of the Molara. Boccabella. Boccapadula. Benirabeni. Boccamazza. Crescentii. Casali. Corsieri. Capogalli. Cenci. Cecchini.
Constanzi. Capezucchi. Carrei. Cavalieri de Militibus. Cassarelli, Dukes. Castellani. Capranica. Coleri. The Family, Delfini is extinct, whereof the Al∣tieri have been Heirs. The Farnesi, Dukes of Latera have sold of late to Don Augistino Ghigi the Lordship of Farnese, which is Soveraign, and which gives the name to the whole Family of Paul the 3d, whereof the Principall Branch, is that of the Duke of Parma. The Francipani, Marquess of Nemi, are divided into three Branches, whereof the first, which was in Rome, is fallen to the younger Brother of the second, who hath Establisht himself in Croatia, and the third bears the Name of Micheli in Venice. Fabri. Foschi. Gabrieli of Rome, are Counts. Gottifredi. Jaccovacci. Incoronati of Placo, come from Spain. Lanti, come from Spain, and are Dukes. Leni, Extinct by the death of the Cardinal of that Name. Mancini. come from Luca. Dukes of Regnano. Magistri. Mellini. Muti delle Mozze. Molara of the Annibalis.
Monaldeschi, Marquess of St. Martin, whereof the last was killed at Fountain Bell'eau, by appointment of the Queen of Suethland. Mattei, Dukes of Giovio; He hath a Brother Married in Flanders, called the Marquess Mattei; & another branch which they call the Baron Mattei. De Maximis. Madaleni. Pauluzzi of the Albertoni, Marquess Porcari. They pretend to descend from the Antient Porci, Cato's; and do shew several Antiquities for proof of their Antiquity. The Marquess of Palombara of the Family of the Savelli. Sforza's, come from John Galeazzo Duke of Milan, of whom Luis Sforza, Sirnamed the Moore usurp'd that Dukedom, they are now Dukes of Santa Flora and Donana. Savocchio. Serlupi, Marquess, extinct within these two years. Santa Croce, Marquess. Scapucci. Tedellini. Valli, of the Valle. Vanucci, Of which Family descended that Ju∣lia, whereof there was to be seen not long ago, the Epitaph in the Church of our Lady of the Popolo, with her Armes in Marble, quarter'd with those of Alexander the 6th, as it were Man and Wife; With this Inscription, D. O. M. Juliae Vanucciae Matri Ducissarum Ferrariae, & Ur∣bini Filiorum Alexandri sexti Papae, Vixit, &c.
The second Classe of the Family of Rome, be∣come Noble within these three Hundred years, or there abouts. ACcoramboni. Ariccia. Armonticri. Buffali of Cancelliari, Marquess, come from Pisloia. Buffalini, come from Civita di Castello. Benaventari, come from Pesaro. Benroni, come from Cremona. Bongiovanni. Baglioi. Coccini, Ceci or Ciacci. Contieri, Cinquini, Gentlemen of Bisantium. Cupis, come from Fano. Evangelisti. iloardi, descended of a Brother of urban the 7th. Gironi, come from Spain. Gabriell, come from Gubbio, who are different from the Romans Leoni, who are come from Genazzne. Massimi, Maccaron, come from Milan. Masse, come from Vrona.
Miganelli, come from Siena. Melcbiori, come from Recanati, and are Marqueses. Masquerotti, are Counts. Mutini, come from Genoua. Marcani. Pamphili, come from Gubbio. Pichi, come from Rodes. Riccia, come from Taranto. Saldoni, Specchi, Soci, Stat. Trofili. Tedelleai. Velleri. Virtelleschi. Verospi, come from Spain. The third Classe of the Families Ennobled in Rome, somewhat above an hundred years agoe. AQuilani. Buca. Carducci, Catalani, Celsi, come from Nepi. Fani, come from Cornto. Gabrini, come from Florence. Garnelli, come from Reggiou, near Modena. Griffoni. Lancellotti.
Paravicini, Issued out of Alexandria in Monferrat. Petroni, come out of Civita Castellana. Porta, come from Como. Roggieri, come from Sutri. Roberti, Rivaldi. Stella. Torres, Marquess come from Spain. Vitelli, come out of Città di Castello. It is to be observed, that of all these Families, there's hardly any one of them, but hath had some Cardinal of it. Families who have come to inhe∣rit there within these hundred Years, and in the first Place, those who have deserted their own Countryes, though very considerable, and very Noble, and have Establisht them∣selves in Rome, without any occasion of Business, or Trade. BOlogntti, come from Bologna. The Counts Carpegna, come from Urbino.
Canobi, Monte Catini, come from Ferrara. Nobili, Marquess come from Rieti, Nephew's of Innocent the 7th. Rasposi, come from Ravenna. The Marquess Pallavicini, come from Parma. The Duke Salviati, come from Florence. The Duke Strozzi, from Florence. Sabatini, of Bologna. Certain Families come to an E∣state of Wealth, by their good Fortune, Services, or Al∣liances with Grandee's. BOngiovanni, of the Marca of Ancona, enricht by the Cardinal Montalto. Cardelli, enricht by the Aldobrandine's. Capponi, by Clement the 8th. Mansroni, by Cardinal Sauli. Nobili, of Montepulciano, Marquess Related to Julius the 3d. Sannesi, Dukes of Collelungo by the Cardinall Pito Aldobrandini. The Marquess, Pignatelli, a Kins-man of the Cardinal of the same Name.
During the Pontificat of Urban the 8th. The following Fa∣milies have enricht themselves. AMadori, Filicaia, Macchiavelli. Meraldi Rasponi, Vacini, who came out of Flo∣rence, and some Provinces belonging to the Church. Some Noble Families in their Country, Planted in Rome, where they surpasse not the second Generation. ACciaitoli, Albizi, Alcoviti. Antenori. Falconieri. Federici. Magalotti. Martelli. Ruspoli. Sacchetti. Americi. Ascorni. Masigni. Nerli, come from Florence. Siri, come from Savona.
Families of Genoua, become Rich since forty, or fifty years at the most. BOnanni, The Marquess Castagutti. Costa, Glustiniare, Prince of Bassano, who hath Espoused a Neece of Innocent the tenth, be∣fore his being Pope. Pagliari. Paravicini. Ravenna. Scagli. Vivaldi. Other Families come from seve∣ral parts of Italy, who have enrich't themselves by the means of the Bank Trade. BErtelotti of Nero. Toppa. Rocci, Rottigni. Rappac∣ciuoli. Spadavarrese. The Marquess Maldacchini, is Nephew of Donna Olimpia, Sister in law to Pope Innocent the tenth The Marquess Mari, came from Florence in the time of Urban the eighth.
Flemish Famalies come to Rome upon the same occasion of Trade. Briel, Manuart, Piscator, Poll, Thys. Portugal Families, which have establisht themselves by the means of the Datery and Chan∣cery. Acosta, Berger, Brandani. Enriquez, Fonzeca, Gomez. Herrera, Lopes, Nunez. Vasbrando, Mendez.
French Families, which have advanc't themselves by the means of Expedition. BErbis, Bouyer, Cause'es, La Borne, Bailly. Eschinards, Phenices, Valtrins. All these Families live upon the Revenue of their Lands, and Lordships, and of the Rents of Pallaces, Houses, and of Vineyards, which they have in Rome, and about it, and on the Rents assign'd on the Mounts of the Pieta, San Spirito, and others. Also upon Offices, which are erected for the payment of Debts contracted by the Pope, or Dominion of the Ecclesiastical See, whereof the Rent is paid at so much per cent; according unto the conditions which have been made thereupon. When the Pope hath need of money, for any ur∣gent occasion; after having made the Consistory of Cardinals acquainted with it; he gives out a Brief, by the which he gives order to the Treasurer General of the State, to publish; That whosoever will give or lend Money to the Chamber, he shall receive accor∣dingly, foure, five, or six per cent, according to the quality of the time; And for security of the said pay∣ment, he assignes a certain piece of Land, which he ingages particularly and generally upon those Reve∣nues. That debt is called Monte; assuming a name
from the cause of its erection, or from the Erector; as Monte della Fede, Monte di Ferrara, Monte Pio. And least debts should lye confus'd. The Mounts are devided in Place or Portions, that each is worth an hundred crowns; and for each Place, is given a Patent or Obligation: insomuch; that a person that shall have disbursed a thousand crowns, shall have ten Patents, which he may make sale of af∣terwards a part if he think good; forasmuch as the Prince never payes back the Principal, but payes pun∣ctually the interest of it, as long as the Mount stands. And the difficulty of placing safely ones money, hath occasioned that one of those Mounts, whereof the Pa∣tents are worth an hundred crowns, hath been re-sould even for an hundred and ten, an hundred and twelve, and an hundred and fifteen. But many have nota∣bly deceived themselves; for the Prince, having oc∣casion to suppresse one of those Mounts, causeth no∣tice to be given to the Creditors to come and receive their re-imbursment at such a Treasurers, restoring for each Patent, the summ therein contained. When any Prince, or Roman Gentleman, hath a mind to errect one of these Mounts, he asketh permis∣sion of the Pope; representing unto him his occasi∣ons, & offers him the examining of the Stock which he intends to ingage: so that the Pope, finding the bu∣sinesse just and profitable, he becometh their securi∣ty. And if these persons happen to fail in the payment of the said Interests; his Holiness, after having sum∣mon'd them with all Formalities of Justice, he puts himself in possession of all the Estates which are in∣gaged, and payes the said Rents in his Name, as it hath hapned unto the Duke of Parma who had erected a Mount of a Million of Gold, which was assigned
upon the Dukedomes of Castro and Roncilione neer Rome and having faild two or three years, one after another, to pay the Interest; The Pope seased himself of the Morgaged Dukedomes, which were soon demolished & their Inheritance refunded to the Apostolick Cham∣ber, in case that the Duke should not pay the Princi∣pal of the said Mount on the twentieth of November, 1657. The which not having been performed; the Duke hath been deprived of the Government of the said Dukedomes, which are incorporated a new into the Chamber. The difference betwixt the Mounts which are the Popes, and those which belong to particular Men is; that the Popes are call'd Camerali, and the others Ba∣nali. After having spoken of the Government and Fa∣milies, and Bourgeosie of Rome; I believe you will sily judge of the Majesty and Grandeur of the Prince which governs it, by the Authority which he hath over the particular Estates, both in the Spiritu∣al and Temporal. As to the Spiritual, over all Ca∣tholique Princes and Commonwealths; there is not any which doth not glory in the rendring him Acts of Filial Obedience, as to the Father of Christians. I have been willing, besides this; to give you a par∣ticular knowledge of the Revenue, as well certain, as uncertain, which the Holy See doth enjoy. The Revenue of the Pope, consists in the customes  Rome, and in the Rights and Subsidies follow∣ing, Videlicet. The customes of Rome have been used to be farm'd to who ds most, at the rate of foure∣score thousand crowns. The fol∣lowing sums are of crowns. 80000.
The Salt of Rome is farm'd to who bids most, at eighteen thousand crowns, 18000. The Grinding Toll, or Meal, rated by Julius the third, and augmented by his Successors, brings in yearly, one hundred twenty eight thousand crowns, 128000. The Impost of the money, Del Quattrino, for each pound of flesh in Rome brings in yearly, twenty five thousand crowns, 25000. The Impost of the Wine brings in yearly, thirty thousand crowns, 30000. The Money Del Quattrino, for each pound of Flesh, in the rest of the Ecclesiastical Dominions, brings in yearly, sixty thousand crowns, 60000. The Office of Post-master of Rome, and of the Ecclesiastical Dominions brings in, twelve thousand crowns. 12000. The Mines of Allum of the Tolsa bring in, sixty foure thousand crowns, 64000. Saint Peters Penny, or rent, brings in, forty thou∣sand crowns, 40000. The Impost upon Candles in Rome, brings in year∣ly, six thousand crowns, 6000. The Quarter or Trienial Subsidie of the Revenue, which is levied upon Mints, is worth, thirty thousand six hundred sixty two crowns 30662. The Trienial Subsidie of the Marca of Ancona, brings in ninty thousand crowns, 90000. The Trienial Subsidie of Rome and its Province, brings in, eighty thousand crowns, 80000. The Trienial Subsidie of Perugia, and the Pro∣vince of Ombria, brings in, sixty eight thousand crowns, 68000. The Trienial Subsidie of the Province of Romagna, and the Maritim Countries, brings in twenty five thousand crowns, 25000.
The tax of Horses in the Province of the Patrimony, brings in three thousand crowns, 3000. The tax of Horses of Romagna, brings in five thou∣sand crowns, 5000. Tivoli, pays rent yearly, three hundred crowns, 300. The augmentation of the Trienial Subsidy of the Marca, in lieu of the impost upon Swines flesh, brings in eighteen thousand crowns, 18000. The same augmentation in the Province of the Romagna, brings in ten thousand crowns, 10000. The Trienial Subsidy in the Province of the Patri∣mony brings in fifteen thousand crowns, 15000. The augmentation of the same Subsidy in the said Provinee, brings in five thousand crowns, 5000. The Treasurship. Or Treasury of the Marca, and of the tax of Horses, brings in eighty thousand crowns, 80000. The Treasury of the Marca Province, brings in nine∣ty thousand crowns, 90000. The Customes & Treasury of the Patrimony, 63377. crowns. The Treasury of Camerino, 36050. crowns. The Treasury of Peruggia and Ombria, brings in year∣ly, 203000. The Treasury of Ascoli, 90000, The Treasury of Campagna, 10000. The Treasuries of Norcia and Cassia, which may be worth five hundred crowns a year, are alienated to particular men. The Treasurship of Benevento, 4500. The tax of Spolto, 16000. The customes of Ancona, 7000. The Farming of Breda, 3000.
The Quattrin, for each pound flesh in Bologna, is enjoyed by the Town-house, or Republick; it may be worth, 20000. The Trienial Subsidy of Bologna, 80000. The Revenue of the Dukedome of Urbino, and that of Ferrara all charges borne, brings in anually, 50000. Ʋncertain Revenues. THe Collection from Spain annually, one with another, 40000. The Collection from Portugal, 12000. That of Italy, 20000. The Permission of Impositions on corn of the Mar∣ca, 6000. There were formerly Mounts vacable, which fall∣ing by the death of the Possessor or Creditor, were sold again by the Pope, and that was worth to him a great deal. But they have been reduc't to other Mounts not Vacable, by Pope Alexander the seventh now reigh∣ning; because too much profit was allowed. The Componenda yields every month, one with ano∣ther, 4800. For that which is paid in the Chancery, comes not to the Pope, but to divers Offices which his Holiness, or his Predecessors have errected; and which I shall observe in the description of the Chancery; whence the Offices which happen to fall by the decease of the Possessors, they are sold again by the Masters or Pre∣fects
of the Componenda, and that brings in a great deal to the Pope to; as doe also several other Right and Levy's, which bring him in considerable sums. Now let us view the Qualities of all the Popes Officers and Domesticks. THe Person the most qualified of the Popes Court and nearest unto him, is Cardinal Ghigi his Ne∣phew; who bears the Title of Secretary and Com∣missary General of the State Ecclesiastick, which the Romans stile by a particular name of Cardinal Pa∣trone, He receives every month, 2000. crowns. Moreover, he hath brought him every day the Parte, which is an Ordnary of Bread, Wine, Salt, Wood, Cole, and Brooms, which may be worth monthly, 342. The Lord Don Augustino Ghigi, receives every month, as His Holiness his Nephew, besides the pro∣visions, as being Lieutenant of the Castle of Saint Angelo, 60. crowns his part, 105. The Lord Don Mario, as Brother to his Holiness; not reckoning what he receives, as being General of the Holy Church. 87. His part, 145. The Cardinal Rospigliosi, dwelleth in the Popes Pallace, bearing the Title of Secretary of State, re∣ceives 29. His part 48.
The Prelate Secretary of the Congregation of Pro∣paganda Fide, 8. His part, 10. 15. The following sums, are of Crowns and Bai∣occo's. The Prelate Secretary of the Congregation of Bi∣shops and Regulars, 25. His part, 43. The Prelate Secretary of the Consulta, 40. His part, 70. The Secritary of the Briefs, Dispensations, Indul∣gences, and such like things, 8. His part, 14. The Secretary of the Congregation of the Coun∣cell, 7. His part, 12. 80. The Prelate Secretary of the Congregation, called De' Riti, 3. His part, 7. 60: The Secretary of the Briefs, addres't to Princes, 14 His part, 25. 25. The second secretary of the Ciphers, 7. His part, 12. 60. Two Secretaries of the Petitions, 19. Their part, 31. 30. A Clarke of Indulgence, 2. 60. His part, 7. 60. Another  larke of Ciphers, 5. His part, 9.
The private Chamberlains, Participanti, MOnsignor Ugolini, Auditor of his Holi∣nesse's affair's, 32. His part, 52. 50. Monsignor Bandinlli, Master of the Chamber 25. His part, 45. Monsignor Acarigi, Cupp-bearer to his Holiness, 30 His part, 52. 50. Monsignor Mini, The Popes Secretary when Car∣dinal, and now Master of the Chamber, unto the Cardinal Nephew, 50. His part, 52. 50. Monsignor Bonsi, Chamberlain, Participante, 30. His part, 52. 50. The Master of the Wardrobe, 25. His part, 37. 50. The Physitian in Ordinary, 30. His part, 52. 50. There are eight Chamberlins of Honor; called, Non Participiati whereof the first five have, 150. Their part, 22. 50. There are three others who receive differently, whereof Signor Rdolsi Abbot, 20. Their part, 35. Signor Alessandro Pellino, 8. His part, 14. Signor Flamminio Valle, under Wardrobe 25. and
as Page of the Chamber unto his Holinesse, 8. Three more Pages of the Chamber unto his Holi∣nesse, 45. Their parts, 78. Foure Chaplins in ordinary, 80. Their part, 140. Six Chaplins for the Houshold, 27. Their parts, 45. 60. Two Privy Clarks, 9. Their part, 15. 20. Eighteen Bussolanti, or Guards of the Chamber of Presence. 81. Their part, 76. Ten Chamberlins call'd Extramuros, 46. Their part, 76. Nineteen Squires, 84 50. Their Parts, 146. 60. The Offices of the Popes Chap∣pel. MOnsignor; the Vestry Keeper, 9. His part, 15. 20. Two under Vestry-keepers, 9. Their part, 15. 20. One under Clarke, 2. His part, 5. A Clarke belonging to the Musick, 2. His part 5. The keeper of the Pictures, 2. 50. His part, 5.
The Officers of Daterie, to whom His Holyness gives Salary. THe Cardinal Datary, 40. His part, 70. The Subatary, 20. His Parte, 35. The Per Obitum, 4. 50. His Part, 9. The Prelate deputed over the Concessum, 7. His Part, 12. 50. The Perfect over the Componenda's, 6. His Part, 10. 50. The Summiste, who is he that distributes the Pe∣titions signed in the Registre, 5. His Part, 8. 60. The Subsitute of the President of the Plomb. 4. His Part, 7. 60. The Registrator of the Plomb. 4. His Part, 7. 60. The Writer call'd of the Demistis, 1. 30. His Part, 6. The Chief Revisor of the Petitions, as to mat∣ters concerning Benefices, 4. His Part, 7. 50. The second Revisor, 6. His Part, 10. 50. The Revisor, as to Matrimonial Affairs, 3. His Part, 6. The two Writers of the Petty Dates, 6. The Part, 12.
The Officers which look to the Chamber of the Concistory. TWo Warders of the Hall of the Concistory, 5. 40. Their Part, 12. Two Warders of the Iron-Gate, 9. Their Part, 15. Two Warders of the first Gate of the Chain, 8. Their Part, 15. Two Warders of the second Chain, 5. 60. Their Part, 12. Two Master Suissers of the Red Rod, 5. 60. Their Part, 12. Two Suissers Warders, 6. 80. Their Part, 12. Two Cursors Warders, 9. 60, Their part, 15. The Keeper of the Register of the Bull's, 1. 50. His Part, 6.
The Officers of the Treasury, which receive Pension from His Holiness. MOnsignor, the Treasurer, 24. His Part, 42. Monsignor, the President, 4. His part, 15. Monsignor, the Commissary General, 8. 25. His part, 15. The Comptrouler, who keeps the Books of Ac∣counts, 10. His Part, 18. Another Comptrouler, 5. His part, 8. One Measurer. 1. His Part, 6. The Officers of the Library. THe Prefect of the Registers, 4. His Part, 9. The Chief Library Keeper, 10. His part, 17. 50.
The Sub-Library Keeper, 7. His part, 12. 50. Two Latin Writers, 8. Their Part, 14: Three Greek Writers, 12. Their part, 21. Two Hebrew Writers, . Their part, 14. Two other Hebrew Writers, 3. Their part, 8. The Printer to the Chamber, 3. His part, 6. Two Sweepers, 2. Their part, 9. The Chief Officers of the Court. MOnsignor, the Chief Steward, 60, His part, 105. The Master Steward, 15. His part, 27. The Comptrowller, 8. 30. His Part 14. The Sub-Comptrowller, 6. His part, 10. 50. A Reverend Father, Master of the Sacred Palace, who is a Jacobin Monk, deputed for the Revising of Books both Printed, and to be Printed, 8. His part, 14. The Deputy, who hath care of the Altar, where his Holyness doth Celebrate at, 3. His Part, 7. 60. The Keeper of the Records of the Castle, 10. His part, 17. 60.
The Inferiour Officers of the Court. THe House Keeper, 7. 50. His Part, 13. The Privy Butler, and his Assistants, 8. Their Part, 14. The Privy Cook, and his Associates, 15 Their Part, 27. The privy Pantler, 10. His Part, 18, Upon which he must keep a Servant. The Privy Purvoyer, 7. His Part, 12. The Privy Baker, 3. 30. His Part, 6. These Privy Officers, are those who work solely for the Popes own Mouth. The Deputy over the Common Cellour, and his Assistants, 10. Their Part, 17. 50. The four Sweepers, 18. Their part, 30. The Chief Baker, 4. 50. His part, 7. 60. There are three more, 9. Their part, 18. Two Assistants, 4. 60. Their part, 12. And another Supernumeray, 1. 50.
His part, 4. 50. The Court Purveyer, 4. His part, 7. 60. The Sub-House-Keeper, 1. 50. His part, 6. 50. Two Pantlers, 4. 80. Their part, 12. Their Assistant, 1. 50. His part, 4. 50. The Common Buyer, 3. His part, 6. 50. He that looks to the wood, 1. 50. His part, 4. 20. Two Aveners, 2. 20. Their part, 9. The Hay-Keeper, 2. 20. His part, 4. 50. The Keeper of the wax, 3. His part, 5. 50. He who looks to the Fountains, 12: His part, 20. The Cook of the Family, 3. His part, 6. Four Porters of Burdens, 4. Their part, 18. Fourteen Sweepers mote belonging to the Court, and Wood Carriers, 16. 80. Their part, 6. The Masters of the Mules, 3. His part, 7. 50. He that delivers out the Coles, 1. 50. His part, 6. The Bell-Ringer at St. Peters. 1. 20. His part, 6. The Poulterer, 1. 50.
His part, 5. The Pantler, belonging to the Family, 2. 50. His part, 6. 50. The Butler for the Poor, 1. 50. His part, 5. A Woman called the Priorss of Santa Martha, which is an Hospital of the Sick belonging to the Court, 1. 80. Her part, 5. The Weigher of Bread, 3. His part, 6. The Common Landrer, 3. 50. His part, 6. 70. Four Mule Grooms of the Court, 17. 20. Their part, 22. The Over-seer of the Privy Cellar, and his As∣sistants, 9. 60. Their Part, 16. Two Water-Bearers, 5. Their part, 11. Two Deputies for distributing of Almes, 4. 80. Their part, 11. The Porter of St. Peter's, 1: 50. His part, 5. The Master, or Over-seer of the Stables, 6. His part, 10. 50. Two Coach-men of the Popes, 9. Their part, 15. 20. Two Postllions, 7. Their part, 12. The Coach-man belonging to the Family. 3. 60. His part, 6. The Keeper of the Consulta, 2. 50. His part, 6. The Keeper of the Castle Gandolfo, 6.
His part, 10. 50. The Master Gardner, 4. His part, 7. 50. The Gardner of Belvedere, 2. His part, 6. He who looks to the Clocks, 12. His part, 8. A Sweeper of the Stables, 2. 50. His part, 6. The Cook belonging to the Poor, 1. 50. His part, 6. The Grooms of the Stables, 21. Their part, 63. The Physitians of the Court. THe two Physitians belonging to the Court, 9. Their part, 15. They are gratisied over and above with two Crowns a piece, 4. Another Assistant, an Inferiour Physitian, 2. 25. His part, 6. The Apothecay, 4. 60. His part, 7. 60. Two Chyrurgions, 6. Their part, 15.
Several other persons belonging to the Court. THe Father Confessor, 20. The Father Oliva, 12. Their part, 40. The Father Agustin de la Valle, 4. 50. His part, 7. 60. The Ordinary Almner, 6. His part, 10, 16. Signor Octavio Maffei, without any Title, 6. His part, 10. 50. The Privy Treasurer, 15. His part, 20. His Assistant, or Deputy, 3. His part, 7. 60. A Painter, 4. 500. His part, 7. 60. A Chaplain of the Eucharist, 1. 20. His part, 7. 60. An Embroideror, 6. His part, 10. 60. Five other Persons without any Title, 25. Their part, 50.
The Estaffiers, or Yeomen-Waiters. THe Senior of the Estaffiers, 3. His part, 6. Another Estaffier of the Old Family of the Popes, whilst he was Cardinal, 3. His part, 6. One and forty Estaffiers, 123. Their part, 246. Two Officers belonging to the Common Table, 6. Their part, 12 A Chaplain belonging to the common Table, 3. His part, 6. Four Sedan-Men, 24. Their part, 40. A Common Clerk, for his Wages, and his whole part, 8. Besides the Fore-mentioned Wages, the Pope fails not to bestow upon such as he hath a kindness for, one of the Pensions Ad Sexenium, which he reserv's for them, upon all the Benfices in Spain, which exceed fifty crowns per Annum. The said Pension being usually the thd part of the Revenue, some of which extend sometimes to the sum of two thousand crowns. For the better Understanding what the Officers are, which belong to the Apostolick Chamber, I thought it necessary to describe their Function.
The Officers of the Chamber Assemble themselves twice a week, Namely, Munday and Fryday, and those dayes that there is any Concistory kept. The Cardinal which is called the Camerlengo is President of it, Assisted by the Governour of Rome, who hath fo an Addition unto the Office of Go∣vernour, the Title of Vice Camerlengo▪ Monsignor the Treasurer General. Monsignor the Auditor of the Chamber, and twelve Clarks of the Chamber, whereof the one is ever a Perfect, or Commissary over the Corn, and Publick Granaries, another over other kind of Victuals, another over the Prisons, an∣other over the Wayes, or Streets. Their Jurisdiction extends over matters where the Interest of the Chamber is concern'd, as Contracts of Farming of the Revenues of the Holy See. The Treasurers of the Ecclesiastical State, of Causes be∣longing to Corporations. Of the Spoils of Priests deceased out of the Residence of their Benefices. Of Causes of Accounts, and Audits with Officers and Ministers of State, over the Coynes and their Value, over Appeals of Sentences, of the Masters over the High-Wayes, or Streets; Over the Affairs of Customes, Taxes, Impositions, and the like. The Camerlingal, or Chamberlin-ship, is given for life to a Cardinal Nephew of the Popes, or unto a great Favorite: Besides his Authority before speci∣fied, during the Popedome; He hath also Soveraign Authority all the Sede Vacante long, causing moni to be stampt in his Name, and other things apper∣taining unto Soveraign Dignity. The Auditor-ship of the Chamber, is purchased usually at fourscore thousand crowns, and is worth Twelve thousand crowns a year. I have set forth his Authority in the Relation of the Courts of Justice
The Treasurer purchases his Place at threescore and four thousand crowns, and it brings him in near upon twelve or thirteen per cent. He hath great power over all the Mounts, as well such as are due by the Chamber, as by Roman Lords, having Au∣thority to make Extractions from them, that is to say, when the Debtors have a mind to acquit them∣selves of a part of their Debts, to Nominate those to whom the Principal Stock is to be restored. The President of the Chamber, purchases his place at near upon thirty thousand crowns, and im∣proves it at the rate of ten per cent. It is he who assists and presides almost alwayes at the Auditing of the accounts of the Officers. The Clarks of the Chamber, purchase their places at two and forty thousand crowns. They are in a manner Counsellors and Assesso unto the Cardinal Camerlengo; and they make o them near upon ten per cent. The other Offices are given Gratis. There are eight Notaries, or Scriveners, who pur∣chase their places at a matter of twelve thousand crowns. The Legations and Government of the Ecclesiastical State. THe Legate of Romagna, hath for allowance an∣nually, 3000. crowns. Of Bologna, 5000.
Of Avignon, 10000. Of Urbino, 5000. Of Ferrara, 5000. And with the Perquisites, there is not any but makes it above fifteen or sixteen thousand crowns. The Governour of Rome hath yearly, 3000. Of Campagna, 600. Of Camerino, 500. Of Ascoli, 600. Of Benevento, 580. Of Peruggia, 700. Of Cesena, 300. Of Rimini, 344. Of Forli, 244. Of Faenza, 144. Of Valdignori, 144. Of Carvia, 300. Of Fano, 360. Of Ancona, 600. Of Macerata, 1200. Of Jesi, 500. Of Spoleto, 600. Of Terni, 180. Of Narni, 396. Of Orvieto, 250. Of the Abby of Farfa, 300. Of Foligno, 600. Of Assisi, 240. Of Rieti, 240. Of Norcia, 360. Of Cascia, 180. Of Visse, 700. Of Subiaco, 300. Of the Abby of Ferentella, 200. Of Citta di Castello, 500.
Of San Severino, 400. Of Montalto, 400. Of Fermo, 1000. Of the Daterie, or Office where the Popes Bulls are dispatcht, and of the Chancery. THe Chancery of Rome, hath such a Corres∣pondence with the Datery, that there is not any thing passeth that which hath not passed in the other; There are, notwithstanding several matte which pass not out of the Daterie into the Chan∣cery, As Namely, the Expeditions of the Benefices i France which are not in Royal Nomination, & which are Executed by the Popes bare signing at the bottom of the Petitions, or the Requests which are made him. The Dispensations (In Secundo gradu,) Absolutions, Commutations of Vowes, and others of the like Nature, which are dispach't by the Secretary of the Breifs, which is called in the Court of Rome, P Viam Secretam. The Foundation upon which all this Structure doth rest, next unto the Pope, is the Datario, who hath been wont usually to be a Prelate, but at pre∣sent Cardinal Corrado is he, and by reason of that he is stiled Prodatario. For the better understanding of all in Order,
will not be from the purpose, to describe the manner that is used throughout the whole Expedition of a a Benefice. First if the Benefice be vacant by the Decease of the Incumbent; You must go to the Per Obitum, a person stiled from the Function of his Office, which is as the Substitute of the Datario; And you must not forget to appear before the Datario himself. In all other Graces, your Address must be to the Datari himself, and Sub-Datario; And after that you are assured by the word of the Datario; by a Rescript, which he makes upon the first Petition which hath been presented him; In these Terms Annuit San∣ctissimus. The Petition must be fram'd in form, with all the Clauses and Restrictions, which are de∣sired, should be enlarged in the Bull; Then carry it to the Sub-Datario, or to the Per Obitum, who writes at the bottom in a few words, the contents of the same, and then delivers it to the Datario, informing him a new of all the Business; Afterwards the Da∣tario carries the same Petition to the Pope, who signs it, granting the request in these words, Fiat ut P∣titur. Afterwards the Datario himself, or his Substitutes consign that Petition unto the Prefect of the Com∣ponenda's, and if there be any fee belonging to it, e taxes it according to the quality of the mat∣ter. This Petition is afterwards consigned to an Of∣ficer, who is called by the Name of petty Dates, whose care is to know the day that the equest was granted on, and to write it down at the bottom. It passeth after that through the hands of the Chief Revisor, who puts out, or Corrects the words and clauses which he finds are not to purpose.
From the Chief Revisor, it passeth to a second, who doth the like, to correct and alter what is ne∣cessary. All the Offices forementioned, here are given ad Beneplacitum Pontisicis, excepting that of the pre∣fect of the Componenda's, which is purchased at six∣teen thousand crowns. Then again is this Petition carried to the Regi∣strator, who writes it in his Register-Book. The Registrators are twenty, and purchase their Place or Office, at three thousand crowns a man. After that it hath been consigned in the Grand Register-Book, he examines it, de verbo, ad ver∣bum. There are six Masters of the Register, who pur∣chase their Offices at six thousand crowns a piece. This Petition, or Request, being gone out of the hands of the Master of the Register with all its For∣malites of the Datarie, it is brought into the Chan∣cery by an Officer deputed to that purpose. Formerly the Office of Chancellour was ever confirmed upon a Cardinal, but since, a Pope ha∣ving invested a Canon of Lateran therewith, he assu∣med the Name of Vicem Agens Cancellarii, who is at this day called Vice Chancellour. The same af∣terwards returned again unto the Cardinals, by rea∣son that one of the Vice Chancellours was promoted to the degree of Cardinal; who besought his Ho∣liness, that He who should hold the said Office, might continue the Name of Vice Chancellour, which is accordingly done till this very present. The Chancellour did exercise also formerly the Office of Datario, but those two Offices have been distinguisht and sever'd even from Azignon, by reason of the condition of Affairs.
The Office of Vice Chancellour is given Ad vi∣tam, it is worth eighteen or twenty thousand crowns a year. The Chancellour himself hath Jurisdiction over all the Officers of the Chancery, but not being wil∣ling to take that trouble upon him, he gives that commission to the Regent of the Chancery, which is an Office, which is sold for two and twenty thousand crowns, and which falling by death is in the Chan∣cellours gift. The Regent of the Chancery, hath Authority to deliver the Petitions, which come from the Datario, unto one of the Prelates Abbreviatori de Parco Ma∣jori, to take the Scedule of the Bull's, to suffer them to be corrected, when they are in his custody, and to appoint the Execution of them to whom he should think best. But to return to the sequel of the Expedition, The Petition being, as hath been already exprest; come into the hands of the Regent, he delivers it to one of the said Prelates of Parco Majori, which are twelve, and purchase their Offices each of them at twelve thousand crowns, and make of them a matter of twelve, thirteen or fourteen per cent. This Prelate sets to his Petition the scedule of the Bull (and that by his Substitute which Acts under him;) which is consigned to an Apostolick Notary, for to be co∣pied in Parchment. After that, this Bull is carried to these Notaries Office, which are one hundred, and purchase their Offices at two thousand two hundred crowns; And those are they who tax which is to be paid them, at the Rate at which the Benefice is worth, o the concern of the business. After which it is brought unto other Officers, who
have no other Jurisdiction but to receive the money for it, because that those Offices are of Alienations of Annata's, which the Popes have made, having need of Moneys; and these Offices are called, some of them Cubiculares of the Holy Father; Others, Knights of St. Paul, Knights of the Lillies, Knights Pious, Knights of Loeto. There are twelve of each Quality, and do purchase those Offices; some at fifteen hundred crowns, others at two thousand crowns, and others again at four thousand crowns, and make of them eight in the hundred, and some∣times more, according as there are businesses to be dispach't. After that this Bull hath past through all these hands, it returns to a Substitute of the Abreviators, besides him who made the scedule, who having per∣used it, whether any thing be faulty, gets it signed by his Prelate; and that is called the sending of the Bull to the Piombo, that is to the Lead. The Prefect, whose Office hath Authority over those of the Piombo (which is the Seal that is affix't unto the Bulls) purchaseth his Office, at the Rate of two thousand crowns, or thereabouts, and is worth him three thousand five hundred crowns a year. In that Office of the Piombo, there are Officers called, Registers of the Bul's, who Record them in their Registers. They are six of them, and each pur∣chaseth his Office at fifteen hundred crowns. Moreover there are Masters of the Register of the Bulls, who have care of Examining of them, and to endorse the Registrata. They are six of them, and purchase their Offices at six thousand crowns. Then there is the Piombatoe, whose Office is worth a thousand crowns, and his duty is to fasten the Seal of Lead to the Bulls, with a silk string, or a
pacthred, according as the matter requires. In Fine, there is the Keeper of the Register, who purchaseth his Office at three thousand crowns, whose duty is to give an Authentick and Valuable Coppy of the Balls, which happen to be lost through negligence, or misfortune. It is to be observed that the Affaires of Dispensa∣tions of Marriage in the fourth degree, the In∣lts, or perpetual Indulgences pass not through the hands of the aforesaid Officers, but there are others of the same Quality, who perform the same Duty, and are called Scriptores de Mori, Abbreviatores & Pruratores de Mori; whereof there are twelve of each, and do purchase their places at four thousand crowns. The Remainder of the Expedition passeth through the same hands as the Matters concerning Benefices. The Pope hath the Right of Disposing of all the Benefices of Italy, Spain, Portugal, Poland, over those of some Bishopricks in Germany, of all Flan∣ders, the Catholick Sucsses, Lorrain, Savoy, Brittany, And the County of Bogogne, excepting out of Italy the Bishopricks, Abbies and Royal Foundations or Patronages, for eight months in the Year; But his Holyness is Accustomed to grant to the Bishops Re∣sident in their Bishopricks, the Alternativa, that is to say, that the Pope gives two of the eight months to the said Bishop, and so reserves six to him∣self. It is observable; that over the Benefices of Spain, Portugal and Italy, which are not in contest, that ex∣ceed not thirty Ducats a year: The Pope is accustom∣ed to lay a Pension for six years, and that Pension is usually assign'd to some one of his Domesticks, or Relations, or of his Familiars, who are that way re∣compenced
for their services; each of them receiving two or three of the said Pensions yearly, greater or smaller, according to the qualities of the Benefices; the said Pensions, being a third of the remainder of the Revenue, which exceeds thirty Ducats. It is further observable, that the Annata, whereof I have spoken before) is paid in Chancery, namely of all Benefices which exceed twenty foure Ducats a year. This Annata is a years Revenue, or first Fruits. Of the Congregations. IT hath been the Custome in the Court of Rome, to decide all Affaires, by the means of certain Con∣gregations of Cardinals and Prelats, Deputed by his Holiness; each Congregation hath its several busi∣nesse, new ones being erected, according as the times require; and them they put down, when no longer necessary. The first is, That which they call of the Holy Of∣fice, or of the Inquisition made up of twelve or more Cardinals, according as the Popes pleasure is; seve∣ral Prelats and Clergy-men of several religious Or∣ders, who all bear Title of Consulters of the Inqui∣sition; a Cardinal is chief of them, and keeps the Seal. There is the Congregation of Bishops and Regu∣lars, the Jurisdiction of whom extends to the differ∣ences which arise twixt the Bishops and such as are under them; and also twixt the Monks, and the Reli∣gious
under them; and to answer to the consultations which the Bishops make. Several Cardinals sit there, who have one more experienc'd than the rest, for their Chief. The Congregation for the Ecclesiastical Immunity, hath been erected for to take notice, whether such Delinquents ought to enjoy that Immunity; That is, whether one ought to receive them into the Church or not, then when they are flln from it. Ther are severall Cardinals of it; one Clark of the Chamber; one Auditor of the Role; and one Re∣ferendary. The Congregation of the Councel, is for the expl∣cation of the Councel of Trent; it is made up of seve∣ral Cardinal. The Congregation of State, is often kept in the Popes presence, and sometimes before the Cardinal Nephew: All the Cardinals who have been Nuatio's and his Holinesse, his Secretary of State are present at it. The Congregation call'd of Propagada Fide; hath been established for to move all means immaginable to advance the Catholick Faith. It is kept once a month before the Pope, and very often in the Col∣ledge which bears the name. There are present there several Cardinals, one Apostolick Protonotary, his Holinesse, his Secretary of State; The Judge, who is  to be the Referendrio, of either Signature and the Secretary.  lodgeth and beareth the charges of all the poor Bishops, in Parlibus, and it hath a Prin∣ting-Presse, for all the Oriental Languages and Sou∣thern. It brings up and instructs a great number of youth, from all the Insidel parts of the World▪ whom i  back again into their own Countries after that
they are knowing; allowing them wherewithall, to defray their journy conveniently. The Congregation of the Riti; A Jurisdiction o∣ver the differences which arise, touching Ecclesiasti∣cal Ceremonies, and Customes, Precedences, and other things of the like nature. The Cardinal, chief of the Deputy's summons it, when it best pleaseth him. There is also the Congregation of Waters, be∣fore which the concern is of Bridges, of the Courses of Rivers; and the like, whereof a Cardinal is chief, and calls it when necessary. The Cardinal Camerlengo, is chief of the Congre∣gation over the Fountains, Ways, or Streets; yet it is kept at the Senior Cardinals Palace, there busi∣nesse is of Aqueducts which supply the Fountains of Rome, of the Ways and Streets, and of the manner, how to inlarge and beautifie them. The Congregation of the Indexes is over the Books already Printed; and such as are to be Printed, it is but seldome kept, and when kept; at a Cardinals, who is chief of it. The Cardinal Nephew of the present Pope, is usual∣ly chief of the Congregation of the Consult of Affairs, concerning the Ecclesiastical State, assisted by six more Cardinals, and eight Prelates, and the Secreta∣ry; their business is of all Vice-Legars, Governors, Judges and other Officers, who gives an accompt to that Congregation; which having resolved what is to be done, they impart the business to the said Vice-Legats, and Governors by the Secretary; and every Prelate who is present at it, is chief of the Affairs of of a Province Assigned to him; whose care, is to make known unto that Congregation all that passeth. It hath though no jurisdiction over Avignoa, Benevento
and Cenedo; the Governors whereof are absolute, each of the Prelats aforementioned, hath a thousand crowns Pention. The Congregation of the Discharges, call'd De' Sgravii, and of that De Bono Regimine, are kept by turns every Saturday at the Cardinal Nephews, who is chief of them, together with six Cardinals more, and eight Prelats, Thether all Corporations repaire, who finde themselves over-rated with publique char∣ges or their Priviledges violated. The Prelats have the same allowance with those of the Consulta. The Congregation of the Moneys hath been set up, to look to the moneys already coyn'd, or what may passe, and to set a rate upon all such as are of for∣reign Princes, There are present at it foure Cardi∣nals and some Officers of the Chamber. There is besides; The Congregation of Concisto∣rical Affairs, of which the Senior Cardinal is chief; it is but seldome call'd, for it hath but little business, but there are transacted the affairs which the Pope re∣ferrs to it; which usualy are of renounciation of Bishop∣ricks, Taxes of Consistorical Churches and Abbey's.
A Relation of the Ceremonies ob∣served on the twenty Eighth of June, at the Presenting of a White Gennet unto the Pope, by the Minister of the King of Spain. THe twenty eighth of June, being St. Peters Eve, is the usual day appoin∣ted for the payment or receiving of Tributes, Rents, and other things which are wont to be paid to the Church in cognisance of Tenures held by her; some make satisfaction personally, but the greatest part by prozy; But the Homage of the King of Spain, is that which is per∣formed with the greatest Pompe and Lustre, as possessing the best Tere of all, which is the Kingdome of Naples; whose Embassadors strive ever to appear with all possible Grandeur at that Ceremony. The Prince, Nephew of the Pope: All the other Princes and Nobles of Rome, of
the Spanish Party, goe and accompany him, his Holiness sends him the Pre∣lates, which they call Assistants at the Pontifical Throne, which are foure Arch∣bishops, and others of lesser account, the Guards of the Suisses, and a Company of light Horse. This Riding or Cavalca∣do, begins at the Embassadors Palace, at a great distance from the Vatican, where the Pope goes, an houre before, which is in the afternoon; The Light Horse march first, led by their Coronet, next a great number of Roman Gentlemen, Spaniards, and Gentlemen sent by Car∣dinals; all march in order on Horseback; after come the Princes, and such as bear Title; after that, two Estaffiers lead the Gennet, cover'd with a foot-cloth of red Sattin, or some other costly stuff, as embroidred with Silver, where are re∣presented, the Popes Armes, and Coat; and a Purse at the Arson of the Sadle, wherein are seventeen thousand crowns, of Cammera Gold, that is of Papal Stamp, after marcheth the Embassador with the Guards of the Suissers, and in the rear of all the Prelates aforesaid. Being arrived in that Order unto St. Peters. The Pope approacheth, at some
small distance, unto the Gate of the Church, where the Embassador being entred, and having made his Speech, presents this White Gennet unto his Ho∣linesse, in the behalf of the King his Ma∣ster, with the seventeen thousand crowns of Gold, of which his Majesty is indebt∣ed unto the Holy Church for the King∣dome of Naples, by vertue of the Infeaf∣ments made by the Pope unto the Aun∣cestors of his Majesty. After which Speech, the Fiscal of the Camera, makes a Speech to the Ambassador, how that Kingdome hath been already devol∣ved to the Church by everal Princes. In fine, the Pope saith, that he accepts willingly that Present from the Catho∣lick King, so it be not to the prejudice of the Rights of the Church; Wishing unto his Majesty, Prosperous Successe, Long Life, and Prosperity: Whereof the Fiscal causeth a Record of it to be made by a Notary there present. And so en∣deth the Ceremony. FINIS.
