I54 [ocm]13072473 197908
THE IMAGE OF THE MALIGNANTS PEACE: OR A representation of the seditious Carriages of the London Cavaliers, in their first endeavours for the Saccage and plunder of the City, under the specious Vizor of a Petition for Peace and Accomodation. Published to undeceive the Multitude, who under that most desir∣able name PEACE, have bin wrought to give their hands to the countenancing of their Catilinarian Conspiracy. THat compendium of Happinesse, Peace, is the generall wish, and every good mans prayer, and he cannot pretend to that name that promotes it not, in the enjoying seldom valued, when lost it commands the endeavours of all, (but the break∣ers) to re-obtain it; which vehement desire (as also in other cases falls out) very often imposeth upon a weaker judge∣ment to receive and accept for such that which cannot just∣ly boast it selfe so much as a shadow of it; like the long thirsty Mariner at his first salutes of the shore, drinking putrid water with an undistinguishing Pallat till he hath unknowingly sucked in his death; or like the strength of Lust not discerning the paint, kisseth the pox for Beauty. This knowne disposition in the most of men renders them too fit a subject for the imposture of those to worke upon who under the name endeavour the ruine of the thing it selfe, many in the simplicity of their Spirits seeking that which if they should obtaine, they should possesse therein only the Asphal apples and a uilded chain. There is no stranger now within our Seas that does not know what a length of peace we have injoyed, and an happinesse thereby to envy, and all men that would tten did also know how for many yeares past, it hath bin undermined by dangerous plots (of an elder conception then yesterday) whereby while short sighted and private Si men, pursued their designes of Walth and plea∣sure (being wholly on asclate with the Dreame of Peace almost lost that pro∣priety
they onely followed; But the more sagacious and discerning at last awa∣kened the multitude to vindication of all that was periclitant, viz. both Reli∣gion, and also our Liberties, in whole extent of them both. Religion was pra∣ctised upon by Popery, in a farre more greedy progresse then that by which it first grew upon the world, so far till a double War was raised for it, first against Scot∣land, then Here, visible enough to every weake eye, all Protestant Professions not∣withstanding, so often even to nauscousnesse obtruded upon the poore baffled people: The common Liberty invaded by Tyranny, and the Mode Francoy's made the English Livery. All men know this that can but remember the old Buckinghamian endeavours for strange Horse, Illegall Loanes, Ship-money, Coat and Conduct money, (when we had no enemy) Propriety given away by Monopolizing and Excising Patents for Coales, Salt, Sope, Wine Pins and almost every thing, and this by Prerogative (though against a known Law, 21 Jac: cap. 3.) which is now also fought for. All those mischiefes and enslaving pressures we suffe∣red in those times which the deceived multitude misaccount in the number of their daies of Peace; and all which had bin for ever bound upon us by a Law, had not the Authors of them missed in their Calculation, hopeing to effect that by a Parliament, which the divine goodnesse and providence had appointed to breake them by, and over-ruled the Spirits of men to such a choyce then, as would not serve turnes which was soone seene, and therefore soone dissolved: and when an i managed, worse grounded, and unblist War, had necessitated the con∣vention of another such an one by the same good hand was brought together, as hath bin hitherto, and we believe shall continue to be the Great Instrument of Gods glory and our happinesse: What endeavours there hath bin to take away this great Bulwarke against Popery and Tyrannie needs not to be here remembred; onely the fourth of Ianuary must never be forgotten so long as we keepe ac∣count of the fift of Novemb. This failing the second War is raised, to give a Cae∣sarian birth to that Conception to which the Parliament denied its hand. This War fomented, assisted and promoted, by all these peccant and noxions humors which had so neerely endangered the ruine of our Body, viz. The whole Hie∣rarchy, whether they be Papists, Atheists, Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and all the rest of that unhallowed crew, all the instruments of Tyranny, Dam mee's, Monopo∣lizers and every Delinquent whose demerits denies him safety in the common safety. This Army for the better maintenance of the Protestant Religion and propiety doth by the hands of Papists and Atheists in many places of this Kingdom to∣gether plunder and spoyle, of all their Estates, and many of their lives and now lately at Marleborough after the long teaching of their Irish wheres of whom a pretty Kennell hath followed the Cause for their necessary use) they have learn∣ed to strip naked and ravish the soberest and gravest Matrons, that by practise they might be more dextrous at their coming againe to London, And all this more especially against them, who dare but professe they stand for the King and Parliament for that Highest Court which is our Bulwarke, our Tribunitian power against Tyranny, our highest concernment, and that which God hath made the cause that we are got Freemen, when other neighbour Nations are slaves. This is that Army that lately during a Treaty of Peace marched against us to assault us having in their hopes prepossessed the plunder of this City, which they believed would have been facilitated by their fellowes here within. A true Viperine Brood, that would make way to their own ends by their Mothers, their
their rich and beautifull Mothers ruine. These, then kept under by the over-awing hand (ever to be a doore for that mercy) have since endeavoured to take a muster of their owne strength, and to list their Names in shew of a Petition, whereby they might be able to assist their fellowes if they should returne (rea∣dy enough to returne if assured of their strenuous assistance) of to defend them∣selves from such Leavies as must be made upon them for the defence of the common safety, to which they have either not contributed at all, or very lately out of feare, or however not considerably, which Petulant and saucy Petition so point-blancke against the priviledges which some of them (its like) have protested to defend, breaths the pure Idiome of a Cavalier, and must needs be inspired by the same black Spirit which acts among them; of which they having now giv∣en an account in print, it may be read of all, and will not be subscribed of any but such as are of the right breed, which if they had pleased to print the Names subscribed, there would be read a most famous Catalogue of Papists, Atheists, and Proctors, the Inhabitants of the neglected Dens of Doctors Commons, also Mo∣nopolizers, Publicanes, or Custom-house-men, Drunkards, Players, debauched vil∣laines, the whole filth, trash, and Colluvies of this City, though amongst these are interspersed many honest men in too great simplicitie of their Spirits wrought upon by that splendid Name, and following of them as once the people Absalom the dethroning of David, whom yet they loved. These are the men of great wisdomes, considerable Estates, singular Modesty, lovers of their country, and such resolute pursuers of peace, as they will overtake or kill it. Of admirable Elocution, have the right accent, can pronounce Round headed Rogue and Parliament Dog with as good a grace as any Cavalier either in the Army, or in Hell. The manner of their prosecution of their Peace, and the Nature of their Peace it selfe (the prosecution whereof they meane shall Saint them) Take from Articles and Depositions as they were presented to the House of Commons, to all which Articles the persons guilty of them, witnesses proving them; and are ready to be produced, which we thought good to suppresse in Print least the witnesses might suffer in security, till the persons of the others be secured. By the very reading whereof, every peaceable minded man, that desires peace with truth in Gods way, and such an one as may be radically found just and durea∣ble in its own Nature, will see sufficient cause to divide himselfe from these dangerous men, and rever believe more, that That can be a good Peace, that is sought so vehemently the breach of Peace by Papists, Atheists, Proctors, Publi∣cans, players. Drunkards, Delinquents, and all that rabble of the enemies of peace, and also that from hence the whole Kingdom may receive satisfaction of the true disposition of those blessed peacemakers, who would make them believe (had they credit enough) that all those whom they please to stile Round-heads are enemies to a good peace, while they resist their sedition tending to ruine. Here followes first their Petition. Sheweth, THat the present sense of our Miscries and Apprehensions of inevitable Ruine both of Church and Common-wealth maketh us to become humble Suiters to this Honourable Assem∣bly (the likeliest meanes under God for our reliefe) to consider our distressed stae and to provide a speedy remedy for our present and future evils.
Earnestly desiring you to weigh the Care and Judgement of our Predeces∣sors, who by a known Law setled and preserved our Protestant Religion, our Liberties and Properties with the right vnderstanding betweene King and Subjects, which produced Plenty and Peace in our Streets. And to reflect with serious thoughts upon our present Distempers, violating Religion by Papists, and Sectaries ingaging our Nation in a Civill, bloudy, and destru∣ctive Warre, in invading our Lawes and Liberties, indangering all our Lives, and utter disabling us to relieve our distressed Bretheren in Ireland. Wee beseech you likewise to consider the effect of a continued Warre, as the Destruction of Christians, the unnaturall effusion of blood, Father against Son, Brothers by Brothers, Friends by Friends slaine; then a Famine and sicknesse the followers of a Civill Warre making way for a generall confusion and Invasion by a forreigne Nation, while our Treasure is exhausted, our Trade lost, and the Kingdome dispeopled. These things weighed and inlarged by your Wisedomes, we doubt not will be as strong motives in you to labour as in us to desire a speedy Peace and hap∣py Accomodation. Wherefore wee humbly crave that not lending an eare to any Fomenters of the present Warre under what pretence soever; nor remembring ought that may increase Jealousies or continuall Divisions, betweene his Majesty and his Houses of Parliament; you will speedily tender his Majesty (according to his Royall Intimations) such Propositions for Accomodation as hee may with Honour and safety to the whole Kingdome accept. For effecting whereof wee shall be ready to assist you with the best and ut∣most of our abilities; and whilst you endeavour Peace, wee shall send up our Prayers to Heaven for the blessing of Peace upon you, and all that desire it. The 8. of Decemb. 1642. Amongst the mulitude gathered together at Hherdashers Hall where the Committe of Lords and Commons sate for advance of moneyes; these words were uttered, viz. 1. IF this Petition die, wee die. 2. If it be stop in one place, we will have it in another. 3. Why should we be affraid, we shall be sufficiently backt. 4. They have borne it with a high hand all this while, and now they seeke to us, and to take away our goods by force. 5. An unjust peace is better then a just Warre. 6. If my Lord Major commit one, he shall commit all. 7. One in the Exchange (seeing one Mr. Story an ancient and well affected Citizen) said There's a base fellow would be kickt out of the Hall. 8. At the conclusion of a Speech uttered by one of this multitude, there was one with a loud voice uttered this execration: And a pox of all Round-heads. 9. That the Common Councell of London were the undoers of the City, And that they should present this Petition to the Common Councell, and those of them that would not a∣gree to it, (the time of Election being neere) they would take notice of them and turne them out.
10. Threatning words were given to Mr. William LLuellin, the multitude crying out, Hang him hang him, pull him in pieces; struck him, and puld him downe. 11. Another of them tooke the aforesaid Mr. LLuellin by the hand in Haberdashers yard, ying▪ You jeered us for our former Petition, calling us the Satten Petitioners; but all that hands in that Petition were as honest men as of the other party, and that Petition shall be made good. 12. Certaine of them laying hands in a violent manner on the aforesaid Mr. LLuellin said  shalbe made good with our bloods and the rest assented saying, yea, that it shall. 13. One speaking to Mr. George Pryor, said, Add truth to your Petition of Peace; he answe∣red, A pox of truth, what have we to do with truth; lets have peace, and truth will follow. 14. That one of the Abettors of Binions Petition, at whose Fathers house it was subscribed, upon Thursday when the said Tumult was in Guild-Hall, stood up in the Court of Hastings, and called them together, read the Petiti n and made Proclamation, That all that would sub∣scribe should come thither for that purpose, where in that Tumult they subscribed. 15. Mr. Osbaeston comming out from the Committee of Lords and Commons in Hab∣erdashers Hall, came into the Hall where the multitude was, stood up and told them what the Lords had said unto him, which was to this effect; viz. That they sate as a Committee for advance of mony and had no Commission to receive Petitions, or order any thing therin; but returned them for Answere to the Lord Major from whence they came. Wherupon, it was put to the question amongst them, Whether they would go to the Lord Major or no: the multitude cryed, I, I. Some particular men cryed out, Hang the Lord Major we will not goe to him. Others cryed out, To Guild-Hall, to Guild-Hall; I, (said others) let's goe there; for there we must have money. Others cryed, Peace, peace; let's have peace upon any termes whatsoever good or bad. And so departed from Haberdashers Hall Their Carriage at Guild-Hall. 16. THat one Mr. dusten comming o Guil-Hl, said, What are here a company of Boyes? A Ship-Chandler that vendeth all sorts of Arms answer'd, no here are peaceable men, and now come without weapon; but it shalt not be long er we come better provided, or in another manner. 17. Another Ship-Chandler that sells Armes cryed out in the Hall Peace, peace: One answered, Peace with truth: whereupon he said Give us peace, and a ox ke truth; and further said. He would maintaine their Petition with his life. 18. That the said Tumult being resolved to goe to the Lord Majors, the Constable, that did by vertue of the Lord Majors Warrant seize upon one of their Petitions, told them. It was in vaine for he was at Sessions they asked the Constable if he had their Petition, who told their, yea Hereupon the multitude cryed out, Take away the Petition from him, take it from him. 19. That one Captaine Harrves Troopers going in amongst them to keepe peace, they cryed out Knock him downe, knock him downe. 20. That one said, Let's have peace upon any Conditions, it's no matter what peace, so we have any peace. 21. They affirmed, that those who made the other Petition were a company of rogues. 22. That Mr. Iones perswading them to desist from this way shewing the ill event of their former Petition, and that the way to peace was to joyne with the Parliament. They cryed, Downe with him, downe with him. 23. That the Lord Major had ill favoredly taken away their Petition; and that they would have it againe by saire meanes or by foule. 24. That one in Birchin Lane, having set to his hand to the Petition, compelled his ser∣vants and workmen to put to their hands also. 25. In Southwarke on Thursday, Decemb. 8 1642. there met in Armes sundry men, under pretence of exercising, most knowne enemies to the Parliament, intending (as is conceived) to defend themselves from the Parliaments Levy of money, saying, They hoped to make their number 150. and hoped to make their party good ere long: one of them having beene with
Brodnax the Brewer, one of the Kings Army: other Delinquents under Parliament censure, at this time dividing themselves, negotiate this Petition; some of them denying to beare Armes by command of both Houses of Parliament. 26. Also a Butcher in the Shambles said, He would have Delinquents punished; but those Delinquents were such as carried in their Plate and money to Guild-hall, to assist the Parliament, saying. If that had not been, there had beene no Warre. The second Part, or further Addition. 1. THat a great Promoter of this Petition hath said. That those that did carry in any Plate into Guild-Hall, did as much as in them lay, strike a dagger to the Kings heart. 2. And further said. The Parliament was no Parliament, 'twas but a Trunk, a Body with∣out a Head. 3. That divers in the said Tumult did say, Wee are now disarmed; but it shall not be long ere we have them againe 4. That one of the Promoters of the said Petition said, Let this Petition be presented to eve∣ry man, and they that refuse to subscribe it, let us rise and cut their throats. 5. That one procured a Minister to read the said Petition on Sunday last publikely in the Church, and to make a Speech, inciting the Parishioners to subscribe the same, which cau∣sed a great disturbance in the Church, to the trouble of the Parishioners. 6. That the same party hath so far declared his disaffection to the Parliament, as that hee hath said, That whosoever came to him for money for the Parliaments use, he would pistoll 7. That divers in the said Tumult at Guild-Hall, said, That if they could not have any peace one way, they would have it another. 8. That one Banks in Cheap-side, a Promoter of this Petition, said, That all were knaves and rogues that subscribed not this Petition: to whom one Downham replyed. It was offered my Lord Major, and he refused to subscribe it: Banks answered, My Lord Major, my Lord Fart: I know no Lord Major there is; for the King said there was none, and he did be∣lieve the King. 9. A Promoter of this Petition swore saying. We must have peace, yea, and will have peace. 10. An active man in furthering the said Petition, said to one Mr. Bond who refused to subscribe the Petition, in a threatning manner, That when the Cavaliers came, he should be one of the first that should be plundered. 11. That one said, The Parliament would have no peace but what they listed: and spea∣king concerning the Petition, said, That if my Lord Major would not condescend to this Petition, he would shortly be made a poore Lord Major. 12. That the same party came to one Mr. Gunter for his hand to the Petition, who refu∣sing, he threatned him saying, Will you not? I will set you downe for a Malignant: the like words he used to one Mr. Burford, supposing by his threats and menaces to force the weaker sort to subscribe the said Petition: but being asked what he had done for the Parlia∣ment; he answered, O, you have lent your money to maintaine Warres. 15. That the said Petition was subscribed by many strangers and forreiners: and some that were agents in that Petition declared, That if they had hands, it were no matter what hands. 16 That one Osbaldstone, a great Promoter of this Petition, being at the Lord Majors with Sheriffe Langham, and going home, called for a sword, saying, he would not dye like a foole. And further said, If they conduct me safely home, let me alone to arme my selfe sufficiently. 17. That one comming to Mr. Clay in Cheapside to subscribe the said Petition: Mr. Clay questioned whether it would please the house? he answered, it would, or else he would lose his eare: It being further replyed by Mr. Clay, What if the House would not accept it? he answered, They would make them doe it. Their Carriage at Guild-Hall on Munday. Dec. 12. 1642. THat an honest man being at Guild-Hall was abused by some in mutiny then gathered to-together; one of them falling upon him, called him Round-headed Rogue, and beat him; and being apprehended by some persons well affected to carry him before a Magistrate, was
rescued by the Tumult, who by their speeches and carriages (which were very insolent) ma∣nifested their malignancy and desire of an uprore. 19 Information being given to Colonel Randall Manwaring, who is appointed by the Committee of the Milicia of the Citie of London to execute the place of Serjeant Major Gene∣rall Skippon, that a multitude of seditious persons and turbulent were assembled at Guild-Hall London, under pretence of promoting a Petition for Peace, and that they were drawing Swords one among another: the said Col directed Cap. Harvey to go with his Troop of horse to Guild-Hall to appease the said Tumult. And comming thither the said Cap. Harvey found a great multitude in the Porch and yard of the said Hall with their swords drawn fighting; where one Iohn Drury was apprehended who was one of the Petitioners and had a drawne sword in his hand; very many of the rest retreated into the Hall with their swords drawne, shut the dores and barricadoed the same with Stooles, Formes and Tables and other Lum∣ber, and refused to open the dore, or give any account of that uprore, but stood upon their guard. So that the said Colonel or Captaine were forced for the prevention of further mis∣chiefe, and for the preservation of the Major, Aldermen and Common Councell then sitting in the usuall place of the Hall beyond them, to bring two pieces of Ordnance, and caused the same to be planted for forcing the said Gate, And giving notice of their intention first to the said persons assembled within the Hall; they within desired a Parley, and declared by one Charles Iennings, That they were then willing all to depart quietty; but in the interim of time, resolved and declared as followeth. 1. That one Captaine Lee being about his occasions at Guild-hall, was abused by one who came to him, tooke him by the Throate, and coller of the Dublet, shooke him, called him Windsore Reformado, Roundheaded rogue, and divers of the said Tumult closed to him, struck up his heeles, violently tooke away his Sword, and animated thereto by one Mr. Pinder kickt him downe three steps. 2. That some of the said mutinous persons did take great pieces of Timber, and knockt against the Common Councell dore, and said that they would have the old Rogues out. 3. That some of the said Muriners an houre before the Tumult said, they were fooles be∣cause they did not come with swords and Pistolls. 4. Some of Captaine Clares Souldiers seeing their fellow souldiers had bin thrust out, and lost their hatts, comming in to looke for their hatts peaceably, offering violence to none, on∣ly had their swords in their hands for their defence: divers in the said Tumult clapt in up∣on them, struck up their heeles disarmed them and wounded them, and having gotten their Armes they stood Sentinell at the doore to keepe it with their naked swords. 5. That one of the Mutiners uttered these Speeches, viz. Come let us hang these two men to begin with all, meaning these two souldiers. 6. That one said if we be quashed many thousand lives shall be quashed. 7. That one said Oh see what danger we are in, here are their Ordinnce upon a com∣pany of naked men, but they dare not meet us in Moorefields. 8. That, some of the said tumultuous persons struck, and assaulted the Troopors on borse∣back, that came into Guild-Hall-yard to preserve and keepe the peace. 9. Another said he would spend his bloud, or life in the cause of the Petitioners, and if he had twenty hands would set them to it. 10. That divers of the said Petitioners declared, that if they could not have their desire granted by the Common Councell they would have them granted elsewhere by one meanes or other. 11. One said, we will goe ten thousand with a Petition w Armes if it be not receiv∣ed, we will goe ten thousand with Armes, and leave then thousand more in London to deale with the Roundheads. 12. That some Souldiers comming to Guild-hall peaceably, offering no wrong, the said mutiners layd hold on them and wounded them, and after they were wounded they said, Looke how the Round-heads bleed like Dogs. 13. That another being desired to desist from the said Petition, answered he would main∣taine it with his bloud. 14. That a furtherer of the Petition said, Lets have peace, and a pox take truth.
15. That though we are come naked men like fooles, yet we will follow our Petition with our swords. 16. That one Ihn Monger in St. Iames Garlickhith, being one of the utiners at Guild. Hell beat, struck and lay about him, using many mutinous words. 17. That some of the mutiners comming forth of Guild-Hall-yard, against the Tobacco shop did then and there utter these words in publique, what shall we maintaine a compa∣ny of Rogues (meaning Captaine Harveyes Troope) to cut our throats, Let us goe home and Arme Arme: 18. That one Redford, one of Captaine Clayes souldiers saith, that one Osbaldeston a chiefe Agent, in promoting this Petition said that all that assisted the Parliament, are Parliament Rogues, and the said Osbaldeston further said to another person, that he was a Parliament Rogue. 19. That one who went about on the Sabboth day last to collect hands thereto hath decla∣red that he will trust neither King or Parliament; And he further said (speaking of the last Declaration for sessing Malignants.) Was there ever such a heathenish Declaration as this adding further that the very Pagans would never have set forth such a Declaration. 20. That divers of the said Mutiners have had severall meetings about putting themselves into a Military Posture, choosing themselves a Captaine, exercising their men with Co∣lours displayed, published Lawes and Ordinances; enioyning secrecy, collecting many to buy Drummes and Colours, saying they hoped ere long to make their party good. The Examination of William Field Apprentice, to Quartermaster Henry Lee, to Colonell Ven, taken the 12th. day of December, 1642. before the Lord Major of the City of London. THis Examinat saith, about eleven or twelve of the clock this day, he being at Guild-Hall which was full of people at that time, one Simmes a Vintner at the Red-Crosse in Redcrosse-street, being then in Guild Hall, with divers other persons with him, did knock this Examinat down to the ground with a piece of a Rest, and afterwards when he was down, divers others of whom one Mead at the Maremaid fell upon him, and kicked him when he was down, and had he not bin rescued by one Percivall Potts an Exchange man who knew this Examinat, he believes he should not have gon out of the Hall alive, and saith he lost two Swords. William Field. Cap. per Iur. coram me Isaak Pennington Major. The Examination of William Mills of Foster Lane Joyner, taken the day and yeare above said before the said Lord Major. HE saith, that he being in Guild Hall about ten of the clock this forenoon did see three Souldiers which he knew not, with Swords by their sides, passing quietly through the Hall towards the doore by the clockhouse, some of those persons which came about the Pe∣tition asked what are these Souldiers which have Swords by their sides saying we are for peace but they are for War, and said thrust the Souldiers out of doores, goe your waies to the Taverne and spnd your money you received from the State, for you shall have no more, there being after that time a great combustion in the Hall, it being very full of people. William Mills. FINIS.
