J1152 [ocm]12257444 197464
Joyfull Newes from WELLS IN Somerset-Shire. VVherein is declared how the Ca∣valiers were beaten out of the said Town, by those Heroick Gentlemen and Members of the Parliament. The names of the Members of the Parl. are these. Sir Francis Popham. Sir Iohn Horner. M. Richard Cole. M. Strowd. M. Pine. Sir Edward Hungerford. Sir Edward Gainton. The names of the chiefe Ca∣valiers are these. Marquesse of Hartford. Lord Paulet. Sir Ralph Hopton. Sir Francis Dorrington. Master Smith. Likewise a true relation how they came to Bristow, with an intent to have fortified themselves, but were opposed by the wel-affected party of the City. With a relation of the taking of Northampton by the Ca∣valiers, on Tuesday, the ninth of August, 1642. Whereunto is annexed the Parliaments Resolution concerning the said Cavaliers. Ordered that this be printed and published. Joh. Browne, Cler. Parl. LONDON, Printed for Henry Fowler. Aug. 12. 1642.
Joyfull Newes FROM WELLS IN Somerset-shire. HAving arrived at my journey end to Taunton-Deane, under the command of Lieutenant Howard, with whom I am entertained Trumpeter to a Troop of Horse, the next day I intended (my duty bin∣ding me thereunto) to take my Horse and ride to Wells, to my Fathers: To which end I went to my Captaine, and told him my intent, withall desiring his licence for foure dayes; who told me that he would goe along with me to Wells, for it was in great distresse, the Cavaliers ha∣ving made it their randevouz, and used several-rigorous
oppressions against those that did any way oppose them. Wherefore he immediately caused me to sound my Trumpet through Taun∣ton-Deane; a Corporall giving notice that it was his desire that all Gentlemen or others that were possest of any Horse, or Horse∣mans Armes, should instantly put themselves into a Posture of Defence, and repaire to him. Which was speedily effected; for within three houres there were with my Captaines owne Horses, and those that were sent in, neere an hundred and twenty. Which being put in order by Lieutenant Howard, we im∣mediately marched towards Wells, where be∣ing arrived, wee found the Countrey all in Armes, and their Towne besieged on every fide. On the hill comming off Mendip from Bristow-ward, there was Sir Francis Popham, and Sir Edward Hungerford, with sixe thousand armed men, and two Peeces of Ordnance, which were mounted against the Bishops Palace. Betweene Glastenbury and Wells there was Sir Edward Gainton, and Sir John Horner, with eight thousand men, or thereabouts. On the hill on the East side between Skipton-Mallard and Wells, there was Master Pine, Master Cole, and Master Strowd, with three thousand more, and two Peeces which they had moun∣ted
to command any part of the town, where occasion should require. The sight of our horse gave a little more life to them, they having very few horses, and the Cavaliers having at the least three hundred. Wherefore Sir Edward Hungerford after a courteous welcome, entreated us to make good the passage from Wells, on the North-east of the Towne, which goes up to the Downes to meet with Skipton mallet Roade, which leads to Bristow, which was accordingly performed by us: the Army being in order, Sir Francis Popham caused some shots to be made from Mendip-Hill against the Bishops Pallace, which (by reason of the strength thereof) they had made their Quarters, it being a place of a considerable strength, and moted round about. Neverthelesse the report of our Ordnance made the Cavaliers bestirre themselves, seeing themselves surrounded by the Country, and knowing the Towne was no place of strength or security either to oppose us, or to secure themselves from us, wherefore they made as if they intended to force a passage towards Glasten∣bury, which caused all our parties of Foot to presse up to secure those passages, which they seeing, with their utmost speed at a passage be∣tweene the wood and us, trooped out upon us, fronting us boldly, which well they might, they being in number much greater, and more ex∣perienced
men, both in Horsemanship, and use of Arms, our men being raw, untutored, and unexperienced both in the use of their Armes, and Horsemanship, our Foot likewise being so farre behind, by reason of the mistake, that it was impossible to reach them, besides our Ord∣nance which was planted on the Hill, lying so high, could not command them, they keeping just under the bottome of the said Hill, being sheltred by the Wood. Neverthelesse, our Captaine (neither esteem∣ing their number, or weighing the danger that might happen by his attempting to intercept a Party so strong, and pusued by almost inevitable ruine, and perpetuall destruction) gave com∣mand that wee should give Fire upon them, which was with unexpected alacrity, and un∣daunted courage performed: They did the like at us, but such their haste was, that they could not stay to see the execution, nor doe we know whether we did any against them, for it was not policie to pursue them, they having the greater number. Besides, had wee engaged our selves beyond the bounds or suc∣cour of our Forces, wee might have been cut off, and they had cause to laugh at our de∣struction. The Towne being thus quit of them, wee drew our Forces in, where wee were enter∣tained with great joy; but they made for
Bristow, being confident that they should have gained a party there, buty being arrived, they found the City up in Armes, and some in Am∣bush, who suffered to passe quietly without discovering of themselves: But at their back returne, being pursued by the Commanders of the City, they intercepted them, and gave them a broad side, putting them to a shrewd confusion. Some Prisoners they have taken, but what they are, is not certaine: onely it is reported that Marquesse Hartford and the Lord Paulet are taken Prisoners: Others say, Sir Ralph Hopton; but of this there is no cettainty: for those that escaped, they fled to my Lord Strange, who lay within ten miles with an Armie, in the Borders of Wales. This day being the eighth of August, wee received severall Votes of both Houses of Parliament, with their Resolution, concern∣ing the said Cavaleers, namely, that Sir Ralph Hopton, Master Thomas Smith, Sir Fer∣dinando Gorges, and Sir Francis Bodington, be forthwith sent for as Delinquents. The Country stands generally for the King and Parliament: You would not imagine now confidently and willingly the Countrey take Armes. Although Sir Ralph Hopton be a Gen∣tleman very well beloved in the whole Coun∣try, yet so highly are they incensed against him
for this last action, that from Evercrutch his owne Tenants and Servants came against him and cry him downe now, more then ever they extolled him when the Knights of the Shire were chosen, my Lo: Paulet is hated of all men. And Mr. Smith is pittied, he being seduced by the other great ones, and it is believed that if he could fairely retreate, he would be no lon∣ger of that faction. It is reported for truth, that the City of North∣hampton is taken by the Cavaliers, but by what means I cannot resolve you. These are the chiefe of our proceedings, I make no question but you heare more then is true, at my next opportunity you shall heare from me, give this inclosed token to my wife. Ordered that this be printed and published Iohn Browne, Cler. Parliamentorum. FINIS.
