L1055 816.m.23[3] R226300 99886633 187567
AT THE DRAWING-SCHOOL NEAR THE Hand and Pen in St. Paul's Church-Yard, IS TAUGHT THE ART of DRAWING: On Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays in the Morning from Eight to Eleven; For Five Shillings Entrance and Five Shillings a Month. Also on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays in the Evening from Six to Nine: At the said Place and on the same Terms. Those that Please may be Taught at their respective Habitations. By B. LENS, and J. STURT. Segniùs irritant animos denissa per AURES, Quàm quae sunt OCULIS subjecta fidelibus.— The plainest Rules deliver'd to the EAR Upon the Mind no equal Force can bear With those that to the EYE subjected are. GRAPHICE by Aristotle is generally taken for the Art of Drawing any thing whatsoever with the Pen or Pencil, and was reckon'd among the Chiefest of those his , or Generous Practices of Youth; as rendring them so many ways Serviceable to their Country, and Profitable to themselves. Of incredible Service and Advantage it would be to our Smiths of all sorts, Masons, Bricklayers, Carpenters, Joyners, Carvers, Turners, Embroiderers, Tapestry-Workers, Silversmiths, Jewellers, nay to all our Handicrafts in general. For shew most of these Workmen abovesaid a Draft of what you would have done, their want of Skill in Drawing renders it almost useless to them. For Example, Should an Engineer invent a Machin and Draw it in all its Parts, with its Views per Front and Sides, the whole in Perspective, a Ground-Plot thereof, with a Scale annex'd thereto, with what Difficulty do they work, and the Projector must be always by or all will be Marr'd; whereas could our Handicrafts and Mechanicks Draw, a Man might send his Work from a Hundred Miles distance, Drawn as a∣bovesaid, and be satisfied it would be perform'd to his Mind and according to his Directions. By what has been said I would not have it thought, that none of our Handicrafts and Mechanicks can Draw, for some do of my own knowledge very well: Which Qualification hath made them the most excellent of all others; for the Best Drafts-Man will be the Best Artist in what Art soever. The Design of this School is to have a constant Nursery or Breed of Youths proper for Artificers; for as two, three or more, Wise, Rich and Artful Citizens, make it not a Wise, Rich and Artful City or Country, but the general Bent, Genius and Inclination, and the greater part of them so Qualified. For Proof of what hath been said, discourse with the meanest of all our Handicrafts, tho he cannot Draw yet will endeavour to chalk out after his fashion, your Meaning and his; knowing by pure instinct, that all the Rhetorick in the World cannot convince like a Drawing. What an Honour would it not be for our Workmen and Handicrafts, and Satisfaction to the Employer, when he comes to bespeak any thing of them Qualified with Drawing; to see them Sketch out as fast as you speak, with a Pen or Pencil, what you Would have done, and be sure to please you even befre a Stroak be struck therein; and this would prevent an Error which the unskill'd in Drawing often commit, in asking extravagantly too much sometimes and as often too little; by drawing they would compute the Charge to a tittle. If Parents sent their Children to Drawing as customarily as they do to Latin and Writing, it being altogether as useful to them, they would soon find the Advantage themselves and their Children would reap thereby. For a Master would take a Servant Qualified with Drawing, with half the Mony and be a Gainer thereby; for the Boy would come to Work in half the time, and both be assur'd the Master of a Servant for his turn, and the Boy of being a Master of his Calling; and not serve Seven Years as many do, to little or no purpose. Neither would our Handicrafts and Mechanicks alone be advantaged hereby; it is an Accomplishment for Noblemen and Gentlemen, Scholars, all Students in Art or Nature; Generals, Engineers, Mathematicians, Surveyors, Surgeons and an infinity of others. How defective are the best Historical Accounts of Animals, as Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Insects, Plants, Descriptions of Countries, Cities, Castles, Man∣ners, Habits, Customs, &c. without Drawings or Sculptures; being little more useful than a Demonstration of Euclid would be without a Scheme. The greatest Master of Words cannot describe in the Verbosest manner any Object, as Beast, Bird or Insect (if never seen before) so as to make it be known when seen, which Drawing performs infallibly and with few Stroaks. I shall only add, what Veneration and Esteem the Artists of this kind have met with in the World; The Profession hereof being admitted into th first Place among the Liberal Arts, and throughout Greece taught only to the Children of Noblemen, and forbidden to their Servants and Slaves. Of no less account was it among the Romans, since one of the most Noble Families in Rome, the Fabii, thought themselves much Honour'd by the Surname of Pictor. Claudius, Titus the Son of Vespasian, the two Antonines, and divers other Emperors and Princes were excellent in this Art; as were also in these later times many of the greatest Princes of Europe; Francis I. King of France; Margaret Queen of Navarre; Emanuel Duke of Savoy, with many others. To Conclude, Speaking of France; The Prodigious height that Nation is arriv'd to in this present Age in most Arts, may be attributed to the Publick Academies and Schools, Erected at the King's own Charge for Drawing, Painting, &c. which hath produc'd such plenty of Artists of most kinds. This Paper may be had at the School. 1697.
