L1583A [ocm]09551138 205734
A LETTER ON George Keith's ADVERTISEMENT OF An Intended Meeting AT Turners-Hall, The 29th of April, 1697. LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. Sowle, near the Meeting-House in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street, and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street, 1697.
Mrs. Sowle, HAving Received this, I thought good to send it to You; who, I understand, Print for the Quakers, and some others, who are Persons of Moderation; and if you think fit to Print this, may. Vale.
A LETTER ON George Keith's ADVERTISEMENT, &c. My Good Friend, IT's a Kindness to be accomodated with that by which one can either reap Pleasure or Profit, but the Adver∣tisment I received, affords neither to a Quiet Mind, or Christian Spirit. I intreat the Favour of a few Lines to advise me what this Geo. Keith is; for, to me, he doth appear Peremptory, Singular, and his design of an Ill Tendency. 1. Peremptory, because he takes upon him to appoint a Meeting, fix time and place; and then, in his own Proceed∣ings, to be so far Judge, as Confidently to Affirm the Per∣sons he mentions are justly Desired to be present, as if his so Saying were sufficient Proof, that he hath such a Power
as to Summon whom he pleases, Charge, Recharge, and prove Guilty in their Absence, and unheard; and if they answer not his Desire, he'll Try, Sentence, and Condemn them, taking all Pro Confesso, that he Suggests, if they yield not Obedience to him, and apear not at his high Com∣mission Court. 2. It's Singular, at least to me, for any Person Concern'd in a Controversy, that is exposed in publick Prints (as I perceived this between him and the Quakers is) to assume such a Power and Method of Answering as he doth. 3. And the Design and Consequence of which Method, at this time of the Day, to me seems very ill, tending to raise Fewds, Animosities and Prejudices amongst Protestants; and for any pretending to be Protestant Dissenters, as these Quakers do (and indeed in what do they differ from us, but in the Sacraments, Ceremonies, and a stricter way of Living) and as such, are Recognized by the Parlia∣ment, to be concerned in such a Work, will raise a strong Jealousie in many that the Fomenters and Propagators of such Assemblies for such pretended Ends, as are proposed, are really Influenced by some Popish Agent, or that they are themselves so Inclined, and by such ways would bring the Protestant Religion into Contempt, by Rendering them so Divided▪ and Guilty of such Gross Errors and Heresies; and the next word, ready to come forth, is Heretick, and then away with these Hereticks, better some cut off and Destroyed, than suffered to Live to Infect the Flock. And notwithstanding the Parenthesis which G. K. claps in, when he Instigates the Christian Teachers, to oppose the words Gangrene and Contagion, which, he saith, hath, and doth at present Infect many Thousands to me;
shews his Inclinations to have other Weapons made use of, than only Spiritual: Therefore, Pra inform me what this desperate Viragoe, this busie and officious Agent is, how looked upon, Countenanced, or Contemned by Authority in your great City; seeing he writes that his Meeting is by their Permission, to detect the Vile and Gross Errors of William Penn, Thomas Ellwood, George Whitehead, John Penington, and their Second Days Weekly Meeting, as he calls it. Surely, if the Civil Authority, whose Business is to pre∣serve the Peace, were desirous to have the Errors and He∣resies of these Men Exposed, they should not Employ such an one, but rather had this matter well weighed and con∣sidered by some Divine, Able, Judicious and Moderate Persons that were Capable to use such proper ways and methods that might Demonstrate they sought their Con∣viction, and Return out of those Errors (if they, or any in this Nation, are guilty thereof) than to imploy such an Agent, who appears more desirous to Charge, Recharge, and Prove those Persons Guilty in their Absence, and in such a confused, mixt and unthinking Assembly (as such commonly are) than to make use of that way of Replying to publick Print, or seeking in a Spirit of Meekness accord∣ing to the Apostolick Doctrine to restore them; but if it be from a Conscienciousness of his own Inability, either truly to do the one, or rightly to do the other, it shews his Preju∣dice and Subtilty: And surely our Church, and the truly Pious and Learned among us, want no Assistance from such an one as this Geo. Keith appears to be, that still pretends to Quakerism, and to be a Dissenter of that sort, who pretend that Tythes are not to be paid of Divine Right, neither are they in any part of the New Testament, by the direction of the Testator to be paid as such unto Gospel Ministers for their Maintenance.
And the Quakers are such a People that will not carry their Children to the Minister to be Baptized, neither will they pay for it, nor the Dues to the Minister of the Parish for Churching of Women, nor Burials; neither do they like our Fonts, Bells, Surplices, and Cushions, Communi∣on-ables, nor Carpitts; but rather Esteem them Popish Institutions. Now these things Considered, with what is before hint∣ed, How can the Civil Authority Permit, or the Ecclesiasti∣cal Encourage such an Angry, Hot, Rigid, Dissenting Qua∣ker in this Work? For my part, as little Wit as the Quakers may be esteem∣ed to have; I shall conclude them, besides that little to meet this Busie, Confident, Officious Tool; that, I fear, hath not Wit enough to see how he is made use of, or to consider how easie it is for others to see him, and his Work, and the Tendency and End thereof is neither Just nor Christi∣an—But, Brings, to my Rememberance, a Story, I have heard of some Insincere Popish Priests; who, to beget a Credit in some Pcotestants of their pretended Miracles, prevailed with an old Woman to feign her self Lame, which she did, and also was instructed to pretend to have had some Dream or Vision, and that therein it was told her, If she did Wash on such a Day, in such a particular place, and had one of her Priests to say so many Masses or Ave-Maries, she should be Cured, and notice was given thereof (as this G. K. doth of his Intended Meeting) the Protestants came to see, but not being Privy to the Juggle nor Design of those that set the thing to Work, came away struck with Admi∣ration, and were ready (as many simple People may be in Geo. Keith's Meeting) to conclude some notable thing was done. But it so fell out, that this deceipt was not easie to
the Poor Woman that was Instrumental in the Cheat, and she was willing in her Confession to a Ghostly Father, of whom she had heard a good Fame, to divulge the whole Trick to him; who, altho' of the same Profession, but more wise and sincere than the designing Priest that want∣ed (as G. K. may) a Popular Applause to Injoyn the Wo∣man to Confess the Truth; telling her, The Church had no need of such methods to support her Power; and I also think, our Church hath no need to Countenance or Encou∣rage any such Dissenting and Designing Agents, that seek themselves more than her true Honour, or the Advancing their particular Interest, or venting their Prejudices more than seeking the Honour of the Church or Christian Religion, and I hope there are some such Fathers among us, that have more Sincerity and Wisdom, than to Countenance such Per∣sons or Things, but when they see it needful to detect Er∣ror, and reclaim Hereticks, will use more Proper and Chri∣stian Methods, that shall rather reach their Consciences, and convince their Understandings, than expose the Quakers and Religion in General to the Scorn and Laughter of such a mixt and heedless Number, and themselves to the Slight and Contempt of those they pretend to Reclaim. And considering the Day this G. Keith hath made choice of, for his Work is the Day after that Authority hath ap∣pointed for a publick Fast; and he pretending to Act by their Permission, I thought meet to add the following Text, that every one may see how he answers Authority, and the true End of a Christian Fast. Behold ye Fast for Strife and Debate, and to smite with the Fist of Wickedness; ye shall not Fast as ye do this Day, to mak your Voice to be heard on High, Isa. 58. 4. FINIS.
