R255 99827937 198091
The Ranting Whores Resolution: Wherein you will finde that her only Treasure Consisteth in being a Lady of Pleasure. To the Tune of, General Monks March. woodcut of man in tree watching couple lying on the ground OH! fye upon care Why should wée despair, Give mée the Lad that will frollick, There is no disease, But Musick will please, If it were the stone or the cholick. The Lad that drinks Wine, Shall only be mine, Hée that calls for a Cup of Canary, That will tipple and sing, Kiss, caper, and spring, And calls for his Mab, and his Mary. Such sinners as these My pallat will please, For this is a Lad that will knock it, Provided hée bée Not Niggard to mée, But carry good gilt in his pocket; I care not from whence Hée gets his expence, Nor how hée comes by his treasure, So I have the swéets When hée and I méets, For I am a Lady of pleasure. I love a young Heir, Whose fortune is fair, And frollick in Fishstreet-dinners, Who boldly doth call, And in private paies all, These Boyes are the noble beginners, For what the old Father In long time did gather, Hée toaps it away without measure, Hée'l lye in my lap, Like a Bird in a trap, And call mee his Lady of pleasure. Hée wears gallant cloaths And studies new Oaths and gets pretty words from the players Hée swaggers and roars, Hée calls the next Oars, And cries, here's a péece for your fairs, Thus wée in delight From morning till night, Do study to cast away treasure, At night in my arms I secure him from harms, For I am a Lady of pleasure.
The second part to the same Tune woodcut of man with hat and sword woodcut of woman WHen this Gallant's broke, I've another bespoke, And hée hath my protestation, I call him my Love, My Iewel, my Dove, And swear by my reputation, That I never did know What love was till now, Though I have had men beyond measure With such tricks as these All Coxcombs I please, For I am a Lady of pleasure. When they're in the Iayle, They wretchedly rail And at mée they cast all their curses, Let them laugh that win, I care not a pin, When I have confounded their purses, While they have disgraces, I know not their faces, When Warriers of Woodstreet make seizure But when they'r whole men I'l know them agen For I am a Lady of pleasure. I live by the quick And not by the sick, Or such whose estates lye a bléeding My wast must be bound By men that are sound, For I am a Lass of high féeding If once they grow poor, No mony, no Whore, And yet they shall wait on my leisure, I only fulfil My fancy and will, Which shews mee a Lady of pleasure. I laugh when they tell Mee stories of Hell I think there is no such Cavern, If Heaven there be (As some will tell mée) I am sure it must bée in the Tavern, Where there is no Wine, There's nothing divine; Wée'l think of a grave at more leisure. Boy fill th'other glass For I am a Lass That will be a Lady of pleasure. In fréedome and joyes I'l spend all my daies, For there is no greater blessing Than musick and meat Good Wine and the feat, And nothing to pay for the dressing; Let Sisters precise Go turn up their eyes, And speak words by line and by leisure; If death come at last, And take mée in haste, Then there lies a Lady of pleasure. FINIS. London, Printed for F. Coles, M. Wright, T. Vere, and W. Gilbertson.
