R558za 816.m.14[40] R224790 99885656 185493
REASONS humbly offered to the Honourable the Commons of England, in Parliament Assembled, against the Intended Bill for 12 l. 12 s. per Tun upon Wines. By the Company of Coopers, London. I. THAT whereas by the great Duty already laid upon Wines, there is not half the Importation, nor consequently half the Consumption as was before the War with France. Now, if this Act should pass, it would be in the Na∣ture of a Prohibition, so that not half of what is now, will be Im∣ported for the time to come; whereby not only His Majesty's Duty of Customs will be very much reduced; but that part of the Trade, which relates to the Cooperage of Wines will be almost wholly lost. II. That since the Prohibition of French Wines, the Company of Coopers have been much employed in Making and Fitting of Empty Cask, to be Exported to Spain and Portugal, &c. but especially to Portugal for bringing in of Wines, that Country being not able to supply them with Cask for the same; who, if this Act should pass, would utterly lose that Benefit also; which hath been a means to supply themselves, and their Families, in this time of dead Trading, Scarcity and Dearness of all Provisions. III. Whereas many of the said Company are great Traders in Wines, and Deal with Inn-keepers and Country-Customers; their said Coun∣try-Chapmen have already made a very little Consumption since these Wars, in regard that Wines are at so high a Price already: And if this Act should pass, Wines must consequently be so much the dearer, that Gentlemen and Travellers will not go to the Price; and so the Trade in the Country will be utterly lost. And this the said Company have the greater Reasons to believe, because several of their Country-Chapmen have already given order not to renew their Wine-Licenses for any further Term, altho this is the usual time for renew∣ing the same. IV. That the Premisses considered, His Majesty will not only lose in his Customs and Wine-License; but most of the Country Inn-keepers will be ruined and undone, if the said Wine-Traders should draw their Stocks out of their Hands, which they will be necessitated to do, they having been so greatly Impoverished, especially since the Quartering of Soldiers, wanting their Subsistence, lies so heavy upon them. Besides the great Prejudice that may be to the Kingdom in hindring the Vending the Native Commodities, and that of Newfound∣land, and the other Fisheries. That the Passing this Bill tends to the Ruin of the Cooper's Trade, with many hundreds of Families, and to the utter Destruction of a Company so useful and necessary at Land, and to His majesty's Navy at Sea. And therefore 'tis humbly hoped the Bill will not pass this Honourable House.
Company of Coopers REASONS. Against the Duty upon Wines.
