R952A L.R.305.a.7.[9] R227719 99887481 190444
REMARKS upon the Scotch Act, in a Letter to a Friend. SIR, TO satisfie you that there's such a thing as a Scotch Act, for Grant∣ing the Trade of India, Africa, and America, to a Company Set∣tled or to be Settled in Scotland, I send you the Printed Copy inclosed. And if Reports be true, and we may believe what we hear, the Sub∣scription of the said Company is already perfected for the full Sum of 600000 l. half whereof is Subscribed by English Merchants, and others. And some say, That the Designs of that Company are framed and car∣ryed on here in London; and Ships are building and buying, and Car∣goes providing here and Abroad, in order to a Vigorous carrying on of their Trade; others say, That the Interlopers here, are very good Friends with the Managers of the Scotch Company, which some take to be the Reason, why they are not heard to find fault with it; which, whether it be, that they are all one, or, that they intend to shelter their Interloping Ships gone to India, and now going thither by Licence under that Com∣pany, and so to come for Scotland, for these or some other Important Rea∣sons to themselves best known; the Interlopers, who are Men that love to Fish in troubled Waters, and hate all Establishments of Company's for Trade, are reconcil'd to this Company, at least so far, as to make no Noise or any Complaint against it. Now as to the Opinions of Men about this Company, which you de∣sire to know, they differ so much therein, that I am at a loss how to give you any Account of them. Some say, That by this Act, Scotland is made a free Port for the Trade of Three Parts of the World. Some say, That if it be so, in little time they will draw in the other Quarter. Some say, That the Riches of England have been Purchased by Selling the Overplus of what we do Import from all Parts of the World, more than what we do Consume our Selves to Foreign Nations. Some say, That Foreigners will buy none of those Goods of us which we bring home from India, Africa, and America, so long as they can be supplied with such Goods from Scotland; because they shall certainly buy them Cheaper there, seeing the Scotch will Pay no Duties upon them, which are very high in England, and by Consequence will make our Goods so much the dearer. Some say, That the Retailers in England will buy few or no Goods, neither brought into England by the Traders to India, Africa, and America, because they will buy them Cheaper in Scotland, the Duties being to be Paid upon such Goods which remain in England, to the full, nothing be∣ing re-paid again but upon the Exportation. Some say, That it will be impossible to hinder the bringing in of Goods by Land from Scotland, by those Pedlars and others, althô the Pict's-Wall were re-built much higher than before. Some say, They will be brought in by Sea also, and some say, that this Scotch Company will in a short time, for these and many other Reasons, destroy the whole Trade and Navigation of England, and carry it to Scotland. Now, Sir, if these will be the Consequences of this Scotch Act, it appears very formidable, and should require a speedy Remedy; but it may be, some Men may be of another Mind, and I am always for submitting to better Judgments, and am, SIR, Printed for John Whitlock, near Stationers-Hall, 1695.
