M1100 489263213 208640
AN ELEGY ON The Much-to-be-deplored DEATH OF That Never-to-be-forgotten PERSON, The Reverend Mr. NATHANAEL COLLINS; Who After he had been many years a faithful Pastor to the Church at Middletown of Connecticut in New-England, about the Forty third year of his Age Expired; On 28th. 10. moneth 1684. Testor, Christianum hic de christiano vera proferre Hier. Epist. Paulae. Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat. Dignum laude virum musa vetat mori. Horat BOSTON in NEW-ENGLAND Printed by Richard Pierce for Obadiah Cill. Anno Christi 1685.
Reader; TO Lament the Dead in Verse, having been even from the Dayes of David until Now, in some sort almost as Common as Death it self, an Apology for that thing at this time is altogether superfluous: Nor have the Noblest Hands disdained to scan Potetical measures on their Fingers, tho' an Annatus has derided a Twiss for not counting that Exercise beneath him. But there seems more needful an Excuse for the meaness of this Composure, which is born before its Time from a Brain disus'd to such Performances; in which I have been so farr from the accuracy of Virgil, who having laid out eleven years upon his Aeneids, after all judged them not polished enough to be published, that a few stolen hours were all I had to shape them in, and to which I could never have been drawn, if the Subject of these Rhythmes, had like the Gentleman in Thuanus upon his Death-bed, given sufficient caution That his Herse should not be burdened with bad Funeral verses. For this, my utmost Plea is, That the sense of Duty, awak∣ened. by the invitation of others hereunto, has
produced this Rapsody, for a Censure on which, I appeal from Curiosity to Candour, expecting no Laurel on this occasion but what I merit by my good Affection to the Memory of a True Is∣raelite worthy to be had in Everlasting Re∣membrance. C. M.
FƲNERAL-TEARS At the Grave of The much Desired And Lamented Mr. NATHANEEL COLLINS? Who changed Death for LIFE, December 28. 1684. — But shall he unobserved steal away? Or Israel not afford an hand to layIsai. 57.1. An Evil-boding Death to heart? no Son Of All the Prophets when Elijah's gone Look after him? Forbid this, Heaven! Showr On a bereaved Clod of Earth a pow'r To yield a spire of grassallusion to the poetical fancy of Ajax whereon may grow The Name of COLLINS, help a verse to show His Vertues, as that Flock acknowledged Their DoeDorcas, Act. 9.39. when to the Spicy Mountains fled. Assist mee, thou who hast engag'd the Just A Memory,Psa. 112.6. to whom the precious dust Of Saints Dissolv'd remains united! — I SIGH the Fate for which our broached eyes Spend floods of brine; at which a dire surprise Of a soul-chilling horrour doth invade The Soul not stone before; at which are made In serious minds as many wounds as were To Caesarwhom the Roman conspirators slew with 23 wounds given. Reader, shake to hear;
The DEATH of COLLINS tis. He dead without A Paper winding sheet to lay him out! A shame. O that Egyptian Odours, and Embalmers tooGen 50.2. were now at my command! I want them. But Hyperboles withdraw, Be gone Licentious Poets. What I saw On this occasion let some countrey Rymes That call a Spade a Spade, tell after-Times. DEPRIV'D of Charrets & of Horsmen too,all. to 2. King. 2.12. I on the wings of Contemplation flew; Into the howling desart thus I went, The cut-off gardenso some render the Garden of Nuts, Cant. 6.11. in a phrase very accomodable to America. where our David sent His sheep to seed and fold, from which he drave The Rav'nous Tigre-brood, in which he gave His herds a Rest at noon.Cant. 1.7. On Jordans Banks I meant to sit with Thoughts on this and Thanks. But there found I an Elect Lady,some (tho' groundlesly though) suppose a Church intended by that name in 2. Joh 1. There Grov'ling in Ashes, with dishev'led hair, Smiting her breast, black'd with a mourning dress, Resembling mother Sion in distress;all. to the figure thereof in B. K.'s ingeni∣ous poem. Or like a Rachel in a Bethl'em plight,Mat. 2.18. But with a Beauty glittering too, that might The Features show that Judah's preaching King Much did once in his machless Raptures sing;viz. the Canticles.
I found her. There amaz'd, into a Treeall. to such a metamorphosis celebrated in Ovid. Almost transformd with passion: Sympathie Produced this Enquiry, Who I wonder, Seems Sorrow's Center, Sorrow's Essence yonder? Lo, I no sooner had approached near, Then from above this voice did thunder; Here Pitty, the Church of Middletown bespeaks Set in the midst of swoons and sobs and shrieks. With Bowells full of it I hastned to The Wet place, asking Why she grieved so; And had this Answer. SIr, Ask you this? Are you a Sojourner Within New-Englands bounds & know not why? I've lost great COLLINS, man! O that, O there, From this Tears-FountainHinc illae lacrymae. is my misery. Immortal COLLINS! what a Charm is in So dear a Name? 'Tis Honey mixt with gall To think, I had him, but I miss him; Seen He was, sad word!fuimus Troes. but so no more he shall. My Love is Talkative: tis fit that I Thus vent my smother'd Fire. The Rabbins say That when good old Methusela did dye, His Wife nine husbands lost in him that day. Like Looser I will speak: The Lamentation Over Jerus'lems Woe doth suit me well, A Widow how is she become!Lam. 1.1. Privation Seems now to be my only Principle.
Once did I prise, I'l now praise what I had. The box of his Fames OyntmentEccles. 7.1. now shall send Abroad its Odours. Alexanderfrom whose corpse 'tis said there went a smell surprizingly fragrant. dead Had not the scent which doth from him ascend. Some Elogyes compose to try their Wits; The Gout,praised by Pichennerus, the Feavour,praised by Huttenus, yea & Injustice,praised by Glaucus, Follypraised by Erasmus, and Povertypraised by Pierius, all in set poems, or orations. have in the Fits Of Ranting Writers had a comeliness. My Theme, my Humour is not such an one: Who to prove Cicero not eloquent, Pen'd Books,as once an humoursome person did. who truth & worth for guards disown Such only count Collins not excellent. Bright COLLINS, Star of the first Magnitude, Extol him how could I! I sha'n't be chid If as much time on him my gazes shou'd Spend, as that GreeksSocrates, who spent 15 year in framing of one Panegyric, one ora∣tion. in's Panegyric did. O that Apelles were my servant now To limn this Hero, but his utmost All Would blush, and draw a vail upon the Browas that painter did upon his Minerva's. Below whose Majesty his skill would fall.
I would that you, my Friend, each drop of Ink Could fill with Elogyes no fewer then The little eelsof which I can with my Microscope see incredible hundreds playing about in one drop of water. that may swim in't: I think They all should celebrate this Flow'r of men. I would too that each syllable all round This Globe with perfum'd Air might fly about; Or your Stentorophonic Tubewhich speaking-Trumpet may be heard a vast way off. might sound The praise of admirable Collins out. Death, thou All-bitingall. to ye Acrost. of Mors Mordens Omnia Rostro S uo Prodigall, a blow Of thine hath laid within the ground a plant Surpassing Cedars. I did hardly know A spice whose quantity on it was scant. Good Nature and good Education were In him conjoyn'd to such an high degree, As gain'd the Title of thatTit. Vesp. who was termed, Deliciae humani generis. Emperour, In this rare soul Mankinds delight we see. Facetious Snow-balls from his candid breast With early Magic hence would captivate His near, Familiars, so that he was blest Who could have leave to be his Intimate. Hence from his Cradle clothes his neat discretion, Mounted upon bridled Ʋrbanity, Before a most obliging Disposition, Triumphant rode in ev'ry Company.
But Oh the fruits of Heav'nly Graces dew Upon so rich a soyl! Let Peter bid His Brethren add one graces pearl unto Thev. the glorious catalogue 2. Pet. 1.5, 7. rest: The whole heap was in Collins hid. You'd scarce believe the FAITH residing in This Child of Abraham, the strong Impression On his heart of Realities unseen,2. cor. 4 18. Of Gospel glories, of things past expression: How dearest to him his Redeemer; how With brave Ignatiuswhose saying often was, Amor meus est crucifixus he could warble out O Christ my Love; how we might e'en allow A JESƲS grav'dwhich is grosly and fabulously reported of another. within his breast no doubt. His VERTUE took this sister by the hand; And with her train accompanyed thus, In vert'ous flights he went — how much beyond An Aristides;two glories of the heathen, the one for Justice, the other for Fidelity. or a Regulus! For KNOWLEDGE, tho in him poor Harvard lost One of her tallest sons, one of the best Souldiers in her Minerva's Camp, my boast Of higher Wisdom in him i'n't the least. My Moses, he in Egypts Learning verstAct. 7.22. Had more then that; Accomplishments Divine In exercise of which, while he converst With Isr'els Jah, to us his face did shine.Exod. 34.35.
Yare at his GRAMMAR, kenning how and when To speak: his tongue aProv. 15.4. tree of life, no (dross Proceeding from this Chrysostomgolden mouth.) the penn Of Ready writers like, not barbarous. How lofty in his RHET'RIC, when with cryes To the Omnipotent reduc'd to sayas in Exod. 32.10. feriendi licentiam petit a Mose qui fecit Mo∣sen. Let me alone, thereby he scal'd the Skyes, And with the oldpreces et lacrymae sunt Arma Ecclesiae. Artill'ry got the day. In the best LOGIC, Oh how Rational! How able to spy Canaan through! how ready To baffle a Temptation! and withal Full of his Oracles sound, solid, steady! How right was his ARITHMETIC that knew Wisely to measure his ownPsa. 90.12. dayes! How right Was his GEOMETRY, that found the true Bulk of the earth! a pointand an invisible point no doubt would it be to an humane eye in the starry Heaven, tho it probably contains above Ten Thousand Millions of cubic German leagues. not worth the sight. In his ASTRONOMY how ripe his eye Reaching to things beyond the stars! Alwayes Exact in this no-vainas some other Philoso∣phy is call'd in Col. 2.8. PHILOSOPHY, That in all things he found his Makerspresentem docult quaelibet herba Deum. praise.
Master of all the Arts that shew us what Tis from each Bad unto each Good to goe; To all his Knowledge last subjoyning that,Socrates his Hoc tantum scio, me nihil scire. All that I know is, that I nothing know. For TEMPERANCE, he liv'd upon it, hee Like Hooper spar d much in his diet, more In 's speech, but most in Time; the hateful Three the Pleasures, and Profits & Honours of the world, be∣come the 3 Belzebubs of it, according to the Distich Ambitiosus honos et opes et foeda voluptas, Haec tria pro trino Numine mundus habet.Fly-gods o'th' world mean while he car'd not for. To Meat aDan. 1.12. Daniel; and a RechabiteJer. 35.6. To Drink; like a John BaptistMat. 3.4. in his Rayment; His sleep, like David,Psa. 119.62. robbing in the Night; Still putting Nature off with scanty payment. Abstemious in all things at such a rate, Some (like ElizaK. Edw. VI. us'd to call the Princess Elizabeth, his Sister Temperance. in her Brothers eyes, Him Brother Temp'rance could denominate. And Justice caus'd what e'er lookt otherwise. For PATIENCE whole beds and loads of it In his soul flourisht. What Affliction meant He felt as much as most do talk, and yet Groans might from him, but GrumblesIt was the sentence of a great Saint under great pain, I groan but do not grumble. ne're be sent.
And under Provocation, 'twas a care By him maintaind to smile Affronts away. Not fireing when meer Cock-boats landed are; Seldom decoy'd from his mild Yea, or Nay. No Brother ofwhom Homer so often represents in fumes. Achilles; like unto The Ʋpper Regions free from Tempests; full Of the doves temper: Able for to go Over an Alphabet,as was wont to do the Renowned Roman Empe∣rour. tho Anger pull, His GODLINESS steer'dallusion to Sola sit humanae pietas cyno∣sura carinae. all his motions still: God had his thrice-hotAmo te, Domine, plusquam meos, plusquam mea, plusquam me. Bern. love, his life, his Whole: Gods Honour was his End, and in the Will Of God he mouldedall. to Rom. 6.17. gr. his renewed soul. His sev'rall Turns on a Religious threed He sought to string: fixing that Motto on What signal he in both his Callings did, With much devotion, Lordas he, Propter te, Do∣mine, propter te. for thee alone.
How James-like were hisof whom Ecclesiastical History relates, that his hard∣ned knees wore the Badges of his hard prayers. Pray'rs, how did the word Of Life, his heart Christsas Jerome remarkt of his friend Nepotian. Library affect! What God-ward flames did his pureAni∣ma justi Coelum est. mind afford, Of any Ord'nance dreading a Neglect! BROTHERLY-KINDNESS did procure the Law Of Kindness in hisprov. 31.26. lips, a Denison Of Philadelphiawhich name signifies brotherly love. in him we saw; Heir to the soul of the ApostleHeb. 13.1. gr. of whom tis said that when through age he could do no more, he would give that short Lesson for a long Sermon to his congregation, my Children, love one another. John. A Zuinglian entire that ever saida savory speech recorded of the famous Zuinglius. Let me see Christ in any one, I shall Him with both Armes embrace. Whatever made Distinctions, this with him removed all. And CHARITY in him warm Beams extended To all the Race of Man; Philanthropy Him like a shaddow every where attended; COLLINS made up of Love, we us'd to cry.
An Injury seldom resenting more Than Cranmer or the MartyrologerHoly Mr. Fox. Who urn'd his Ashes, of whom tis notour, Of good, for ill, Turns from them sure you were. In fine, As theSeneca. Philosopher did give His friend advice, suppose a Cato's eye On you, and so be wise; when I would live Uprightly, I'd imagine, COLLINS by. Thus was he for a Christian, and thus he With Conversation lightned, every Deed Of his in print a Sermon yeeldeth mee:Ille pius pastor, quo non prestantior unus, Qui faciendo docet, quae facienda doct. But now what as a Minister you'l heed. Methinks I see how fraught the Pulpit was Of Grace, of Gravity, of Wisdom, when With most harmonious notes a Barnabas He now was, and a Boanerges then: How deep his Sermons were, where Elephants Might take content, and yet withal how plain, Suited unto the leather Dublet's Wants. All in a near unimitable Strain:
What undashtall. to 2. Cor. 2.17. gr. wine he gave me: what a Zeal For me consum'd him: how material He was in Dispensations aim'd to heal Distempers in me, yet how Spiritual: He like an Oxall. to those 2 creatures in Rev. 4.7. whereof by the former some will have the Pastor, & by the latter the Teacher of a Church to be meant. was alwaies labouring To feed me, but he like an Eagleall. to those 2 creatures in Rev. 4.7. whereof by the former some will have the Pastor, & by the latter the Teacher of a Church to be meant. too Did soar to Pisgah's Top, from thence to bring Celestial Visions pore-blind us unto. One is a Doctor mostso Alexander Hales. Invincible Another mostso Bradwar∣dine. Profound, a Third is counted A Subtilso Scotus. one; (Scholastic Records tell) A Fourthso Aquinas. Angelical by none surmounted: COLLINS was all of this. The noblethus dis∣tinguished in an Epigram of Beza's Three Geneva Crowns, enlightning Calvin, and The thundring Farel join'd auspiciouslie With shouring Viret, here in one did stand. For Memory almost a Seneca,whose tenacious Memory is to all Ages memorable. For Judgement and Fancy inferior To few: in Learning rich, and ev'ry way He was a furnisht Gospel-Orator.
How manyall. to. Act. 16.14. Lydian-hearts reputed him Aan excellent Divine, the English of whose Name seems to be Key-carrier: Claviger, by him unlockt? To us For Light giv,n to our House how much Esteem He had as ananother, whose Name in likelyhood was House-Lamp. Oecolampadius! To save poor me and mine, Oh how severeobserving the Motto of the Emperour Se∣verus, which was LABOREMUS. His Labours were! how lasting his Renown Must to my Offspring be, Once (saying) were Doves eyes within the Locks ofall. to Cant. 4.1. where by those expressions some understand Christian Teachers surrounded with their believ∣ing Hearers. Middletown! My Neighbourhood shar'd with me too; he gave Some Spirit unto them: and then hisOne of his last Services was that he assisted in a Day of Prayer at New-Haven, im∣mediatly on which he sickned. Haven He chose: So on the DayHe died on a Sab∣bath Day about the beginning of the Morning Ex∣ercise. we us'd to have Heaven from him, from us he flew to Heaven. The Age of Perkinsabout 44. just attaind, he thought It time to follow him. But Why so fast? The cause you know that of such things is brought Belong'd to him, he only grew too fast.Immodicis brevis est aetas et rara senectus.
More would I say but Heart-corroding Anguish Layes that check on me, you have lost him now. Broken with thy big Loss dear Friend, I languish: Hence would my Tears more than my River flow. Now in Micaiahs Trance1. King. 22.17. I seem to see For Food on mountains, wandring Shepherdless, And Shiftless rambling, what belongs to me. Wast Park of mine that now no Keeper has! Lord, is my Night come shall Impaenitent Transgressours now continue so? Shall it Upon my Meeting-House, while men repent, This and that man born hereallusion to Psal. 87.5. no more be writ? Shall a forsaken now Society Without its Head, its Heart, its Eyes remain? And like Isaiah's woful Vineyard lyall. to Isai. 5. With with'ring Grapes abandon'd by the Rain? O Ghastly Omens! if Paraeus dy Let Heidleberge look to't. If Austin go Let Hippo tremble. If Elisha fly2. King. 15.20. 'Tis one of the Jewish Oracles, Quando Lumi∣naria patiuntur Eclipsin, malum est signum mundo. After his Master, next year brings a wo
I fear of both sorts nowSome have observed, that the Death of a faithful Minister in a place where he hath done God much service, is oft attended with a great Mortality among other persons in that place. I. Collins. Elijahs Lamenation. p. 18. Mortalities, Of Famines too I fear theSee Amos 8.11. worst, I fear The Gallop of no less Calamities Then can be wrap'd in a pale Comets Hair. Amidst these hideous Frights perplext, I mourn With Incohaerent Throbs you see. Now tell me Whether it be not just that thus forlorn I here bewail this that has late befel me. SHE said; Her heavy words were hardly out When, as one planet-struck, a doleful shout Of the surviving COLLINSes detaind Me from Replies to what had been complain'd. To fill the Stage there seem'd to throng a croud Of his Relations to us. First aloud His Aged Parents with drench'd Hankerchiefs Saw and had cause thus to proclaim their Griefs: A Son, our Staff andA Bird fam'd for its regard to its Dam: Stork; (said they) A Son, Our Benjamin, Alas, must he be gone To his Long-Home before us? Heaven more May now be Heaven to us than before.
Farewel, thou world ofOne of the most splendid Cities wherein, is hence ap∣positely term'd Lutetia. Dirt; we meekly wait But for aVitam habentes in pati∣entia, Mortem in desiderio. Call too. This deplored: Straight His Brethren not as asee Jer. 22.17. Jehoiakim But as av. 2. Sam. 1.17. Jonathan, bemoaned him, With this, We live to see the Joseph die, Whom we thought born for our Adversity! His Widdow then, (the tender Whiting swam Thro' the Blackall. to the Mare mortuum. sea of Death to us) I came (Said She) to bear a part with you. But I Must in deep Silence do't. That ev'ry Sigh Of mine — O that it Marbles might erect To him, for lack of whom I'm thus deject. And then his Orphans, all ensabled add O could we say — that once a Father had, A Father whose paternal over-sight Did make us over happy, whose Delight Was in our Welfare, whose Behaviours Still taught us — Mercy! what a Loss is our's! In this Distraction mixing once again A Consolation-cup;such the Jews were wont to have at their Fune∣rals. Thick Mists amain About us gathering; a Murmur there Of the blest Shade himself we then might hear.
FOND Mortals, wipe your eyes (said he) pray keep That liquor for your selves.all. to Luk. 23 28. poor Envy 'tis Which prompts your Threnodies for me. To weep For my sake, is but to Ignore my Bliss. O what a world of smoke of dust of Folly Am I sayl'dall. to Phil. 1.23. where to depart, is by some translated to loose Anchor. from! No sin shall me annoy, And no Temptation more to be unholy Shall e'er molest me in my Masters JOY. I have my Ragged Mantle dropt; I have All Vanity and all VexationMors Beatitudinis principium, Laborum meta, peremptoria peccatorum, Aug. Escap'd, my Clay safe kept within a Grave Preserv'd lies for the Resurrection. No CrossChrist & his Cross part at Heavens door, for there's no room for Crosses in Heaven. Rutherf. Epist. shall ever gall my shoulders more, From God, correcting my disorders, and No Club e're strike me, red with ancient Gore, Still by each CainCaint adhuc clavus Abelis sanguine rubens ubique circum∣fertur. Bucholtz. retained in his hand. I'm got within the Vail, and there I see The ever-glorious Face of theThe Heaven of Heaven, pourtray'd in Joh. 17.24. GOD-MAN; And He with Transports doth convey to me As much of GOD as entertain I can.
I Know, I Live, I Love; But how? forbear To be inquisitive: It can't be told To you; No, tho you allskil'd in the language which bold conjectures think to be Heavens Dialect. Hebricians were: Nor can shell-vesselsall. to 2. cor. 4.7. gr. this things meaning hold. I find besides my loving Guardians here, Here the Good Angels that convey'd me thro' T Divel-haunted-Dungeon-Atmosphere,the territores whereto the apostate troops of Lucifer seem to be confined, from eph. 2.2. To mine annex their Hallelujahs do. Here, me the Chorus of the glorify'd, The polishtall. to 2. cor. 5.5. stones, now in the Temple plac,t The twice cloath'dall. to 2. ibid. where an upper garment of glory is engaged to the souls on which an under garment of grace is wrought with the Eternal Spirts Needle-work. Souls, salute on ev'ry side; I see Nathaneelv. Joh. 1.47. here, I know the rest. Be glad that I am here, and after hye, Your selves with diligence, all posting hither, Precepts and Patterns left, my Counsels eye, And Copyes, so we shall be soon together. Souls, follow me. Anon the Stars, the Sands, The Atoms of the Universe — a Scrol Like Heaven fill'd with Nines, for cypher stands, Compar'd to the Long joyesa line  too long for the verse, but too short not∣withnding to give a shaddow of ETERNITY that over us may roll.a thing rationally sung by the man Swan the night before he died.
A PERIOD this puts to the Tragaedy. He vanisht; They retir'd; confused I Now quite alone, have nothing else to do, But to pour out a short Hosannah to The Worlds Almighty GOVERNOUR to whom On this account now these Petitions come From lifted Hands, and bended Knees — Dread Lord, By whom vast Hosts of Beings with a Word Are made and mov'd: Let thy much-hop'd Salvation Shield us, like Walls from much-fear'd Desolation. O Save New-Englands Churches; Let them be Still golden Candlesticks, belov'd by thee, Still Puritans; Still Iv'ry Pallaces. Keep up the Quickset Hedge about them; Please To keep the gladsome Streams of them alive. Save Middletown, and cause the Place to thrive Ʋnder Fat Clouds still, and that Bochim let By thy Provision be a Bethel yet. Save ev'ry soul that reads this Elegy; Like COLLINS let us live, like COLLINS dy. AMEN. Sic mihi contingat vivere sicque mori. Sic optat, Qui longe sequitur vestigia semper adorans. Qualis vita, ita FINIS.
