P1050aA [ocn]297426160 208151
The Pedigree of John Lord Purbeck, the Duke of Buckingham, and Lord Anglesey. Sir George Villiers, by his Second Wife, had Is∣sue Three Sons: 1. John Lord Purbeck. 1. John Lord Purbeck died without Issue. That one Robert Right, an Illegitimate Issue, claims the Title and Honour of Lord Purbeck, who had Issue— Robert. Robert hath Is∣sue John, the now Pretender. 2. George Duke of Bucks, 2. George Duke of Buc∣kingham had Issue, The late Duke of Bucks, and Lord Francis Villiers; both dead, without Issue: And the late Dutchess of Richmond, who is also dead, without Issue. 3. Christopher Lord An∣glesey. 3. Christopher Earl of Anglesey had Issue, One Son, and The Son is dead, with∣out Issue; and— One Daughter. The Daughter had Is∣sue Three Daughters. 1. Frances, Wife to the Lord Brudenell: 2. Elizabeth, Wife to the Earl of Castlehaven: 3. Mary, Wife to Mr. Cary of Torabby. Which Three Daughters are Heirs at Law to the late Duke of Buckingham; the Pretended Issue of John Lord Purbeck being Illegitimate. The CASE of James Earl of Castlehaven and Elizabeth his Wife, Francis Lord Brudnell and Frances his Wife, Edward Cary of Torabby, Esq; and Mary his Wife, on the Behalf of their Wives being Heirs to the Duke of Bucks: Shewing the Illegitimacy of the Pretended Heir, being an Infant. THAT John Lord Purbeck married the Daughter of Sir Edward Cook, that not long after the said Intermarriage (by reason of weak∣ness John Lord Purbeck Mar∣ried and lived a-part from his Lady. in Body, and Distraction and Madness of the said Lord Purbeck) the said Lord and Lady were caused to live a-part. The Lord was confined at his Physician's House, Forty Miles from London, for the Cure of his Distemper and Madness, and never after Co∣habited with his Lady. That the Lady Purbeck lodged at Denmark-House, now called Somerset-House in the Strand, who some time after the said separation The Lady lived in Adul∣tery. Two years after Sepa∣ration, pretended to have a Child. The Lady Condemned for Adultery. from her Lord, held an Adulterous conversation with one Sir Robert Howard. That two years after the Lady and Sir Robert had lived together in that manner, the Lady pretended to have a Child. Whereupon the Duke of Buckingham, and other Relations of the Lord Purbecks, causes the Lady to be Cited into the High Commission Court for Adultery; and upon proof of the Ladies lascivious Life, she was sentenced for Adultery, and enjoined Penance. It was also proved, by the Deposition of several credible Witnesses. First, That the Lord Purbeck had not seen his Lady of two Years be∣fore Proved her Lord had not liv'd with her of two years before the Birth of the pre∣tended Child. Secondly, The Child was an unknown Child. Christened Robert Right. Robert died, left Issue Ro∣bert. Robert the Son Petitioned King Charles II. to be admit∣ted into the House of Lords; the Petition referr'd to the Lords. she pretended to have a Child. Secondly, That this Child which the Lady Purbeck owned to be her Child, was the Child of an unknown Parent, Christned by the Name of Robert, the Son of Robert Right of Yorkshire, and so Entred in the Church-book at Cripple Gate, London. That this Child (the now pretenders Grandfather) went by the Name of Robert Right, till he came of Age, then he took upon him the Name of Howard; then the Name of Villiers; lastly, relinquished the Name of Villiers, and took that Name of Danvers, who died and left Issue Robert. That Robert the Son, after the Death of his Father Petitioned King Charles II. by the Name of Lord Purbeck, to be admitted into the House of Lords; the Petition was referr'd to the Lords in Parliament, which being Read, It was Ordered, That the Earl of Denbigh, or other Relations of the old Lord Purbeck deceased, be heard by way of Answer. The Earl of Denbigh put in a Petition. Shewing, That the pretender to the Name and Dignity of Viscount Purbeck is the Son of Robert, with the Sirname of Right in his Infancy, at The Earl of Denbigh's Answer to the Petition. Age he took that of Howard; and then that of Villiers; lastly, relinquished the Name of Villiers and assumed that of Danvers. Prays that before their Lordships admit him into the House, that he, the pretender Robert Right, may make out his Title: And also that their Lordships would take care that the Honour of Peers may not receive deminution by any Illegitimate mixture, and to do in this case as to their great Wisdom and Honour shall seem meet. That upon the reading of this Petition, it was Ordered to be spoken to on both sides by Councel, at the Bar of the House of Lords, and that The Cause heard in the House of Lords. notice be given also to the Duke of Buckingham and the Lord Brudenell. That at the day appointed the Cause was heard by Council, afterwards Ordered to be debated, and the Judges and Mr. Attorney General to be present, where after long debate, Question put that a Bill be brought to disable the Petiti∣oner to claim the Title of Vis∣count Purbeck. Resolved in the Affirmative. The Petitioner Robert died left Issue (an Infant) the now pretender to be Heir to the Duke of Bucks. The Lady Castlehaven, Lady Brudenell, and Mrs. Cary prays to be named as Heirs to the said Duke, in he Bill for the Sale of the ukes Estate. The said In∣nt being. Illegitimate. The Question was put whether the King should be Petitioned to give Leave that a Bill be brought in to disable the Petitioner to claim the Title of Viscount Purbeck? Resolved in the Affirmative. That a Petition by the Order of the House of Lords was accordingly prepared and presented. Since which time there hath been no further proceedings therein, during the life of the said Robert who is dead, having left Issue John, who pretends to be Heir to the Duke of Buckingham, and to inherit the said Duke's Estate and Honour of Earl of Buckingham. Wherefore the Lady Elizabeth Countess of Castlehaven, the Lady Frances Brudenell, and Mrs. Cary, undoubted Heirs to the Duke of Bucks, as by the Pedigree doth appear, doth hope that after such full proofs of Illegitimacy in the pretenders Grandfather, as by this Case is set forth, that a Clause may be incerted in the Bill for the Sale of the Duke of Buckingham's Estate, giving the surplusage of the said Estate, after just Debts are paid, unto the said Elizabeth Countess of Castlehaven, the Lady Frances Brudenell, and Mrs. Mary Cary, being lawful Heirs to the Duke of Buckingham. MEMORANDUM, That Robert, the Pretender's Father, was Arrested by the Name of Robert Villiers, alias Danvers, alias Purbeck, and was Committed ☞ by Habeas Corpus, to the Marshal of the King's-Bench, the 21th Day of June, 1679. at the Suit of one Johnson, a Coach-maker, and many others: That he remain'd a Prisoner above Seven Years, till he was kill'd, without any Relief from the House of Lords, tho' often importun'd to own him as a Peer of England. And that the said Robert did, by an Instrument under his Hand and Seal, together with Margaret, his then Wife, join in an Indenture Tripartite, between them and William Earl of Clanricard, for a certain great Summ of Money by him receiv'd, wherein he stiles himself Robert Villiers, Esq; commonly called, and known, by the Name of Robert Viscount Purbeck; this being his own proper Act and Deed.
