S3879 [ocn]625106362 211343
BRISTOL, 29 April, 1682. SIR, I Presume you began to wonder I did not sooner endeavour to satisfy you and other good Men by a personal and particular answer to those many Libels wherewith we have lately been entertained. For my own part, I despise these Libels as the Moon doth the barking of Doggs. But you see by the inclosed, That the City are Concerned thereat, and have condemned them to the Flames. Perhaps you may hear of the Authors how they will be dealt with e're it be long. Justice will as certainly find them out, as I am Your very Loving Friend. Bristol sc' Easter Sessions, 1682. To the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Earle Knight, Mayor of the City of Bristol, and the Right Worshipful and Worshipful the Aldermen, His Majestie's Justices of the Peace for this City and County in their general Quarter-Sessions of the Peace now Assembled. VVEE the Grand Jurors for our Soveraign Lord the King and the Body of the County of this City, having too great occasion given us by se∣veral Infamous, Scandalous and Seditious Libels of late disper∣sed and published here, Namely two purporting themselves Printed by one R. Janeway, under the title of the Impartial Protestant Mercury, Numb. 89, & 96. And four others, The one Entituled; The Sad and Lamentable Cry of Oppression and Cru∣elty in the City of Bristol, &c. Another Entituled, More Sad
and Lamentable News from Bristol, &c. Another, The Devour∣ing Informers of Bristol, &c. And the other, The Protestant Corant purporting it self, published by Rich. Baldwin, do upon diligent reading and perusal of them, and examination of the Matters concerning this City therein set forth, Present the same to be for the most utterly false, and these few truths that are therein to be most malitiously mis-represented: Whereas what is therein complained of, (if impartially rela∣ted) would have appeared to all honest and unbyassed men, to be not onely agreeable to Law and Reason, but com∣mendable also. We deem all these Libels to be the Contrivance of Factious and Disaffected persons to His Majesty and our present Esta∣blishments in Church and State, who endeavour by all means to Calumniate divers of the Magistrates of this City, The Right Reverend Father in God our Lord Bishop, The Right Worshipful Sir John Knight, one of our Sheriffs, John Romsey Esq; our Town-Clerk, John Hellier Gent. Chief Constable of the Word of St. James, and several other Constables and others who out of their Zeal to the Church, and their Loyalty and Obedience to the King and his Laws, have been active and industrious in putting them in execution. And we humbly recommend it to this Court as the Sence of this City, That the Authors and Dispersers of these and all such like Libels may be severely proceeded against and punished, and that the Libels themselves may pass under some public and exem∣plary mark of the displeasure and detestation of this Court. We are very glad to see and observe, that your Worships proceedings in executing the Laws against Dissenters, have been productive of such good Fruits in order to the recon∣ciling of divers of His Majestiy's Subjects here to the Govern∣ment both in Church and State; and particularly we con∣gratulate Erasmus Dole (a Quaker) for his taking the Oath of Allegiance now tendered him, which he refused last Sessions, and are so far from any insolent triumph on that occasion, that we think our selves and all Loyal Men obliged in Chri∣stian Charity to encourage and cherish him and all others in returning to their Loyalty to His Majesty, and reconciling themselves to the Church. And whereas Baldwins Libel beforementioned hath the impudence to charge the Execution of the Laws here with
partiality towards Papists: For the just Vindication of this City in this particular, We present and affirm, That there are not, nor for Seven Years last past have been to the best of our knowledg above two Families of Papists within this City and County, One of which removed to avoid prosecution, And the other hath hitherto escaped it (as many scores of other Recusants have done) by sheltring themselves in the Castle, being extra Parochial and their Common Sanctuary. But even there we hope the Justice of this Court will in short time find them all out, and bring them to Conformity or Condign punishment. We have lately brought to our hands another Libel sty∣led, The Addresses, importing an Abhorrence of an Association, &c. purporting to be printed for R. Baldwin; which having read, It gives us just occasion to testify our concurrence with those of this City and elsewhere, who have formerly declared their Thanks to His Majesty for his most Gratious Declaration of his Reasons for Dissolving the Two last Parliaments, and their Detestation and Abhorrence of that Treasonable In∣strument of Association seized in the Earl of Shaftsbury's Clo∣set. And although we are not so tame as to wear Chains or worship the Host, Yet we declare our selves willing to bear the easie Yoke of Obedience and Subjection due to His Ma∣jesty, his Heirs and Successors, and to the Laws as now Esta∣blished, and shall account it our Interest as well as Duty, according to our sworn Allegiance, with our Lives and Fortunes to maintain and defend him and them against that and all other such like Damnable Associations and Confede∣racies whatsoever. And in regard the Printers of these Li∣bels are out of the Liberties of this City, we humbly request your Worships to Address His Sacred Majesty in Councel, and implore the Aid and Assistance of that Board in order to their being dealt with according to their demerits. Robert Brookehouse, John Yeomans, Richard Gibbons, Edward Millerd, John Reed, John Winpenny, William Lewis, George Bryan, John Coperthwayte, John Horne, Alexander Caduggan, Thomas Turner, Thomas Compton, Thomas Lane, William Hasell, John Smyth, Joseph Hobbs, Walter Hawkins, Timothy Michael, Thomas Green, Barnabas Skinner,
28 April, 1682. THis Court being very sensible of the Easter Sessions Bristol. great Dishonour and Scandal the se∣veral Libels mentioned in the Presentment of the Grand Jury, have brought upon the Government of this City, and their Proceedings, and many of the Persons named in them, do, for the Vindication of the Proceedings and Persons aforesaid, and in Detestation of such Malicious and Evil Practises, Order that the said seve∣ral Libels be at the rising of the Court pub∣lickly Burnt by the Beadle or Common Executioner. And that the Belman at∣tend then to Publish this Order. Per Cur' At the Rising of the Court, the said Libels were accord∣ingly burnt: The Bell-man after ringing of the Bell three times declaring the occasion of the Fire, and of the burning of the Papers there. The Mayor and Aldermen attending with the Sword at the Tolzey to see the Execution of this Order. Ordered, That Mr. Town-Clerk prepare an Address to His Majesty and Councel, That the Libellers of this City and the Proceed∣ings there may be brought to condign Punishment. Printed for W. C. and Sold by W. Davis.
