10650 99839231 3634
THE FRVITERERS SECRETS: Containing directions, for the due time, and manner, of gathering all kindes of fruite, aswell stone-fruite as other: and how they are afterwards to be or∣dered in packing, carrying and conueighing them by land or by water; then in separating or culling them into diuers sorts; and lastly, in reseruing or laying them vp, so, as may bee for their best lasting and continuance. Enterlaced with diuerse other secrets (and their naturall causes) touching trees, and their fruite. No Treatise, to this purpose, being here∣tofore published. AT LONDON, Printed by R.B. and are to be solde by Roger Iackson, at his shop in Fleete-streete, neere the conduit. 1604.
To the right honorable, Charles, Earle of Deuonshire, Lo: Mountioye, Lo: Lieutenant of Ire∣land, and one of his Maiesties most honorable Priuie Councell; N. F. wisheth long life, with increase of honour. RIght Honorable, hauing (long since) often weighed and considered, with my selfe, the great care & paines that haue been taken, in setting forth sundry necessary books for plan∣ting & grafting of fruit, & finding it (by much experience) no lesse needfull, that the right order, in gatheting & keeping thereof, should be made knowen, & obserued: I re∣solued, at length (for the general good of the whole kingdome) to lay downe, in this small Treatise, the disorder and abuses of the vnskilful in this kinde; together with the true & due course to be taken therein. The worke now finished, I haue presumed (though far vnworthy) to publish it, to the world (vnder the shadow of your honorable protection) as the first fruites of a willing minde, ready to make tender of his humble seruice, & acknowledgement of all duty, to your Lordship, to performe it, in what he may. Not doubting, but that, as your Ho: (next vn∣der his Maiestie) hath been the protectour & preseruer of the whole realme of Ireland, you will also vouchsafe to patronize and protect one Irish-borne, who (by long experience) hath made triall of that which he deliuereth to others. Wherefore, humbly crauing, that your Honour will bee pleased to accept hereof, & to giue it countenance (that so the rather it may haue free passage, in despite of malitious & scornfull tongues, into the hands of all such as desire to eat the fruite of their owne vi∣neyards, in their due season): I conclude with my earnest and feruent prayers to Almighty God, for the protection and pre∣seruation of your good Lordship, in all true honour & happi∣nes, in this life; & hereafter to make you partaker of that inua∣luable & incorruptible fruit of the life eternall, which groweth not in orchards of mens planting, but in the Paradise of God, Nouember, the 7. Your Honours, in all humblenesse, N. F.
The Epistle to the Reader. GEntle Reader, as there haue been diuers bookes set forth for the good of this land, and the great encrease of fruite; As of planting, setting, proy∣ning and grafting, also of preseruing them, after the order of the Apothecary: so amongst the rest, bestowe the Reading of this little worke; wherein you shall finde the true order of gathe∣ring, carrying, and keeping of all sorts of fruites, in their season, and how you shall know what time your seuerall fruites are ready to be ga∣thered; especially all kinde of pippins, and apples, all kinde of peares, wardens, Quinces, and Medlers, also cherries and other stone fruite whatsoeuer. I omit the nominating of all kind of fruites; for they be too many to be seuerally named. And commonly euery fruite country hath their se∣uerall names, although one kinde of fruite. As, Iohn-apples be, in some places, called Dewzings or long-lasters: and Gooddings be called old Wiues, &c. Yet although not seuerally named, you shall by this Treatise know the due course how to gather all kindes in their prime and season, and afterwards to carry or conueigh them, either by land or by water, and then how to reserue or keep them, to endure longest. And, afore I proceede to the Treatise it selfe, I thinke meete to acquaint thee from whence our great plentie of fruite, in England, came. One Richard Harris of London, borne in Ireland, Fruiterer to King Henry the eight, fetched out of Fraunce great store of grafies, especi∣ally pippins: before which time there was no right pippins in England. He fetched also, out of the Lowe Countries, Cherrie grafts, & Peare grafts, of diuers sorts: Then tooke a peece of ground belonging to the King, in the parrish of Tenham in Kent, being about the quantitie of seauen score acres; whereof he made an Orchard, planting therein all those foraigne grafts. Which Orchard is, and hath been from time to time, the chiefe Mother of all other orchards for those kindes
of fruites in Kent, and of diuers other places. And afore that these said grafts were fetched out of Fraunce, and the Lowe Countries, although that there was some store of fruite in England, yet there wanted both rare fruite, and lasting fine fruite. The Dutch & French, finding it to be so scarce, especially in these countries neere London, commonly plyed Billings-gate, & diuers other places with such kinde of fruite. But now (thankes bee to God) diuers Gentlemen & others, taking delight in grafting (being a matter so necessary and bene∣ficial in a Cōmon-wealth) haue planted many Orchards; fetching their grafts out of that Orchard, which Harris planted called the New∣garden. And by reason of the great increase that now is growing in di∣uers parts of this Land, of such fine & seruiceable fruit, there is no need of any foraigne fruite, but we are able to serue other places. Now therefore, since it hath pleased Almighty God, to giue encrease & plenty of fruite in this land, and that diuers haue taken paines in the maintenance thereof, of all degrees: (the better sort for their plea∣sure, & in that they doe delight to see the worke of their owne handes prosper, as also to eate the fruite thereof; the common sort, for profit, and for the better reliefe of their family) In regard, I say, of the great paines that haue been taken, in planting, setting, grafting, & proyning, whereby a great deale of ground hath been taken vp, which might serue for other good purposes; I thought good to shew what course might bee taken, that mens Labours be not lost, nor such great quantity of groūd, wherein fruite doth growe, lye in waste (as it were) and become vnpro∣fitable, through ignorance of well handling the fruite, after God hath giuen it. For if there be not as great care taken for the well gathering, and good vsage of fruite, as hath been for the planting thereof, I account most of the labour in planting lost, and the grounds wherein they growe to lye partly waste, and better to be vsed for some other good purpose. But, the fruite being well handled & vsed, the ground can bee turned to no better profit. And so (committing both thy endeuours, and these my labours, to the blessing of God) I hasten to the Directions them∣selues. Thy well-willer, N.F.
THE FRVITERERS SECRETS. Of Cherries. CHerries are the first fruite that are to be ga∣thered, especially which here shalbe mentioned: Of which fruite there are foure sorts here in England, (that is to say) Flemish cherries, Eng∣lish cherries, Gascoyne cherries, and blacke cherries, whereof two are chiefly to be mentio∣ned, that is the Flemish and the English. The Flemish cherries are not so called, in respect that they growe in Flaunders, but that the first grafts and chiefe original of them came from Flaunders, and therefore they are called Flemish cherries: and in what place soeuer in England these graftes be, or any trees growing
from them, from time to time since the first be∣ginning of them, they are sooner ripe then they that are naturally of themselues English Che∣ries, in some places foureteene daies sooner, in other some three weekes, according to the fore∣wardnes or backwardnes of the grownds wherin they grow: But whersoeuer they grow, although in one plot or acre of groūd, you shall yet find that the one will be ripe before the other chāge their cullor red. And as soone as you see your Cheries to change their color, & be red (that is, whē they beginto ripen) you must haue a care that you set one to keep thē frō the birds, which wil be very busie about them, & especially at the breake of day, vntill eight of the clocke in the forenoone: and so likewise when the heate of the day is past, beginning at foure or fiue of the clocke vntill nine at night: The keeper must with a peece shoote, or make some other noise, to feare the birds, or with a sling to throw at them, being carefull to watch at those times. There are two kindes of birds especially, that hurt che∣ries most: the one is called a Iay: which must be narrowly looked vnto, or els she will pick the cheries as fast as they ripen. The other, which is called a Bulfinch, will eate stones and all: but you shall heare her chirpe before she lights vpon the tree. The order of gathering of Cheries. NOw for the gathering of your cheries (be∣cause all cheries vpon a tree cannot be ripe
and ready to be gathered at one time) prouide a fine light ladder: & looking about your tree, wher you see most store ripe, there set it vp. Be careful for placing thereof, for feare of breaking any boughes. Also you must haue a fine hooke in your hand called a gathering hooke, to pull the bough tenderly vnto you, which you cannot reach with your hand. You must prouide you also a chery pot or kib∣zey to gather your cheries in: and to the same cherie pot there must be tyed with a string a lit∣tle hooke, that when the gatherer sets to ga∣ther, he may hang his chery pot vpon and bough neer, as occasion serues, and so to be remoued at his pleasure: Alwaies prouided, that the gathe∣rer haue a great care that he pull no more but the very same stalke that the chery hangs by: for the next knot, or brut to the stalke, is it com∣monly that yeelds fruite, the yeare next ensuing. At the gathering of your cheries there unist be great heede taken that they be not roughlie handled: onely pull them off by the stalke and lay them into your pot. For much handling of them (being a very tender fruite) will make them change their colour, and turne blackish. ¶ How to carry and conuey Cheries. IF there be any great store of cheries that must be caryed any farre way, from whence they be gathered, there must be prouided eyther fine bas∣kets or siues: into which (when the chery pots be
full, you must poure them out. Each of these siues should haue two laths in the bottome on the outside, not crost, but both one way: each lath must be about the breadth of two fingers: and about the breadth of the palme of a mans hand betwixt, or somewhat more asunder. The rea∣son why I wish these laths to be vsed in the bottome, is, because that when they be caryed vpon ones head, the siue being weake bottomed of it selfe, the carryers head will make a dent therein, the breadth of his head, which wold cause the cheryes, in all that circle of his head, to breake and to be brused: but the two laths will keepe his head from spoyling of the cheryes, and so to be easily carryed, hauing a wreath or some such thing betwixt him and the laths, for hurt∣ing of his head. The French men commonly vse to carry their cherries in the very same pots that they gather them in, & neuer put them out vntill such times as they are to be spent. The Dutchmen doe turne them out of their cherry pots, into deepe rod-baskets. This latter way is not so good. For, lying so thick one vpon another, it quickly bringeth them into a heat: and once being in a heat, they presently rot. But the Fruiterers of London (whose way I holde to be the best) doe first gather them into kibseis, or little open baskets: and by reason of their great quantity they poure them out gently into their siues, or broad baskets made siue fa∣shion: so filling them that the siues or bas∣kets
may be three inches (or there about) emptie at the top. For when they be put into a Ship, Hoy, or boate, they are often (for want of roome) set one vp∣on another: which would hurt the cherries, if the siue or basket were full. But otherwise, they that haue no great store to carry or conueigh by land, may conueigh them on horsebacke in a payre of panniers, on each side one, lyned thinne both in the bottom and top with fresh fearn. Prouided, that your panniers or baskets be full: or els the fruite will be spoiled with tossing. ¶ The order of gathering all other stone-fruite. COncerning Apricocks, Peaches, Peare-plums, Damsons, bullase, &c. for the knowledge of ga∣thering of them, they are al much of a nature or qua∣litie. For although, in each kinde of them, some ri∣pen sooner then other some, euen vpon one and the same tree, yet as soone as they are ready to bee ga∣thered, some wil drop off, and the rest remaine hard: yet then are those hard ones also in their full tune to be gathered. Then must you place your ladder as before is mentioned, hauing a speciall care that you hurt not the tree: also obseruing that it be dry weather, and the morning deaw past. For, being ga∣thered wet, they wil both loose their perfect colour, and become mildewed. Then take your kibsey (such as hath been shewed how to gather cherries with∣all) and taking also a hooke in your hand to pull those boughes that you cannot reach, haue ready by you a siue, basket or some such thing, that when
your kibsey is full, you may poure them thereinto. In the bottom wherof, lay nettles newly gathered, and with the like couer them on the top: which will hasten the ripening of them, make them keepe their colour, and cause them to eate as kindly as if they had been fully ripened vpon the tree. But if you let them hang vpon the tree vntil they be full ripe, they will drop off, for the most part: and the rest that hang, will quickly rot after that they be gathered, and doe little seruice, except they bee pre∣sently vsed. Three things to be considered, in gathering of Peares. THere are diuers wayes to bee vsed in gathering of Peares: as followeth. First, it is to be noted whether they grow in a yard, garden, or backe side, being no more then will serue for a mans owne spending. Secondlie, whether there bee any such that will be solde, and so to be conueighed any farre way, eyther by land or water. Thirdly, whether they be Peares that will serue for the Apothecary to preserue, and so to be gathered accordingly. How to know whether Peares be ready to be gathered. NOw, for the gathering of such as be for a mans owne vse, no doubt but euery man hauing seene the naturall ripening of his owne fruite, by long ex∣perience knoweth their time of gathering: but for the better instruction of those that newly come vnto a place, being not acquainted with the natu∣rall
ripening of the Peares therein growing, I wil here after expresse how you shall know when their due time of gathering is. Some, or rather most men, vse not to gather their Peares vntill they be all ready to drop off: and, hanging so long vpon the tree, assoone as they be gathered, and layed one vpon another, they will be in a great heate, and presently rot. But if you haue Peares that you make any account of, that are summer Peares, and for your owne vse, assoone as you see them turne their colour, or any part of them ripe (which wil not be al at one time, although growing vpon one tree, & of one sort) still gather the ripest, & so by degrees at your pleasure. But, being gathered when they be almost ripe (that is, when onely some of them begin to fall) they will naturally ripen of themselues. And whereas the Peares that are gathered, beeing through ripe, doe soone rot one another, through their ouer great heat: on the other side, the temperate heate of those that bee gathered before they bee all full ripe, doth cause them to ripen one another. But for Peares that are to be carryed any farre way, they must be gathered by another obseruation: that is, pull one off the tree, and cut it in the middle, and if you finde that it be hollow about the coare, & the kernell to haue roome, as it were loosening within the coare, although none of the Peares on that tree be so ripe as to drop off, then it hath his full grouth, and (although not then ful ripe, and rea∣dy to be eaten) may be gathered. And hauing layde then vpon an heape, or one vpon an other, as
they must be in the carriage, they wil in a very time ripen, & eate as kindly as if they had been gathered ripe off the tree: but being gathered before this time, that is, before the time that they begin to be hollow about the coare, they will wither, shrinke, & eate tough, more like in taste to a peece of the tree, then a Peare. ¶ Diuers wayes vsed in gathering of Peares. KNow also that all kinde of Peares & Apples are by diuers men, diuers waies vsed to bee handled, euen in the very manner of gathering them. As, some vse to clime vp without a ladder, ha∣uing a basket to gather in, with alyne tyed to it, that thereby it may be let downe when it is full, and an∣other vpon the grownd to receiue it, he in the tree still holding the one end of the cord or lyne, that when the basket is emptied, he may draw it vp a∣gaine: which way is not to be commended. Other some with a ladder doe get vp, ha∣uing a basket in their hands, and euery time that it is full they bring it downe, powring the fruite into some other bigger basket, not regarding either how they handle the fruit in the powring, nor how rude∣ly & boysterously they place their ladder, to the hurt of the tree. Other some beate them downe with poles, breaking both the tree and fruite. These two last sort of gatherers haue little re∣spect what fruite may grow vpon the trees for the time ensuing, in regard of their rough handling of the tree, in breaking the boughes, sprigs and bruts
whereupon fruite might growe. Onely for the time present is all their care: some being but tenants at will, or other carelesse and ignorant persons being put in trust to gather. But for the setting of your ladder to the tree, the best way is, to place it easily: For, laying of it hard on, will spoile & fell a great many of the fruite, as far as the ladder toucheth. Also being firmely placed, it is both good for the gatherers owne safegard, and for the safegard of the tree. But, being carelesse and rash in placing thereof vpon the weake boughes & branches, the weight of the gatherer to the tree∣ward, will breake the weake branches & endanger the gatherer. How to gather apples, and how to know when they are ready to be gathered. ANd touching ye gathering of apples, beginning first with sommer fruite, as Ieniting apples, Margaret apples, so called in Kent, & others which are too tedious in this place to be nominated: yet by the rules hereafter, although the fruits not men∣tioned, shall you know their due seuerall times of gathering. If they haue their full grouth, some of the ripest will bee dropping off the tree, and com∣monly the birds will be picking of them. Or els, you may pull off one of the greenest, cut it, & if you finde that it is hollow about the coare, and the kirnell be∣ginning to be loose (as is shewed before in the tryal of Peares) then haue they their ful grouth, and they are ready to be gathered. And being gathered either of these waies, they will in the house come to their
perfect colour, and ripen kindly of themselues: but if they bee gathered afore, they will shrinke, wither, and eate tough, and doe no seruice. Winter fruite, how to be gathered. VVInter or lasting fruite, should bee gathered in the wane of the Moone, the winde not being in the East: although indeed the Fruiterers of London by reason of their great quantity doe not obserue the same. For, when they doe once begin to gather, they giue not ouer, vntill they haue gathered the last, except in foule or wet weather. For al fruite whatsoeuer being gathered in wet weather, or as long as the deaw hangs vpon the trees, be they e∣ner so good lasting fruite, it will cause them in short time to rot. For, being wet or moyst when they bee gathered, soone after that they be housed and layed, it will bring them into a heate, causing them to rot, and be mildeawed. How to vse your gathering hooke. AS concerning the better handling of your fruite in the gathering, the placing of the ladder hath been before specified: you must also bee proui∣ded of a hooke and a gathering apron or bag. The hooke, to pul the bough that you cannot reach with your hand: The bagge or gathering apron, to put in your fruite, as you gather them. Of the gathering apron, and the manner how to fasten it about you. THe gathering apron is commonly euery way
an Ell: hauing, at the lower end thereof, in the middest of the hemme, a strong loope. Set this a∣pron about your back, knitting both the vpper ends afore, then take vp the loope-end (which hung downe) putting your girdle through the loope: and so hauing fastened your girdle about you, tye the two corners of the loope end of your apron, the one of one side vnder your girdle, the other on the other side, doubling each of the corners vnder your gir∣dle, for feare of slipping: thē your apron will be ne∣cessary for both your handes, or either of thē, to put in your fruite, as you gather it. And when your a∣pron is full, loose but one of the ends fastened vnder your girdle: & so bowing somewhat downe your bo∣dy on that side, let fall your fruite very tenderly into your prickell or basket. For, in laying them downe roughly, their owne stalkes will pricke them. And, although then nothing seene or noted, yet they, that are stalke-prickt, will in time rot, beginning in the verie same place. But if you haue not such aprons ready, then take a bagge of a bushell, halfe a bushell, or thereabout, with a wollen list or some such like thing so broad, both endes sowed to the bagges mouth, in length as might serue to hang vpon your shoulder & reach your girdle. Fruite to be gathered, without bruts or leaues: and why. GAther your fruite cleane (as neere as you can) without leafe or brut: onely gather it with the stalke. For, pulling any more then the stalke, breeds two discommodities: the one to the tree, the other to the fruite. To the tree, because that the
brut would, the next yeere, haue been growne to be a stalke whereupon the fruite might grow. To the fruite, because the brut being gathered, and ioyned to the fruite with the stalke, will (in the powring of them downe) breake the next vnto it, although at that time not much seene: which will cause it to rot before his time. The leaues likewise, being a∣mongst them, will in a short time rot the fruite. And as the fruite is not to be gathered, but with the stalk onely, so is it not to bee gathered without a stalke. For, as the brut, as far as it toucheth, doth hurt the fruite: so, without the stalke, it will not last long, it will rot in the very stalke roome. How to vse your fallings. THey that fall off the tree, which be not gathered with hād, are not to be layed with the rest. For, commonly they are broken or bruised, with the fall: by reason whereof they will not last, and, being lay∣ed amongst the gathered fruite, will in time spoile them. Yet are those fallings better, that fall when the fruite hath his full grouth, then they which fall before the time of gathering, as wind-falles, & such other. For they that fall before their full grouth wil shrinke, be withered, and neuer doe seruice: but they that are taken vp in gathering time, being layed by themselues, will serue to roast or bake, &c. Abuses, in gathering of fruite. IN some great fruite countries, as Worcester shire, and Glocester-shire, they vse to beate downe their coorse fruite, where of they make their Perry & Cider, and likewise carry them in long carts, iog∣ging
one against another, by reason of their loose∣nes in the cart, also in sackes: which kinde of car∣riage, doth batter and bruise them: yet serue they for that purpose, or to spend or vse out of the way: but the fruite, that is to bee reserued for other pur∣poses, is not so to be vsed. How to carry the fruite after the gathering, in what bas∣kets, and how they shall be shot. IF your fruite be gathered neere the place, where they are to bee layed vp, there must bee prouided certaine baskets or prickles, (able to containe two bushels, or a bushell a peece) each of them hauing two eares or handles, that so (being full) they may be carryed, betweene two, holding each of them one of the handles, in their hands, or betwixt them to be carryed vpon a coule-staffe, and so into the place appointed: by which meanes of carriage, the fruite will be neither bruised nor battered. Also haue a care, that they be poured or shot downe very gently, laying euery sort by themselues. But if there bee want of roome, hauing so many sorts, that you can∣not well lay them seuerall (for some haue diuers sorts, although very small store of fruite) yet such of summer-fruite as are neerest, in taste, & colour, & of winter fruite, such as will taste alike, may (if neede be) be layed together: and in time they may be sepe∣rated, as hereafter shall bee expressed. But if the fruite be gathered, farre from whence they are to be layed, and that they must be carryed or conueyghed by cart or wagon (hauing any good store to carry) there must be prouided great baskets, or (as some call them) Maunds, of quarters or halfe quarters.
And for the carriage, especially of summer Peares, greene fearne must be vsed to lyne them withall, on the inside of the Maunds: And here bee carefull to pul the stubborne ends of the fearne, cleane through the basket, that so they may be on the out-side. By this meanes, neither shall the fearne slip to the bot∣tome, when the fruite is poured out into the maund, neither shall those hard ends bruise the fruite. Also couer your maund close with fearne: & with a great packe-needle, bigger then ordinary packe-needles, draw a lyne or small cord closing hard the fearne, that the fruite fall not out, neither be iogged or tos∣sed in carriage. The fearne doth not onely stand in the stead aforesaid, but it causeth the peares soone to ripen (remaining any time therein) and to eate as well as if they had been gathered ripe: but if they be once come to a heate, and not taken out of the fearne in time, they will soone rot & become blacke. When you haue brought your peares to the place appointed, if at the loosing of them out of the maunds you finde them not ripe, if you will hasten the ripening of them, lay them thicke vpon fearne, and with fearne also couer them close: for, being kept warme, they wil soone ripen and come to their perfect colour: alwaies prouided, that when they be neer ripe, they be vncouered. For, when they be∣gin to ripen, being kept close, they will ripen too fast: and being vncouered, at that time, the ayre wil moderate their heate. But if otherwise, you meane not to hasten the ripening of them, lay them vpon the bare boards, neither too thicke nor too thin, and they will leasurely ripen. For winter or lasting peares, they may be carry∣ed
and packed either in fearne or strawe: not to the intent that the fearne should hasten the ripening of them: but that in the carriage they may not be bat∣tered. Also, at their iourneys end, they must be layed vpon fine sweet straw: prouided that they bee not layed in too warme a roome, least so you bring them into a heate: neither layed in a windy colde roome, for feare of shrinking and riueling them: but in a roome indifferent, where they shall haue ayre, & not too much. How to gather Wardens. VVArdens are to be carried, packt, and layed, as winter Peares. How to gather Medlers, and how to keep them. MEdlers are to be gathered about Michaelmas, after that a frost hath touched them: at which time they are commonly in their full grouth, & will be then dropping off the tree, but neuer ripe vpon the tree. And after they be gathered, they are to bee layed in a basket, siue, barrell, or any such like caske, and wrapt about with wollen clothes, vnder, ouer, and on the sides: also some waight layed vpon them, hauing a board betweene. For, except that they bee brought into a heate, they will neuer ripen kindely, nor eate well. And after they haue layen so long as you thinke, or finde, that any of them be ripe, (as they will not ripen all together) the ripest, still as they ripen, must be taken from the rest. Therefore poure them out into another siue, or basket, leasure∣ly, that so you may well finde them, that bee ripest: letting the hard ones fal into this other basket, and
those that be ripe layed aside, the other that be halfe ripe seuer also in a third basket or siue. For, if they that be ripe, or halfe ripe, be not seperated from the other, the one will bee mouldy before the other bee ripe, and so spoile the rest. And still after that the ripest are taken from the other, they are frō time to time to be vsed as aforesaid, vntill that they bee all ripe. How to order Quinces. QVinces are a fruite, which, if there be any store of them, be not to be layed in that roome, where any other fruite is, by reason of their strong sent. For, being layed in any close roome, neer other fruit, it will cause the fruite to smell of them. The riper also that they be, the stronger their sent is: especial∣ly if they be in a close roome: and they will not one∣ly be hurtfull to the fruite neere them, but noysome also to them that come into the roome where they bee. Therefore they are to bee layed, in such a roome seuerall (vpon fine straw) where they shall haue ayre enough. Also, being to be carryed any far way, they must bee packt in straw: and so likewise Medlers. Their time of gathering also is all one with Medlers. As the order of packing, & vsage of Peares, Med∣lers, & Quinces is shewed: so likewise shall bee de∣clared the manner of packing pippins, and al other sorts of apples, beginning with the summer fruite. How to packe or maunde apples. ALL kinde of summer or winter apples must be packt, layed, and carryed in wheate or rather
rye straw. And although, for the most part, they are layed in some roome, neere where they growe, vntill they be all gathered & ready to be carryed away: yet the better way for those that are to conueigh their fruite, from whence they are gathered, is to haue maunds, straw, & all ready, lyning them with straw, that whē your baskets or prickels be ful, you may presētly poure them into the maunds. For, be∣ing first layed in one place, and then taken vp again, to be put into maunds or other casks, doth hurt the fruite with too much tossing: but being presently put into the maunds, well packt, and gently hand∣led, will cause summer fruite to keep plumpe, & keep their colour the better. If you haue not so many of one kinde of fruite, or that there be a remnant (as of some sorts, there bee but a fewe, in an orchard) so that the maund cannot be filled: first poure in one sort, and when they bee all in, lay some fine sweet strawe vpon them, then poure in the other kinde of fruite, and so fill your maunde: and being filled and well packt, the two sorts will not come together in the stirring or car∣riage of them. How to empty maunds, and how to lay the fruite. AT the emptying of them, see that the fruite bee not rashly poured out, least that the seuerall sorts com together. And although packt and car∣ryed in straw, yet at the emptying let the straw bee pickt out cleane: and, as neere as you can, let euery sort be layed seuerall. Now, if there bee so many sorts, that, for want of roome, some of them must be mixed, be sure that you mingle none, but those that
will last alike: But if they bee neere in taste and colour, there needes no separation. But al∣though some sortes doe last alike, and be neere of one taste, yet if they be not of a colour, they are not to be layed together. For, it is an vnseemely sight to see one heape of apples of seuerall colours. But if already they be mingled, let them be taken vp with a Trey: and looke how many sorts there be in the heape, you must haue by you so many baskets, and so part euery sort, seuerall: when they be parted, the ripest to be first spent, & the rest by degrees in their time. And although they that be summer fruite, be cal∣led rathe fruite, yet are they not ripe all at one time. Wherfore, no sorts must belayed together, but those that ripen alike: otherwise, being layed together in a heape, the one will be rotten before the other bee ripe, and cause the hardest amongst them to rot, be∣fore they be kindely ripe. Also Pippins and other winter fruite, are to bee carryed and packt in maunds, lyned with wheate or rye straw: and at the emptying of them, the straw to be cleane pickt out. And when your pippins, or other winter fruite, come to be layed in the house or place appointed, whether they should be conueighed or carryed, vnlace your maunds, take off the straw, at the top: when you haue done, whelme downe the maunds, emptying them gently, into small baskets, picking out the straw as cleane as you can. Haue a great care also in shooting or pouring thē out. For, in pouring of them hard, the one wil hurt the other: especially the stalkes of the one, will run into the o∣ther. And being once stalk-prickt, they will not
last long, although not presently seene. Also, being battered or bruised, they cannot keep. Onely the Pippin hath a qualitie by it selfe. For, if it be battered, the skinne being not broken, it will dry vp againe: so that it be when it is greene, and being layed amongst the rest: for then they will soake away the bruise, and make it plumpe againe, if it be not too much bruised. Of the difference of fruite, growing in one ground, and on one tree. YOu must note that there be pippins and other winter fruite, although of one sort, and grow in one ground or orchard, that will last better then o∣ther some: and of some trees growe greater fruite thē of other some of the same sort, & in the very same orchard. For, where the sunne hath most power or shineth hottest, the fruite is harder grained, bigger, and of a better colour, then they that grow vpon the very same tree, vpon the lower boughes (which are called water boughes) or the inner boughes of the tree. For, the raine or moysture that lights vpon the tree, falles to the lower parts: by reason wher∣of they neuer haue any good colour, but are alwaies greene and soft, and eate very waterish: which cau∣seth them, they can neuer last long, nor eat kindely. But the other (as I said) that haue the warmth of the sunne, doe grow greater and better coloured: some being red sided, other some russet: also they last long and eate kindly. Therefore I wish them, that haue fine lasting fruite, that they make great store of, for the seruice
of their owne house, to separate them at the gathe∣ring. But otherwise, if they bee such fruite, that no such account is to be made of them, they may belay∣ed altogether: and after that they haue layen, take them vp in a trey, and separate the ripest from the o∣ther, and so spend them as occasion serues. Also, the largenesse, & goodnes of the fruite, holds proportiō with the age of the tree. For, while ye tree is in growing to perfection, the fruite groweth eue∣ry yeere bigger and bigger, better in taste, & colour, & more firme and hard: but when the tree begins to decay & waxe olde, the fruite (which it beareth) doth also decay in bignes, colour, taste & firmenes: & con∣sequently will not last so long. How to order fruite, in conueighing them by water. IF there bee any occasion of sending fruite a∣ny farre way by water, especially such fine fruite, that will keep well, and worth sending (for summer fruit are not farre to be sent) prouide some dry hogs∣heads, barrels, or some such caske, and because they may lye the closer (to auoide iogging and tossing, in remoouing or stirring of the caske) they must be lay∣ed in, by hand, one by one: not poured in. For, being poured in, they will lye hollow, & so be spoiled with battering, and bruising one against another, in the remouing of the caske: but, being layed in, one by one, and the caske filled vp, they will not stirre. Lyne your caskes at both ends, with the finest & sweetest straw, you can get: but not the sides of your caske: for too much warmth will hurt them. You must also pearce holes in both ends, about eight or ten at an end. For, fruite (let them be euer such good
lasting fruite) if they haue not ayre, they will quickly come in a great heate, and so sodainly rot. Haue al∣so a great care that they be kept dry in the cariage. For, as the want of ayre doth cause them to rot: so, being wet will rot them likewise. Also fruite, that are to be carryed by sea, may bee shot vnder hatches vpon straw, if there be not caske enough to carry them in. Alwayes prouided, that they be shot in a dry place, and with great care that they be kept dry ouer head: now and then opening the hatches to ayre them. Vnfit times to remoue or carry fruite, by land or water: and the reason thereof. THe fruite that is stirred, packt, or carryed in frosty weather, or in March (if the winde blow sharp) let thē be euer so hard at the taking vp, yet be∣fore they come to their iourneys end, being carried by land or water, they wil then be so tēder (in frosty weather, by reason of the colde ayre: in March, by reason of the sharpe and bitter winde: and in sum∣mer, by reason of heate) that the most part of them will change blacke, and a great many of them so shriueld as if they had been sodden: so that they wil not abide to be tossed, nor carryed at that time of the yeare, by reason of their tendernes. The hardest & the best lasting fruite, that is, after they haue layen long, or especially if they haue layen till March, or neere the Spring, and so likewise vntill Iuly, the weather growing hotter & hotter, although in the taking vp of them they seeme very hard, yet shal you finde a great alteration in them, after their ca∣riage.
Small store of fruite, how to be conueighed by land. THey that haue but small store to carry, or but now and then to carry some, of what sort soe∣uer, they doe commonly carry them in dossers, pan∣niers, or prickles, &c. one, on each side of the horse: alwaies prouided, that euery or each one be full, the cherries & peares to be lyned with greene fearne, al kinde of apples to be lyned with fine sweet strawe, onely in the bottome and top (not on the sides) of the panniers and dossers. But baskets or prickles (the rods whereof are not so neere together) must be lyned, sides and all. In what kinde of roomes, winter-fruite are to be layed, and in what manner. FOr the better reseruing or keeping of winter-fruite, first there must be great heede taken, what place or roome they are layed in: for it must be ney∣ther too hot nor too colde, neither too close nor too open. For, as the closenes of the roome brings thē in a great heate, so doth too much ayre make them shrinke, and be withered: besides, in time of yeare, the frost will sore nip them. You must also haue a great care, that they be neither layed vpon the groūd, in any low roome, or cellar: vnles it be either paued or boarded. For, although they be vnderlay∣ed well with strawe, yet the moystnes of the bare ground wil cause the straw to be mustie, & the musti∣nes ascend to the fruite: which wil make them both musty and mouldy.
The laying of fruite in a lowe roome or cellar (so that the roome be sweet, and eyther boorded or pa∣ued, being not very close) is good, from Christmas vntill the latter end of March: which will both keepe them from the frost, and from the sharpnes of the March winde. Betweene March and the latter end of May (being the chiefe of the spring) the cellars be hot: and, in that time, the fruite will run out, or rot, more in those roomes, then in other cōue∣nient places. Roomes, that be very opē, are neither good for winter nor summer: and especially such as are neere the tyles where no seeling is ouer them. For, in winter, the sharp windes and frosts wil haue accesse through the chinkes or creuisses of the win∣dowes, although shut: and, betwixt the tiles, the heate of the sunne, in hot weather will pearce like∣wise. As cellars be hot toward the spring, they be cold in summer: and are then good to keep fruite in. Roomes, that be seeled ouer head, are good for fruite, hauing ayre sufficient, where the windowes may be shut and opened, as occasion serueth. For, being seeled it will keep away dust, that might haue fallen downe, and the heate of the sunne. Alwayes prouided, in what roome soeuer, that they be vnder∣layed, with good, cleane, and sweet strawe, eyther wheate or rye. Take also the longest of the straw, and let it be layed to the walles, standing vp as far as the fruite reacheth: not thicke, but onely suffici∣ent to keep the fruite from the wall. Which, if it be a stone wall, will giue, at euery change of the wea∣ther. If any other wall, it wil be ful of dust. Ther∣fore the straw is good, both to dry vp the moyst∣nes before it comes to the fruite, and likewise to
keep away the dust. But if the roome bee eyther wayne-scotted or boarded round, there needs no straw, betweene the walles and the fruite. How winter-fruites, of one sort and kinde, are to be culled, and sorted diuersly. AS it is shewed how Summer-fruite (that is, such as be rathe fruite, and to be spent in sum∣mer) are to be ordered: so now shall be shewed, how winter or lasting fruite shall be vsed, and kept in their kinde, for their best lasting. And as there be diuers kindes of fruite that will not last, but must be vsed in summer, some at one time and some at another: so likewise there are diuers sorts, which will naturally last, some but til Alhollantide, some till Christmas, some till Landlemas, & other some till Shrouetide, &c. But especially, Pippins, Iohn apples, or as some call them Dewzins, Pear-maynes, winter-russettings, and such other lasting seruiceable fruite, with good vsage, will last till new fruite come in. It is the order in Kent, and in most fruite coun∣tryes in England, when they haue great heapes of fruite, lying in their houses, to take a long rod or staffe, with a nayle, or some such sharpe poynted thing, in the end thereof, and with the same to take vp those they see rotten, vpon the top or side of the heapes: not regarding how they rot vndermost, and in the heart of the heape: where, is more waste, then in the outward parts. And other some neuer stirre them, but when they haue occasion to vse thē,
and then taking them vp, and throwing out the rot∣ten ones, doe let the rest rot that will. But if you haue any fruit, that you meane to keep or reserue, as long as they can, by their seuerall naturall kindes, they must be vsed in another sort. When there is seene any perisht fruite, eyther vpon the toppe or sides of your heape, then it sheweth that some are rotten in the inner parts. Therfore, hauing a trey, with the same gently take them vp, being carefull, that you neither thrust the trey hard to the heape, nor with your nayles touch them. And heere know, that although the fruite of your heape be all of one kinde, yet at the turning or taking vp of them, they are to bee parted into three sorts: for they will not keep alike, although they grew all vp∣on one tree. Therefore your trey being filled set it before you, with your prickles or baskets round a∣bout you, & taking them out of the trey, peruse them well, and lay the hardest, or those that are without spots, which will last longest, in the basket next vn∣to you, laying them downe gently: the other sort that are broken skinned, stalke-pricked, or vnder∣run (that is beginning to perish) will be as good for the present time to spend, and as sound as the other sort, so that they be taken in time. For, when they begin once to be spotted, or any way the skinne bro∣ken, if it be but the breadth of a pins head, they will not last long. This second sort you must put into the second prickle or basket. The third sort (for your third basket) are those that are already perisht, or worme eaten: which must be layed by themselues seuerall, and spent out of hand: and those that are
found throughly rotten, to bee cast out, which will be but a fewe, if they be carefully looked into, shut∣ting or pouring euery sort seuerall: and alwayes as they are turning, to bee vnderlayed with fresh & sweet straw. But if they be not taken vp, & loo∣ked to in time, you shal haue them, that be but stalk-prickt, or any way broken skind, soone rotten: and the other that be but a little perisht, whē these other begin to perish, wil be all rotten, and so spoile them, that would last long. The times when long lasting fruite, should be stirred and turned. PIppins, Iohn-apples, Peare-maines, and other such long lasting fruite, need not to bee turned, vntill the weeke before Christmas, except that there bee some riper kinde of fruite mingled with them (which must be taken out) or that the fallings haue not been taken out at the gathering, or any strawe left amongst them. The second time, that you should turne these last∣ing kindes of fruite, is about Shrouetide, or the latter end of March, or the beginning of Aprill. For, towards the spring all kinds of fruite will rot, more thē at other times. And so vntill Whitsontide turne them once in the month, and afterwards once in a fortnight. Still, in the turning, lay your heape lower and lower, and your straw vnderneath them very thinne. Alwaies prouided, that you doe not touch your fruite, in any great frost, and especially if they bee in an open roome. In a cellar or close
roome, where the frost cannot come at them, they may be touched, if there be any occasion of haste (or else not,) so that you keepe the roome very close shut too, when they be in turning. At the thaw, the fruite is wet and moyst: and as long as they be so, they must not be touched, nor any way stirred, vntill that they be dry againe. And so likewise in rainy weather, they will be danke and moyste, and giue, according to the weather: at which times they may not be touched. For, being touched in any of those times aforesayd, they wil turn black: and hauing once changed colour, they will not last. Therefore in what roome soeuer you lay them, set open your windows, doores, or other entrances for ayre (that so the winde may come in vpon them) in winter, betwixt nine in the forenoone, and foure in the afternoone: and in summer you may open at sixe in the morning vntill eight at night. For, before and after these times, the ayre is too colde. In March open not your windowes at all: for the March winde will cause the fruite to shrinke. When Pippins, and other long lasting fruite, begin to be shriueled: and the reason. LAsting fruite, after that the middle of May is past, begin to wither: by reason that then they waxe dryer. And thē, the moysture being gone, which caused them to keep plumpe, they looke wi∣thered and become smaller. Also when nature is
decayed in them (doe what you can) they will rot. For, in the Spring, as the tree yeelds fruit, spring∣ing and budding euery day more and more: so, doe the kirnels of the olde fruite, at that time, begin to swell & sprout within: and common∣ly it makes way at the stalke, and there begins for the most part to rot. FINIS. A fault escaped. Pag. 8. lyne 1. For, very time: Read, very short time.
