11266 S112648 99847894 12958
A DECLARA∣tion concerning the need∣fulnesse of peace to be made in Fraunce, and the means for the ma∣king of the same: exhibited to the most Christian king, Henrie the second of that name, King of Fraunce and Po∣lande, vpon two Edictes, put forth by his Maiestie, the one the tenth of September, the other the thirtenth of October. Anno. 1574. Translated out of Frenche by G. H. Esquire. ¶ Jmprinted at London by Henrie Bynneman, for Raufe Newberie, dwelling in Fleetstreat, a little aboue the Conduit.
¶ To the right worshipfull his especiall good father Sir Pearciuall Hart Knight, one of the Sewars, and Knight Harbinger to hir Maiestie: his humble and obedient sonne G. H. wisheth health and long lyfe. IT is now (Syr) long time since I not onely desi∣red but fully de¦termined, to te∣stifie the ac∣knowledgement of my dutie to∣wardes you, by some peece of my trauell, in this present kinde of ex∣ercise. The bringing whereof to passe, although I haue oftē sought by perusing many bookes: yet could
I not light vpō any to answere my contentment (which stood alwayes on the choyce of some such matter, as J thought myght best like you) vntil there chanced into my hands this little frenche aduertisement: The which I had no soner read o∣uer, but by and by there was kind∣led in me a certaine desirousnesse to take it in hād, partly for the ar∣gumēt therof, which caryeth great cause of likelyhoode to please the reader in generall: but chiefly for my perticular purpose to delight you, whom I know to haue a special inclination to heare and reade the
discourses of the frenche affayres, bycause you youre selfe in youre yong dais, hauing serued the kings Grandfather Francis of Valoys, in his Courte, and trauayled that countrey, haue had good occasion to be acquainted with the customs thereof, and with the nature of the people there. And I doubte not but it will like you so much the better, for the varietie of foraine histories, applyed most aptly to the groūd of the present mater, wher∣with it is, I say not poudered or fil∣led, but fraughted. Neuerthe∣lesse, althoughe my liking of the
worke did hale forward my labour to the translating thereof: yet I must needes say, that after I was somewhat entred thereinto, strait∣wayes there stoode vp such a num∣ber of doubts, and so huge a heape of imperfections to withstand me, as had not my desire to pleasure you preuayled againste all those stoppes and stayes: my trauell and deuotion therein had lyen in the dust, before my race had halfe bin runne. But yet notwithstandyng, the reasons aforesayd, and the de∣sire I had to do the thing, and the delight I tooke in doing it, wrought
such persuasion and incouragemēt in me, and did so keepe me still in breath, as I neuer gaue it ouer, till J had turned it into Englishe, in suche sorte, as you my good fa∣ther, may nowe vouchesafe to see: to whome, J moste humbly present it as a newyeeres gift. Therewith∣all hartely wishing, that your ear∣nest zeale towardes all wise, wor∣thy, and vertuous proceedynges, (whereof neerenesse in bloud for∣biddeth me to speak according ei∣ther to your desert, or to my know∣ledge, desire, and duetie) may en∣crease, to Gods glory & the profit
of your countrey. And the same God prosper you and all youre do∣inges, and blesse you with manye moe newe yeeres, to the conten∣tation of your owne harts desire. This first of Ianuary .1575. Your humble and obedient sonne George Harte.
¶ The fyrste Edicte the tenth of December, of the wil and intent of the most Christian King of France and Poland, Henry of Valoys, the third of that name. HEnry by the grace of God Kyng of France and Poland, To all that shall see and reade this pre∣sent Edict, greting. The brotherly a∣mitie whyche al∣wayes hathe bene mutually betweene our late most honorable Lord and brother king Charles, (whose soule God pardone) and vs, and the naturall in∣clination and duetie whiche we haue to the conseruation and quietnesse of thys realme, hathe heretofore not only made vs mindfull of the welfare of our sayde late Lorde and brother, and of his subiects: but also inforced vs to neglect our owne commodities, and
to participate the care & trauell of managing all affayres, as wel publike as priuate, and as well of wars as of peace: in which we haue willingly imployed, not only al our means, but also our own proper person, as appereth by diuers encounters & battailes, which God by his holy grace hath alwais fauored accor∣ding to ye right & equitie of the cause which we defend. Whereas notwithstanding it is most certain & euident, that ye losses in yt case so happening as wel on the one part as on ye other, did altogether tend to the diminishing & weakning of the forces of the realme. Our sayde late brother knowing this, had at sun∣dry times assayed to qualifie the sharpnesse of that inconuenience, by benignitie and cle∣mencie, indeuouring to bryng agayne the hartes of his subiects to their due obedience by gentlenesse, and to reconcile their willes to good vnitie and concorde, whiche were at oddes before, specially the yeere passed when I was his Liefetenant generall before Ro∣chel: we following his mind and comman∣dement by the aduice and counsell of Prin∣ces, Lords & notable persons, which at that time wer with vs, did thē again accept yt gē∣tle
means of pacification, which we thought most meetest, as the thing which we specially desired, to be firme & durable, knowing that the most part of ye subiects of the realme, had sufficiently tried, felt, & proued the miseries & calamities which ciuil & inwarde war brin∣geth wt it. And yt was ye very cause, vpō hope wherof, we tooke our iourney into Polande, whither ye states of the countrey (that alittle before had elected vs for their king) did call vs: wheras if we had thought that ye warres shuld haue seased & rested so short a time, we had not abādoned our said lord & brother, nor yet ye realm. But rather we wold haue pre∣ferred ye conseruatiō & defence thereof, aboue al aduancemēt or perticular benefite yt could touch vs or apertain vnto vs. Yet notwith∣stāding some being seduced by euill councel, haue vnder diuers pretēces, renued ye troubles and entred again into armes. Wherby it is come to passe that the realme is immediatly falne into ye same malady of whiche it was but newly crept out, & the means yt had bin attēpted for the redresse thereof, brought not the fruite that was looked for, and desired. Nowe for asmuche as it is the duetie of a good king, as well as of a good father and
pastor, to strayne him selfe to the vttermost of his power, and to imploy all his doyngs to the benefyte and preseruation of those whome God hathe put vnder hys charge, specially at ye beginning of hys raigne. And seeing that it hath pleased the deuine boun∣tie to call vs to the rule and gouernment of this realme: We haue thought good, fyrst of all to proue all meanes possible to bryng our subiectes agayne to the righte way by gentle meanes, that they may lyue peace∣ably one with another in good vnitie and concord, and yeld vs the obedience whiche by all right they ought to do, as the thing whi∣che euery man of his owne parte ought of right to desire and procure. Therefore to the intent that all men may vnderstand our wil and meaning, which tendeth to nothing but the benefyte and comfort of the Realme and our subiects: We haue sayd and declared, and do say and declare, that all those whiche heretofore haue risen and takē armes against our late Lorde and brother the king last de∣ceased, and against his authoritie and ours, or haue absented thēselues out of ye Realm, withdrawing them into strange countries
without our leaue, and at this present will lay a part armes, giue ouer the practises of warre, returne home into their houses, leaue vp and put into our obeysance the townes which they hold and occupy, and do as good and loyall subiects ought to do to their king and soueraigne Prince: they shall fynde vs disposed and ready to admit and receyue thē into our good grace, with intention and will to intreate them well, forgetting the former things, and prouiding that neyther presente nor to come, any of those of what quality degree or condition so euer they be, or for any cause that may bee pretended to haue bin done by them during the troubles, shall any way be disquieted, molested, or sif∣ted by vs or our officers, eyther in their per∣sons, goodes, or honors, but shall lyue in all assurance, rest, and tranquilitie, both they, theyr families, and posterities: assuring them that if they will come or sende to vs to thys ende, they shall do it with all suretie by ver∣tue of these presents, whiche shall serue them for safeconduit, howbeit so as in their com∣ming towardes vs, they take safeconduites and pasports of the gouernours and Liefete∣nants
of the prouinces by which they passe, whom we authorise & enioyn to do so wtout refusall or let, commanding all gouernours & captaines of places iusticers & officers, Shi∣refs of towns, and other our subiectes, accor∣ding to their duties to let thē passe in all saf∣tie towards vs, without giuing or suffering to be giuen, any disturbance, molestation, or impeachmēt. And if any of them be not dis∣posed to receiue & accept this our fauour, & to vse ye goodnesse & clemencie which we offer thē, but rather wil perseuer in their euil intēts & purposes: thē are we fully resolued to im∣ploy al the means which God hath put into our hāds, to represse their insolencies, and to bring their malapertnesse & rashnesse to rea∣son: wherin we hope & do promise our selfs, yt god (who knoweth our intent) wil of his gracious goodnes fauour & ayd vs, to main∣tayn ye authoritie which we acknowledge our selues to hold of him: And yt therwithal our good and loyal subiects wil not forget their duties & allegeāce which they haue alwayes borne vs, to ye end therfore the rather to put ye realme in quietnesse, & to reestablish it in his auncient greatnesse, dignity, & beautie: We charge & cōmand al our Liefetenants gene∣ral,
& gouernours of our prouinces, baylifes Stewards & their deputies, to cause this pre∣sent Edict to be proclaimed in euery of their gouernments, assemblies, & iurisdictions, & to cōtinue ye keeping & obseruing of ye same in∣uiolable, wtout impeachmēt or suffering it to be impeached in any sort or maner what so∣euer it be, expresly forbidding the officers of our courtes of Parliamēts, to impeach it for their part, & putting as wel thē as our solli∣citers & atturneys general & al other persons vnto silence vpon ye sight hereof, for so is our pleasure. In witnesse wherof we haue cau∣sed our seals to be put to these presēts. Giuē at Lions the .x. day of Sept. the yere of grace 1574. & of our raign ye first. Also signed vp∣on ye reply, by ye king being in his counsell, with whom there was also the Queene his mother, my Lorde the Duke of Alanson his brother, ye king of Nauarre, the Cardinals of Burbo, Lorein, & Gwyses, ye prince Dolphin, ye Dukes of Gwyse, Namors, and Mayne, ye Earle of Charnie, the great Esquire, ye lords of Moruillier, of Valence, of Lanssak, of Li∣moges, of Foys, of Bellieure, & of Monluke, and other Lordes of his priuie counsell then present, Fizes. And sealed vpō double labels, with the great seale in yellow waxe.
¶ The seconde Edict the thirtenth of October. HEnry by ye grace of God King of France and Po∣lande, To al that shall see this pre∣sent Edict, gree∣ting. Though at oure commyng into thys oure realm, & by our letters pattēts signed with our hand the .x. day of September last past, which was sent vnto our gouernours, Liefetenants generall in our prouinces, iudges and officers, to pu∣blishe the fame, and to continue the exacte maintayning and obseruing thereof, wee haue playnely and particularly ynough de∣clared and opened the inward meaning and intente of our harte, and the desyre that wee haue to imbrace and receyue all our subiects into our good fauour, which wil frame them selues to their duetie, and yeld the obedience
that God and nature hath bounde them to, being very willing to forget all that is pas∣sed: Yet notwithstanding bycause many of our subiects whiche be farre off, and within the townes and places possessed againste our authoritie, and peraduenture not well ad∣uertised and certified of our sayde meaning, or haue hadde it misreported vnto them by some whiche haue a will to mayntayne still these troubles and disorders for ye particular profite and commoditie whiche they receyue by it, vnder colour that since our comming either we haue caused ye Rutters, Swysers, and other forces to march in some prouinces of our realme, (whiche forces we found ready assembled to recouer the saide places with∣holden against our sayde authoritie, and to open the passages of our prouinces,) inten∣ding vnder that pretence to beare men in hande, that our meaning was not to pacifie the affayres of our realme, according to our declaration, although it be the onely thyng whiche we most chiefly seeke: and we lyke∣wise haue bin aduertised that some of them haue delayed their comming or sending vn∣to vs (to inioy the fauor whiche we haue of∣fered
them by our said Declaration, for feare of their liues, and for feare to be forced and constrained in their consciences, for that there was not expresse mention thereof in our sayde Declaration, notwithstanding we haue both hearde, and gently receyued all those which haue come vnto vs for that pur∣pose. And haue graunted perticular pasports, and necessarie suerties to others, which haue giuen vs knowledge of their desire to doe the like: For these causes and other great considerations mouing vs therevnto, and to take wholly away al doubt and scrupulositie from our sayd subiectes, we haue sufficiently and as much as necessitie requireth, sayd and declared, and by these presentes signed with our hande, do say and declare, that our grea∣test care and desire, is to restore our sayde Realme in to the auncient estate of quiet∣nesse and tranquillitie, by meanes of suche peace as we intende to giue to our subiectes, and the clemencie we purpose to vse to∣wardes them, forgetting all that is passed, without remembring any part thereof, and intending that none of all our subiectes, of
what qualitie, degree, or condition so euer they bee, or for what cause so euer may bee pretended, to haue bene doone and commit∣ted by them during the troubles, or by their occasion, shall any way be disquieted, mo∣lested, or syfted by vs or oure officers, eyther in their persons, goodes, or honours, but that they may lyue in their houses in all assurance, rest, and tranquilitie, both they, their families, and posterities. And there∣fore we folowing (& conforming our selues, to our sayd first letters,) mynding moreouer so greatly the benefit of peace, that we will not in any wyse haue them syfted, distressed, nor troubled for their consciences, but doe vtterly forbid it, and for the same wyll make all necessarie prouision to be put in ready∣nesse. And to the ende that those which are wil∣ling to come to vs to shewe vs their griefes, may doe it safely, and so likewise returne: We will that these presents shall serue them for safeconduct. Prouided alwayes, that as well for theyr comming as theyr going, they take safeconductes and Pasportes of the gouernours and Lieftenantes generall
of our prouinces by which they passe. Whom we commaunde to deliuer ye same vnto thē without refuse or delay. Enioyning also all gouernours & Captaynes of places, our iu∣sticers and officers. Sherifes of Townes and other our subiectes, according to theyr dueties, to suffer all suche trauellers to come and goe safely, without giuing or suffering to be giuen any molestation or impeache∣ment. And we promise in the faith and word of a king, and vpō our honor, to accomplish and performe that which is by these presents and shall be by vs after accorded and assu∣red: And for more greater suretie it shall be allowed and approued as matter of recorde throughout all the courtes of Parliamentes of our Realm, by the Princes of our bloud, Lordes, Gentlemen, Mayors, Sherifes, and principall dwellers of oure Townes, and others, if neede shall require. Thus wee gyue commaundemente to our trusty and welbeloued officers of our Courtes of Par∣liamentes, and our sayde Liefetenantes ge∣nerall, gouernours, Baylifes, Stewardes, and other deputies, to keepe and obserue in∣uiolably these presentes, without contradic∣tion
or suffering any contradiction in what sort or manner soeuer it be: putting our at∣turney generall and all others vnto silence: For so is our pleasure. In witnesse whereof we haue caused our seale to be put to these presentes. Giuen at Lions the thirtienth day of October in the yeare of grace .1574. and of our raigne the first: So signed, HENRY: And vpon the reply, By the king, be∣ing in his councell at Neufville. And sealed with double labels in yel∣lowe waxe.
¶ A declaration to the most Christian king, Henrie the thirde of that name, king of Fraunce and Poland. SYr, the two E∣dictes that your maiestie hath cau¦sed to be publi∣shed since youre newe comming to the Crowne, (which GOD make prosperous vnto you) doe make great shewe, that your sayde Maiestie is desirous to see a good peace in France. And truly, al good people do greatly praise God, for the good wil & father∣ly affection, that he hath put into your heart towards your sayde subiects, and desire that the same may there take so deepe and liuely roote, as it may vtter it selfe more and more in deede and effect. But (according to your sayd Maiesties complaint in the last of those Edictes) many are so full of mistrust, as they can hardly beleue such affection of peace.
to be yet throughly imprinted in your heart, the rather for that they see your Maiestie to make warre against them, to whom you say you intende to giue peace: in so muche that, seeing on the one side a pretence of your will tending to peace, and on the other side, an ex∣ecution of warre, they knowe not what to determine thereof. Some say, they must rest them selues rather on the deede, than on the word, paper or ynke. Other some thinke that the worde and promise of a King, is ground sufficient to reste vppon, excusing youre Maiesties making of warre, with the same excuse that is contayned in your last Edict, that is to say, that your Maiestie assembled not those forces, but hauing found them rea∣die furnished at your cōming to the crown, thought it more requisite to imploy them, than to suffer them to be idle, specially seeing that the entertaining of them was so charge∣able, & they must needs be payd whether they serue or no. Some say moreouer, that what so euer your Maiestie hath doone touching the execution of war, was but to sharpen mens apetites vnto peace, which held your townes in their hands, & were in armes against you.
bycause feare is a ready meane to make the weaker craue peace of the stronger. Other∣some say further, that a noble prince oughte to behaue him selfe mildely towardes suche as humble them selues vnder his obeysance, and to tame and represse suche as make resi∣stance against him: and that therefore your Maiestie hathe iust cause to make warre a∣gainst those your subiects, whiche will not yeeld you their obedience, to whome neuer∣thelesse ye would giue peace, if they woulde put off armor & desire it of you with hum∣blenesse. But (to speake the trueth) all these reasons can not make the greater number, to hazard them selues by beleeuing the con∣trary (say they) to that which they haue seene and yet doe see with their eyes. And especi∣ally those that be in armes, who thinke yee meane to make of them a matter seruiceable to your glory and triumph. (as did the an∣cient Emperours those barbarous nations whom they subdued.) And they groūd their beleefe vpon your first Edict, by the whyche your said Maiestie seemeth to take for great victorie and matter of triumph, the lamen∣table aduentures happened in the warres
passed, in the late king your brothers tyme, against those that named them selues youre subiectes, and were in deede Frenchmen borne. Again they graūt that a prince ought to represse and tame suche as will not obey him, and that God and nature doe teache vs to obey our princes, and soueraigne Lordes: but they also say, that God and nature doe likewise teach vs to preserue our liues, and yt to the obedience due to princes ought to be ioyned the assurance of the subiectes lyues, which should not be taken away, but by or∣der of lawe: and that if they were assured of that point vppon any other pledges than paper and ynke, there were nothing in the world that they woulde more willingly do, than the yelding vnto you theyr whole obe∣dience and seruice: and that therefore they are not to bee accompted as traytors and rebels though they submit not themselues without assurance of their liues, bycause the former time serueth them for a sufficient ex∣ample and lesson to learne by the harmes of their kinsfolke & friendes, neyther to be light of beleefe, nor to hazard their liues but vpon good warrant. They furder discourse here∣of
in many other sortes, your Maiestie may well consider, that to such as liue in feare of their liues, all things are holden suspect. For some, bycause them selues are desirous of peace, are easily perswaded that your maie∣stie desireth the same: and othersome for the doubt they stand in of their liues, are loth to beleeue any thing: and all generally hang in the ballance betweene hope and dread, and knowe not what to trust vnto, nor whiche way to turne them. Now sir, seeing the world in this maner is tossed, I haue aduentured to take vppon me the humble presentment of this little de∣claration vnto your maiestie, thereby to giue you knowledge of three points of great im∣portance, whiche I intende to verifie by ex∣amples notable and worthy of memorie. One is, that neuer Prince founde it good to make warre againste his subiectes, nor to deale rigorously and cruelly with them. A∣nother is, that a good peace would not onely make your realme of France to florishe, and your poore subiects to prosper, which are now at the last cast: but also make you the grea∣test king that euer was in France, yea with∣out exceptiō of Charlemaine, Clowis, or any
other. And ye third point is, that a good peace is not so impossible to bee made as many iudge it to be. But before I enter into ye di∣scourse of these three points, I wil here recite one historie much to ye purpose of my former saying yt the poore pretēded rebels are in such wise tossed betweene hope and dread, as they know not where they are. And God graunt your maiesty a willing desire, to folow the exāple of this historie which I shall declare. The Romanes had in imes past muche war with the Latines which were their ney∣bors, & (as it were) subiect to thē by reason of their neere neighborhod. But the Romanes (hauing ouercome them in many victories) would needes constrayne them, to the yeel∣ding of a good part of their goodes and pos∣sessions, by way of an amendes making, for that the Latins had broken the treatie of theyr assotiatiō, & were becom rebels against thē. The pore Latines being sore troubled & vex∣ed, knew not which way to wind them, for it greeued thē extreamely to indure so great a losse, ioyned with suche shame and disho∣nour, & on the other side they sawe no meane left them whereby to maintaine the warres any longer. Herevpon, one Furius Camillus,
a braue and valiant Captaine, and then Cō∣sull of Rome, declared to the senate that hee knew a very good & an assured meanes, how to make, that the Latins shoulde neuer after that rise vp in armes against the Romaines, but euer liue in peace and fidelitie togyther with them. Then demaunded they of hym what that meanes was. Euen this sayde he, that nowe when they are vanquished and so troubled as they knowe not what to doe, we receyue them for Citizens of Rome as our selues, to enioy ye like profites, commo∣dities and priuileges as we do: for they looke not for so great a benefite at our handes, but prepare them selues, both to doe and receyue all hostility. And herein is offered vnto vs a very faire occasion to increase oure glory, whiche wee oughte not to let slippe, bycause there is not a surer nor a longer lasting go∣uernemēt, than that which is plausible vnto the gouerned. But we must make hast, to the intente that nowe while they looke for warre, and prepare for it, we may preuent them with so great a benefyte. When Ca∣millus had so put foorth his mind and opini∣on, the voices ranne, whereof the greater nū∣ber
stayed vppon his sayings, and his aduice was followed, for the receyuing of the La∣tins to be Citizens of Rome, to the enioying of the like rightes and priuileges as the Ci∣tizens did. And from that tyme forwarde they were alwayes so firmely vnited to the Romanes, as there was neuer any warre or deuision betweene them. Now then if your Maiestie would voutchsafe to imitate thys noble and honorable manner of taking per∣petuall peace with the poore pretended Re∣bels (which are your subiects) your goodnes, gentlenesse, and liberalitie shewed towards them which deserue it not, would very gret∣ly increase your glory. And so much ye grea∣ter would the benefyte be, bycause they looke not for it, but are vtterly perswaded yt youre maiestie wil either haue no peace at al, or else such a peace as shal only tend to your owne aduantage. And therefore they be fully bent rather to endure all extremitie, than to trust any more to those fruitelesse peaces (whiche they cal Paix fourrees, & wherwith (say they) they haue alwayes heretofore bin entrapped. I wil herevppon recite one other historie muche to the purpose. In the time that the
Romanes were at war with the Samnites, i. Liuius b. 9. deca. 1. (a war like people) it happened that Porthu∣mius and Veturius consuls and captaynes of the Romane armie, were by occasion of e∣uill conduct, enclosed in a streight of disad∣uantage. And for lacke of a better remedy, they entred into an entreaty of peace with the Samnites, which so in that straight held their enclosed. The Captain generall of the Samnites was a braue yong gentleman na∣med Pontius, whose father called Herenni∣us, had of long time gouerned the state of the Samnites. The aduice of this good old man was asked for the making of peace: he an∣sweared that they must set goe the Romans whom they held already couped vp as Cap∣tiues, without any harme or violence. This aduice was not very well liked of by Potius his sonne, which eftlones asked him whether he knew no better way than that; for ye brin∣ging of ye peace to passe. To whom the good olde man answeared, that if they misliked of that his firste opinion, his nexte aduice was, that they should kill all the Romanes which they held then enclosed, without suffering of any one of them to escape. For (said he) there is betweene both no meane, that may auaile to the winning of a good peace, ye same must
of necessitie be gotten either by the vertue of some benefite bestowed vpon the enemie, or else by the so weakening of them (through the putting of the whole armie to the sword) as in a long time after they shall not be able to recouer again their force. Neither ye one nor the other of this good mans opinions were followed, but in the ende a dissimuled peace was made, whiche was not only shamefull to the Romanes, but also by them inconti∣nently broken to the vtter ruine & decay of the Samnites, whiche vnderstood in the ende, yt the counsell of the good old Herennius had bin the best to haue bin folowed. Hereof sir I mean to cōclude, that for asmuch as the Hu∣gonots cannot al be enclosed in one strayte, & that if they could, to kil them al (being your subiects & not your enemies) it were a thing neither reasonable nor cōueniēt: ye could not do better, than to agree to suche a peace, as might to each parte be both profitable and a∣greeable, which would cause it to be of con∣tinuāce. In this respect ye great warrior Hā∣niball demanded peace of the valiant & hap∣py Scipio after this maner. It is I Hānibal yt do demaund the peace, which I would not demaunde if it might not be profitable, and hauing obteyned such a one I wil willingly
keepe it, for the very same profit for the which I required it: ionisius alic. lib. 3. for to bee shorte, a good peace ought not to be made in hast, but rather to be digested with meere deliberation, loking to none other end, than the profite of the com∣mon weale. And for this cause was it by Tullus Hostilius king of the Romanes saide, that the mutual entercourse of commodities, was the true band of peace. But cōming now to intreat of those three points whiche before I proponed, as subiect to this declaration. Touching the first, whi∣che is, yt a prince ought not to take in hand ye making of wars against his subiects: I set down for a true cōsequēce yt a people do ne∣uer die. The perticulars or seueral parts of ye same do die in deede, but they leaue alwayes behind such as do succeede them not only in their inheritāces, but also in their quarels & passions: so as seldome or neuer dieth ther a∣ny so very a caytife & vnfortunate wretche yt leaueth not another (yea two or three, eyther children, brethren, parēts or friēds) which wil be sorie for his death, & seeke reuēgemēt of it if it wer violētly procured. Wherfore, who soeuer hath to do wt a people, by killing of ye perticulars profiteth little, bicause they leaue
alwais to succede thē such as are (as it were) maried to their quarels. The same is at thys day to be sene by ye Gospellers (so do I tearm them in stead of Hugonots, and catholikes in stead of Papists, as did ye Lord of Valence in his declaratiō made to ye Poloniās: for with∣in these .xv yeres, what by the warres, what by iustice, and what by murthers, there hath bene done to death more than 200000. and yet for all that, there are still so great a num∣ber of them, as it may seeme there hath not any one dyed. There is very apparant reason why it should be so: namely for that a peo∣ple dyeth not, bicause the perticulars haue al∣wayes other perticulars to succede them, not onely in their inheritances, but also in theyr maners, instructions, and other conditions. But contrarywise, the great Princes dye, as the late king your brother is deade, and ma∣ny of his best seruitors are deade, your selfe also are mortall, and your best seruitors be mortall, wherthrough it is commonly seene, yt great mens great deuices vanish away in the smoake, bycause that for the moste parte their successours are not of the same humor and will, but vse their gouernment farre o∣therwise, the one vndoing what by the other
was done. In so much as it is sene that ordi∣narily they pull downe, whome their prede∣cessours had set vp. Whereof among others, master Enguerran of Marigny may be a wit∣nesse, which hauing bin in great credite and authoritie, in the time of king Philip the faire: was by his brother and successor king Lewes Hutin so abased, as he therethrough became a poore man, without any cause ap∣parant, other than for the enuie & hate borne to the greatnesse that he had gotten. Also the wise Courtiers (which will not their liues, honors, and goods, to depend vpon the life of one onely man) are accustomed not onely to please him that presently raigneth, but also him that is like to succede him. For as Pom∣pei said vnto Scilla, there be moe that doe worship ye sunne rising, thā ye sunne setting. Alexander the great did in his time many wonderful & incredible things. Plutarch in Alexandro. For with an armie of .30000. Macedons, he ouercam Da∣rius ye great monarch of al the east leuant in three battels. In the first wherof Darius had 300000. mē, which was twentie against one In the .2. he had .600000. which was .20. a∣gainst one. And in the third, he had a Missiō, which was thirtie against one. He subdued
al the Empire of Darius, as the Persians, the Medes, the Parthians, the Armenians, the Ba∣bylonians, with Egypt, Palestine, and Syria, and generally all the lande habitable of Eu∣rope and Asi, from Macedonie eastwarde vnto India. But all those faire conquestes vanished like smoke, and in the ende came to nothing, for he him selfe died yong, and left not successors of like noblenesse and valiācie as he was. Whervpon Titus Liuius putteth forth this question. Liuius lib. 9. deca. 1. If Alexander the great had taken in hande the warres of his time a∣gainst the Romanes, whether he should as easily haue ouercome them as he did Darius? he answereth no. For though (saith he) Alex∣ander was a valiant king, and a stout & braue warriour: yet was he but one: & in hauing to do with Darius, he had to do but with one head. Where, had he had to do with the Ro∣manes, he must haue fought with a number of braue Captaines one after another. As Valerius Coruinus, Martius Rutilius, Caius Sulpicius, Manlius Torquatus, Publius Phi∣lo, Papirius Cursor, Fabius Maximus, Lucius Volumnius, the two Decians, Marcus Curi∣us, and many other, which would from hand
to hande haue receyued him, so as he shoulde haue knowne that they vnderstoode the my∣steries of the warres. And as concerning Councell, Alexander whiche was a yong Prince, could haue no better than they, that were guided by the heades of a whole Se∣nate. The conclusion (saith Titus Liuius) is, That the Macedons had but one Alexander, but the Romanes had many captaines which woulde haue matched him, of whome euerie one should haue liued, and dyed without pe∣rill or danger to the state publike: Whereas by the death of Alexander, the state of his Monarch was rent and torne in peeces. The experience of this discourse of Titus Liuius, Ti. Liuius lib. 2. deca. 1. was well seene in the warres that Hanniball had against the Romanes. For he was a wise and valiaunt Captaine, and knewe as well howe to guide his armie as when to fight. Neyther was he ignorant of the stratagemes or policies of warre. And in deede he ouerthrew many of the Romane Captaines, as Flamminius, Paulus Emilius, Terencius Varro, Marcellus, and many o∣ther. But in the ende he was repulsed by Claudius Nero, Fabius Maximus, and other,
and last of all so vtterly ouerthrowne by the great Scipio the Affricane, as he founde well that it was no small thing, to haue to doe with a people, which do dayly breede newe Captaines and men of warre. And that wel the perticulars of a people may be vanqui∣shed and ouerthrowne, but the whole people neuer. According to this saying of the philo∣sophers: A generall kinde is immortall, by reason of the succession of perticulars (which succeede one another) though euerie perti∣cular in it selfe be mortall. And this reason aduiseth a Prince, not onely to forbeare to striue with his people: but also to shunne the euill will of them, for feare of after clappes. The Emperour Caius Caligula, Su in Ca∣lig. cap. 30. 3. 49. 56. Dion ibid. in his time put to death many of his subiects, euen of the chiefest, most commonly for his owne plea∣sure without lawfull cause, and namely those which founde any faulte with his do∣ings and gouernment, thinking by that meanes to haue made away all that hated him, & imagining (though fondly) that with crueltie he might auoyd hatred, wherewith crueltie is ordinarily and worthyly accom∣panied. But the moe he caused to dye, the
more his haters encreased, and by the kylling of one, he gat the hatred of tenne, in so much that perceyuing him selfe to be hated of all his people, hee wished that all the people of Rome had had but one hed, wherby he ment, that if he had could, he wold haue dispatched thē al at one stroke. But at the last experiēce taught him, that a people hath many heades (which dayly multiply) where hee had but one, by the taking wherof from him, he was miserably slayne. For although by being Emperour of the worlde, he was of great power: yet was the power of the people founde to be greater than his. This was well declared in a Comedie to the great Emperour Maximine, Capitolinus in Maximino. great I say of stature, (for he was in length eyght foote, and in bignesse therevnto accordant, but in vertue verie small. This Emperour was of personage so strong, as with one blowe of his fist hee strake out the teeth of an horse, with one spurne of his foote he burst in sun∣der a horses legge, and with both his handes he pluckt a horseshoe in sunder. With yt na∣tural force, he had also ye force of ye Romane Empire at cōmaundement, so as he thought
him selfe to be inuincible and immortall. And therefore as one carelesse of the peoples displeasure, he put to death many gentlemen and other persons of credite, partly for his pleasure, and partly for the enuie that he bare vnto their vertues. Therefore as he was one day in the Theatre beholding the playing of a Commedie, one of the players with a good countenance, sayde aloude as foloweth. Whom one alone could neuer hurt, a number may confound, The huge and mightie Elyphant, is so borne downe to ground: The princely Lion, though he be vnfeareful, strong and stout, Is notwithstanding ouerthrowne, and killed by a rout. The cruell Tygre so is left starke deade vpon the ground, For al his fell and furious moode, that passeth for no wound. And thou that standest in no feare of any one alone, At leastwise feare the common rage of many knit in one. Maximine perceyued not that this player had cast these verses as it were a stone into his garden. Or if he did perceiue, yet did he dissemble it, but within a while after, hee found what so was sayde in iest, toward him to turne to good earnest. For after he had ex∣ercised many cruelties, and therein done to death moe than .4000. Gentlemen without order of iustice, he was of all his subiectes so mislyked, as (leading an armie against the towne of Aquilee) the whole countrey con∣spired
to keepe him from victuals, (notwith∣standing any commaundement by him put foorth to the contrarie) by reason whereof the souldiers (being pinched with famine) con∣ceyued a hatred against him, and began to grudge at him, and so at the last murthered him. The auncient Romanes woulde al∣wayes seeme inuincible against strangers, but neuer against their owne people. The chiefe of whom were esteemed amōgst them as the heade, and the meane sort as the mem∣bers. And if at any time the commons were falne into any mutenie, the heads incōtinent went about to appease them by gentlenesse, often thinking good, rather to yeelde them what so euer they demaunded, than to assay to daunt them by any force of armes. Ti. Liuius lib. 2. deca. 1. On a time the people, rose by reason of the great rygoure that the bankers and vsurers (to whome they ought money) vsed against thē. By and by the Consuls assembled their Se∣nate, to be aduised howe that tumult of the people might be appeased. After the matter had bene propounded, and some speaches pas∣sed of it, Appius Claudius (a seuere man) was of opinion that the bandes of the bankers and
vsurers ought and were to be payd, and that such a libertie was not to be set open, as the suffering of the people to breake their con∣tractes wherevnto they were bounde, but that they ought rather by force to be compel∣led to performe them. And that if they wold punish some of the ringleaders and most se∣ditious persons, that had of that mutenie bin the first mouers, al the residue would shrinke and be so discouraged, that hardly shoulde there any be founde, that would at any time after that, become a captaine to the commōs, or any motioner of sedition. On the con∣trary part, the Consull Seruilius was of opi∣nion that the sedition was to be appeased by gentle meanes, saying, that it is much easier to bowe a people than to breake them, and that for the conseruation of the common weale, the gentle meanes is much surer than the rigorous, bycause if that rigour take not good successe, the people become madde, and vtter vnsubduable. By the decree of the Se∣nate the adulce of Seruilius was folowed, that they should rather cardesure, than to cō∣mit to hazard the estate of the publike weale, and for a time the exaction of the handes,
(wherevpon the bankers and other had lent money vpon interest to the people) were sus∣pended. Ti. Liuius lib. eodem. Within a while after, certaine of the chiefest in Rome, caused one of the Tribunes of the people (whiche was (as it were) the maintayner of ye liberties of the third estate) to be slayne as secretly as coulde be, bycause that vnder the colour of his office, hee had gone about to moue the people to sedition. The people were sore grieued at the death of their Tribune: but they sayd nothing to it, bycause they knewe not to whose charge to lay it nor whom to blame for it. The noble men (which had caused that blowe to be gi∣uen) were verie well a payde, that the people durst not open their lippes at it, thinking thē selues to haue vsed a verie good mean of pre∣uenting the sedition, and that other Tri∣bunes therby, would take example of it here∣after: They thought surely, that by their cau∣sing of the chiefe mouer of the sedition to be slayne, they had taken away the cause of sedition. But in verie deede, they had not the principall efficient cause, that is to say, the rcour, miscontentment, and indignation of the people, but they had rather increased it
by such vnlawfull execution. What becae thereof? It happened anon after, that there were certain souldiers to be leuyed in Rome for a peece of seruice that the Romanes had in hands, and euerie man thought that the eath of the Trir had then bin falne asleepe, and for euer forgotten. The Consuls commaunded one Valeo (a man of the third estate, that had beforeene captaine of cr∣twe footmen) to put this compauit in a rea∣dinesse: e answered atly yt he would not. Thervpō Emilius and Virginius then Cō∣s,  certaine Sris to arstohi, and  towarde. But he esping the  of the Sarant, cast him self into althroug of the people, and crying out for  sayde, Maisters let vs stande to our  looing to be any were hol∣pen  Tribunes, who dare not say any thing, bicause they be put to death for doing of their duties. Vpon those wordis of his, notwithstonding that the Consols did what they would to appease that sedition, so of them  vpon the rants, who being wil ffeted, and haing their mces , did with much adde  the Paare where
the Senatours were assembled. Then began they to fall to consultation, howe that vprore might be remedied. Many speaking rigo∣rously, sayd, that such boldnesse and rashnesse of the people was to be repressed with force & seueritie. But the auncient and wiser Sena∣tors, which were of opinion that it was not meete for the head to subdue the members by violence (but rather by curtesie & gentlenesse) preuayled in that counsell. For they knewe wel that they had already done too much, in causing the Tribune to be slaine without or∣der of iustice, (although he had deserued it) & in offring that extremitie so rashly to Vale∣ro, and that in such common misorders, the mydest remedies are the surest and hole∣surnest. I will reaccount one example more of this gentle maner of proceding, which for the appeasing of tumults and ciuil seditions, the ancient Romanes liked to vse, bicause it is a point both worthy the marking, & ap∣pertinent to our purpose. It fell out one day in Rome that amongst the people there was so great a mutenie, as the commons woulde needs separat them selues from the nobilitie, taking occasiō therinto, through the grieuous
burthens of their impostes, subsidies, & other like exactions. And it went so far, as the poo∣rest and meanest of the people, did separate them selues from the rich and noble, and for∣sooke their houses to dwell elswhere, howbeit without quarelling among thēselues. Whē this matter came in questiō, by what meanes the sayd mutenie might best be stayed, and the people framed and brought to the yelding of their obedience towardes their superiours and magistrates: amongst the Senatours ran two opinions, one contrarie to the other. The one was of Appius Claudius, a man ve∣ry seuere and rygorous against the common people: whose opinion was, that there was no yelding to the common people, whose na∣ture is such (sayde he) if it were not brideled, would waxe stubborne & proud, & the graū∣ting of any thing vnto them vnder colour of this sedition, would be a maintenance & fur∣derance of other rashnesse and boldnesse, and an occasiō to make them doe the like another time: and therefore they were to be subdued by rygour and force. This opinion of Appius at the first sight was alowed and followed of the yong Senators, whose bloude was
as hote & fierce, as their discretions were cold and vnstayed. The other opinion was of Menenius Agrippa, a very good man, curte∣ous, of good reputation, and of a right noble house, (but poore & a despiser of riches) which sayde, that the publike affaires were as the body of a man, from the which the good Chi∣rurgion doth not by & by cut off the member that hath an vleer o impostume, but rather deuiseth, how he may with good and wise re∣medies heale it, adding also, that experience alwayes sheweth the nature of a people, to become tractable by good and gentle dea∣ling, and the moste modest and myldest, to become fierce with ende and rygorous hand∣ling, no more nor lesse than a wilde beast, be∣ing entised and flattered becommeth to: and the tame being beatē & euil intreated, be∣cōmeth wilde. And that they ought by bea∣ring with ye people, & bearing of their plaints and griefes to win their hearts, and by gen∣tle and fauourable means to bring thē backe againe to their obedience. This opinion of Menenius was folowed by those auncient wise Senatours, that were well practised in the gouernment of the common affaires, to
whome also soone after agreed the yonger sort, somwhat ashamed to haue holdē cōtra∣rie opinion to their auncients in yeeres and iudgement. And they excused them selues of it by the mouth of one of thē named Spurius Nautius, who desired the auncient to holde their youth excused, which is not lightly ac∣companied with stayed iudgement, assuring them yt their folowing of the opinion of Ap∣pius, proceded rather of a boyling and vnad∣uised affection, & not of purpose to stand vpō termes with thē, promising from thēceforth to flee the falling into any such fault, and to be conformable to the iudgement of the el∣ders, as men of more wisedome and greater experience. The yong Senators were much praysed, as wel for the reuoking of their opi∣nion, as for their so curteous excusing of thē selues, and so Appius remayned alone in his rigorous iudgemēts And charge was giuen by the Senate to Menenius to make known their good will to the people, which he did in such curteous manner, and with so sweete words, that he not only won their hearts, but also abated their furie and fiercenesse of cou∣rage. My maisters (saith he) the Senate hath
neyther done you harme, nor meane to doe you any. They are as it were the belly, and you the members of the body: and shoulde the members complayne them, that what they labour for is all for the belly? Is it not the belly that nourisheth, mayntaineth, and keepeth the members, being (as it were) the storehouse or Garner of all the whole body? When the belly taketh and receyueth suste∣naunce and nourishment, doth it keepe it altogether to it selfe? dothe it not rather dis∣perse it through the whole bodie, euen to the fingers of the handes, and to the toes of the feete, which are furthest off from it? Do we not see that the nourishment which it gathe∣reth, serueth not for it selfe alone, but for the whole body? And euen in like sorte doth the Senate employ those things which they de∣maunde and gather of you. The Tributes and Subsidies that they leuie and receyue, are they not to be employed for the seruice of the whole bodie of the common wealth? Cease then my maisters to complayne you of your superiours and Magistrates, which do nothing but for you and for your con∣seruations. Whereof doe you complaine
you, and the cause of your complaint shal be taken away (for a malady cannot better bee cured than by the taking away of the cause.) All things shal be yeelded you that shall bee founde profitable and necessary to the whole body of the common weale, which bande of commō profit shall be one mean of assurāce to conserue the one with the other: and the publique othe whiche shall be sworne vnto you, shall also bee another good guage. By this oratiō and declaration of this good man Menenius, were the people appeased, their harts wonne, and them selues reconci∣led and brought againe vnder the obedience of their superiours and magistrates, and a∣boue all, he was greatly commended for hys sweete manner of speaking, but especially in that hee compared the Senate rather to the belly than to the head, to shew that they were rather fathers and nourishers than any hau∣tie rulers ouer the people. It is then a thyng very certaine, that the manner of appeasing the people by gentlenes and profit, (and not by making them warre) is the true mean to bring and hold them vnder obedience as it is also for the appeasing of troubles and sediti∣ons.
Nero that was Emperour of the Ro∣maynes, Suetonius in Nerone ca. 38. 40. 42. 47 48. 49. Dion e∣odem. would needes make warre against his subiectes, not by preparing an army a∣gainst them, but by causing an infinite nū∣ber of them to be slayne and murthred one after another, only for his pleasure sake. For the whiche also he set on fire the four corners of Rome, to the end to haue burned ye whole towne, whereof in deede he burned a good part. And when he had done, he made pre∣tence that he did it to haue buylded it newe agayn, for the doing wherof, he laid so great tributes and subsedies vpon al the prouinces of the Empire, that hee sucked thē drie with his fines. These cruelties and oppressions, so wonne him the euil will of all his subiectes, as they one after another reuolted from his obeysance. And him selfe in the end being a∣bandoned of euery one, (yea euen of those of his owne guard) fled and hid him in a little lodge in the fields where he was discouered, and fearing to be taken aliue, killed himself. Galba succeeded him in the Empire. Suetonius & Dion in Nero. Cor. Tacitus Annalium libr. 13. 14. But seing I am entred into the making of some discourse concerning the Emperour Nero, I will make a little digression which shall
not be impertinent nor out of my purpose. This Emperour being the last of the house of Caesars, was as vicious, wicked, and cruell, as the first (whiche was Iulius Caesar) was vertuous, good, and gentle. The re∣compting of the legend of his wicked lyfe, woulde require too long a time: but it shall suffice me to tell how he dealt with his best seruants, and what he gayned by suche dea∣ling. He had then many noble and good ser∣uitours, whiche as long as he trusted them, were to him very louing and faithfull, but when they once sawe hym to become mi∣strustfull of their doings, their fidelities be∣gan to wauer & diminishe, for fearing least he should execute like crueltie vpon them, as he had done vpon many others that had de∣serued it. Among other he had seuen al right graue and excellente personages that were his most especiall seruantes, and by him em∣ployde in the greatest charges of his empire. That is to saye Seneca, whiche in his youth had bin his tutor and gouernour, and was (as it were) the superintendent of all the af∣fayres of the Empire. Ruffus whiche was his Constable and great master of his hous∣hold.
Subrius Flauius whiche was captayne generall of his guardes. Sulpicius after one of his darlings and one of ye principal Cap∣taynes of the same guard. Corbulo whyche was his liefetenāt in the east parts, and cap∣tayne generall ouer the Romaine army, a∣gainst the Parthes, who was a valiant war∣riour and did noble acts againste Terida∣tes Vologesus, and other kings in the East, wherethrough he gat greate honour and re∣putation throughout the worlde. Vindex whiche was likewise his Liefetenant gene∣rall and gouernour in the gouernmente of Gaul, a great and mightie prouince, contey∣ning all that whiche is nowe the realme of France with base Alemaigne on this side the Rhine, the low cuntrey of Flanders, Brabant and Henalt, euen vnto the sea: Switzerlande, Sauoye, Piedinont and Lombardy euen to Reniui where there is a little floud called in olde time Rubicon, that separateth Gaule Cisalpine frō Italy. Also Sergius Galba was his Lieftenaunt generall and gouernour in Spaine, Portingale and Granade, whiche likewise was a very great gouernment that comprehendeth at this daye seuen or eyght
realmes. And this Galba was a wise and va∣liant captaine, but greatly striken in yeares, for hee was .lxxiij. yeeres olde when Nero died. These seuen great Lordes were good and louing seruants to Nero, til such time as he becam so wicked, & so far past al goodnes, as he was no longer to be borne withal. His corruption came chiefly by the means of A∣grippine his mother, which would needs go∣uerne & manage al the affayres of the Em∣pire (so ambitious shee was and desirous to cōmaūd.) But this was the mischiefe, that Seneca suffered himselfe to be wonne by hir. For she was a faire wel fauoured princes, & with hir entred he into so great familiaritie, as he enioyed hir secretly. They two then (to the end that al things shoulde passe through their handes) perswaded Nero (whiche was a yong prince) to take his pleasures & sports, and to leaue vnto them the charge and paine of the publique affayres, thinking that the furie of his youth woulde weare away in fond delights and pastimes, and that wise∣dome would increase with his age, and that in the meane time they shoulde better go∣uerne than hee. Of the same opinion was
Burrus a singular person, and next vnto Se∣neca in the waightie causes of gouernment. And surely about the space of fiue yeeres, they gouerned the Empire reasonably well. Howbeit; bycause Agrippine tooke vpon hir to rule all alone after hir owne appetite, these two persons Seneca and Burrus, toke order out of hand, that the Emperour shuld withdrawe some parte of the gouernmente frō hir, and not suffer hir to deale any more with it. But as wisemen as they were, yet were they greatly deceyued, in that they thought the Emperour Nero should in age become wise by passing his youth in follies: for it happened cleane cōtrary, and he became a most wicked and cruell tyrant. And truely it is not to be beleeued, that Seneca whyche was so sage & so greate a Philosopher, was ignoraunt that of a dissolute life in youthe, Nero could not gather ought else than an e∣uill inclination in age, and that his conti∣nuance in riot and voluptuousnesse (ioyned with a princes libertie) could not otherwise do, than drawe him to a maruelous corrup∣tion. But to say the truth, Seneca was puft vp with ambition and desire of soueraintie,
notwithstanding that in his wordes, & wri∣tings, he detested it most of all men, for hee was a great hypocrite and deepe dissimuler, speaking one thing and doing another. Hee preached against couetousnesse and couetous men, whilst he himselfe flattered the olde rich people that had no children, to get thereby their heritages. And he had banks goyng in diuers countries where his seruants made gaine of his money through interest, so as his reuenue came to fyue or syxe Millions of sextercies, which is in value eyght hūdred thousand poundes of rent. He preached a∣gainst pomps and delights, and in ye meane while had the fairest houses, and best builded that might be, not farre inferiour to ye proud palaces and royall houses of Nero the Em∣perour, and therevnto the most fayre delici∣ous gardins that were possible to be seene, togither with so sumptuous moueables that he had .50. tables of Cedar with their trestles and frames of yuorie, and so muche syluer vessell and tapistry as furnished euery house that he had throughly. He inueyed agaynst whoredome, when he enterteyned the Em∣presse and delighted in the company of Bar∣dasses.
He cried out and stormed agaynste flattery, and ther was not a finer nor craftier courtier in that qualitie than he, for he could make the court to euery body, (yea euen to the Pages and varlets of the chamber) from whome any commoditie was to be drawē. And lastly he exclaymed against ambition, and in the meane while woulde needes go∣uerne all himselfe, & suffer nothing to passe but through his hands. Moreouer, to heare him speake, was nothing else but hony, but eloquence, but holynesse, but wisedome and knowledge. And to be short, if he were now liuing, he woulde deserue to bee the greatest Cardinall of all Fraunce. But now to come again to our matter. Seneca hauing let lose the reynes to the Emperour Nero, and suf∣fering him so farre foorth till he had done a thousande mischiefes and cruelties agaynste one and other, great and small (as his fansie led him) began to doubt least the like might happen vnto himselfe. Also Burrus, Ruffus, Sulpitius and Flauius, and diuers other great Lordes that folowed the court by reason of their estates and offices, entred into the like feare and mistrust, especially after they had
seene him do to death his mother Agrippine vppon displeasure only, that she woulde still take vpon hir the dealing with the matters of the Empire. They then to auoyde hys crueltie, made a conspiracie to kill him, but the enterprise was discouered in such sorte, as contrariwise, he caused all them to be killed. Neuerthelesse before they were executed, he woulde needes talke with Sulpicius one of the Captaynes of his guarde, and with Fla∣uius the generall of the same. Of Sulpicius he demaunded wherefore hee had broken hys othe in conspiring agaynste him. For that (answered he) there was no other meane to heale thee of thy naughtinesse. He lykewise did aske of Flauius, wherfore he had conspi∣red against him: I haue (sayd he) loued, and hated thee about any man in ye world: Lo∣ued thee, so long as there remained any hope that thou wouldest become a good Prince: and hated thee, when I sawe there was no more hope of thee but that thou wouldest growe euery daye worse and worse: For so long as thou deseruedst to bee beloued, thou hadst not a more faythfull and louing ser∣uant than I: but when I sawe thee once to
become a manqueller, a murtherer, a player of enterludes, a fencer, and a touneburner, I could not but hate thee extremely. Those braue answers of those two captiues or cap∣tayne prisoners, made Nero more afrayd thā any other thing, as one maruelously asto∣nied to heare that they durst speake vnto him so boldly. In the ende, after he had put them to death, and all other that were but neuer so little suspected of that conspiracie, hee made great sacrifices of thankesgiuing vnto Iupi∣ter his deliuerer, as one that thoughte hym∣selfe nowe to haue gotten the vpperhand of all his enimies, and in place of amendment, he gaue him selfe to doe worse than before, assuring hym selfe to raigne then fortie yeeres and more through the prophecyings of his Magiciens and deuines which had wil∣led him to take heede to the yeare of his age 73. and he had then skarsely accomplished 29. But as he continued his naughtie disor∣dered course, beholde Vindex became a re∣uolter from his obeysance, togither with all the prouinces and countries vnder his go∣uernemente, whereof though the losse were not small, yet was not Nero therwith much
troubled. But when he vnderstoode that the olde Captayne Galba hys gouernour of Spayne was reuolted, he was greatly asto∣nied, fearing least that which the magiciens had sayde vnto him, touching the age of .73. was to bee vnderstanded, not of hys owne yeeres, but of Galbas, whiche was then of the same age. Corbulo which was then with a great armie in the East, was greatly pro∣uoked to do as Vindex and Galba had done. But he as one that would neuer thereto cō∣sent, continued alwayes so faithfull & trustie to Nero, as he gate therfore euill will, & was blamed of al mē, which said he was a main∣tainer of tyrannie. Yet for all this, Nero fea∣ring least he should doe as his other felowes did, sent for him by louing letters to come & speake with him. Corbulo making no doubt of the matter, tooke the iourney in hand: but before he was come to the place where Nero was, he was at Cenchre betrayed & taken by the assailaunts whiche Nero before had sente thither to kil him, who seing how the world went, & weying his fault in the not doing as other did, drewe out his dagger, & therwith strake himself to ye hart wt vttering these for
his last wordes I am worthy. Nowe sir by this short digression it may be gathered, that the best meane to make a Prince to be well and faythfully serued of his seruauntes and officers, is to be a good and faythfull Prince towards them, withoute mistrusting of thē, and to vse clemencie and gentlenes (and not rigour & crueltie) in his gouernment. For a good master maketh a good seruant. And yee haue not so good a seruaunt, but hee will bee discouraged when he seeth his maister to mi∣strust him, or his seruice not to please hys master, specially whē the case concerneth the seruice of a prince, who hath power of lyfe & death, ouer his subiects and seruants. For let the seruant of a prince receyue a sowre coun∣tenance of his maiestie, and by and by he en∣treth into the feare of the losse of his life, or at the least of his goodes and estimation. But before I passe out of this matter of Nero, I wil on the contrary part set downe an example of ye gentle and curteous Prince Alexander Seuerus (of whome your maiestie hath heretofore borne the name.) And that is, to shewe that those two Emperous haue both of them fayled the losse of theyr lyues
by following of two extremities. For Nero hauing a will to gouerne all vpon hys owne head, was cast headlong into the mislikyng and hatred of his people, to ye losse of his life. And Alexander by suffering him selfe to bee ruled by the fantasies of other men, wonne the euill will of his nobilitie and mē of war, which vnhappily slew him. And of a trueth, a man muste alwayes keepe an euen hande, and eschewe extremities in all things, and specially in matters of state and gouernmēt. For as Horace sayth.Horace lib. 1. Sermo. Satira. 2. Oft whilst the foole doth one fault flie, He falles into the contrarie. Nero (as I saide) had good and wise ser∣uants about him to his officers. But whē he had suffered thē to beare authoritie awhile, hee fell into misliking of them, and therevpō would not be ruled any more by them. Lampridi∣us in Alex∣andro. He∣rodianus lib. 6. Cō∣trariwise Alexander woulde doe nothing at all, but by the councel of wise men, of whom he had a great number about him and ther∣in surely he did well. Neuerthelesse ye wri∣ters of histories find fault with him in this, that he gaue too muche authoritie to his mo∣ther Mámea, which otherwise had bin a good
woman, but that shee was not only greedy in gathering of goods from the poore people, but also a couetous niggarde towards such as serued the Emperour hir sonne beside the which she was very ambitious, aspiring al∣together to the gouernement of the affayres, euer sorie to see hir sonne so curteous & gen∣tle in his gouernemente: for where hee was surnamed Seuerus, hee tooke that aswell of his predecessor Septimius Seuerus, as of his seuere obseruing of warlike discipline: but otherwise he was the most affablest and gē∣tlest prince in the world. Neuerthelesse, by his yeelding so much authoritie to his mo∣ther Mámea, he so gate the euill will of hys gentlemen and men of warre, as by way of a conspiracie they slew them both togyther. Truely it was a spectacle very piteous, to see this gentle yong Prince (when the con∣spiratours entred the chamber to kill him) runne and cast him selfe betweene the armes of his mother, lamentably crying, Ah mo∣ther mother, you are heereof the cause. So were they wretchedly flayne, the one in the others armes, to the greate damage of the Empire, for the losse of so good and gentle
a prince, who in al other things gouerned him selfe aswell as might be possible, through the good and wise aduises of such excellent per∣sonages, as were of his priuie counsell: A∣mongst whome the chiefe was doctor Vl∣pian, a mā singularly learned in ye ciuil law, and very well practised in matters of the state, and issued of the house and stocke of A∣lexander, whome hee serued as his chan∣celer. This mā was not an old doterd of a strāge nation, ignorant of the lawes, manners, and customes of the countrie, drawē out of Vul∣cans shop to deale with sealing: he was one made of another manner of metall. But in summe (as I sayd) ye fault of this good Em∣perour Alexander in giuing his mother too much authoritie, cost both him and hir theyr liues. And truely that fault of his was not small. For Alexander ought to haue consi∣dered what hee had learned of Heliogaba∣lus his cosin and predecessor, Lampri. in Heliogaba. Dion in pseudo Antonino. which Helioga∣balus gouerning by his mother Semiamira (without whose aduise nothing passed tou∣ching the common wealth) was incontinēt∣lye despised of all the worlde, and after
he had raigned not passing three yeeres, was by certaine rebels slayne very yong, and had his body togither with his sayde mothers, drawen through the fylth of the riuer Tiber. And therevpon it was decreed by the Se∣nate, that neuer woman should enter into the counsel. Froyssart lib. 1. cap. 4 15. 24. The gentle King Edward of Eng∣land the thirde of that name, gouerned him∣selfe farre otherwise. He was sonne to Ed∣ward the seconde a cruell king, that was de∣priued of his kingdome by his subiects, and to the Lady Isabell daughter of Philip the fayre, king of France. This Lady Isabell Queene of England, was the cause that hir sonne was crowned King, by the estat of the Realme, and therefore thought he should doe nothing but by hir councell, as in very deede he dyd not for a tyme, but gaue to hir the chiefe authoritie touching the gouerne∣ment of his realme. But it happened that this good Queene mother to reuenge hir selfe of certayne of the nobilitie at hir plea∣sure, caused hir sonne to committe certaine cruelties, for the whyche hee was misli∣ked and muche blamed of his subiectes. Whiche when thys gentle King Edwarde
perceiued, iudging it best rather to loose the fauour of his mother than of his people, he neyther woulde fall into like perill as did Nero and Alexander Seuerus, nor yet put his mother to death as Nero did: but made hir to be bestowed in a strong, howebeit a very faire and pleasant castell, of large circuite, wherein there were many goodly courtes, gardens, and walkes, inclosed with walles: and appoynted hir a good companie of La∣dies and gentlewomen, with men of wor∣ship and honour, to serue hir after hir state. And bycause she was of the house of France, and Queene mother of Englande, he assig∣ned hir a sufficient reuenue for the mainte∣nance of hir estate. And to honour hir as his mother, hee went to visite hir twice or thrice a yeere. But neyther woulde he euer suffer hir to passe out of the precinct of the castell, nor to meddle any more with the go∣uernment of the realme. And he was muche esteemed, as well of strangers as of his sub∣iects, for his valiant and manly heart, in that he would not submit himselfe vnder the rule of a woman. But let vs returne againe to our former matter, touching such Princes as
haue vndone them selues by making warre against their subiectes. Titus li. 17. Sueton in Vitel. 10. cap. 10. The Emperour Vitellius ouerthrewe and made a great slaughter of the Romanes, in his battell had against Otho: his souldiers seeing so many deade bodyes in the fielde, were therefore verie sorowfull, but especially for that there was of them few or none that founde not a∣mongst those deade bodies some of their pa∣rents & friends (for they were all Romanes) whose death ministred to them muche cause of griefe, vpon the which occasion they gene∣rally detested those ciuill warres had be∣tweene Vitellius and Otho. Vitellius one day walking through the field wher the dead bodies of that ouerthrow lay, and seeing some stop their noses, did as it were in mockage thereof, and as one glad of the slaughter, vtter this detestable saying: the body of a slaine enimie hath a good sent, but the body of a slain citizē hath yet a better But not long after, yt tyrant which found so muche sweetnesse in the sauour of his slaine citizens, was him selfe slaine as shamefully as he possibly might be. For being taken and bound by suche as conspired against him: he
was brought into the market place with a halter about his necke, all naked from the waste vpward, his apparell all to torne, and his handes fastned behinde him, his chin also being vnderset with a bodkin, to make him hold vp his head. With which furniture hee was in derision harryed through the streetes, not without dirt and filth flung in his face, till he came to the cōmō gibet, where he was slaine and cut in peeces, & lastly cast into Ty∣ber. That was the rewarde that he reaped of his pleasure taken in the smel of the dead bo∣dies of his citizens. Trebellius Pollio in Gallieno & in Ingenio tyranno. The Emperour Gallien made war against ye inhabitants of Bizance his subiectes. Bizance was then a goodly flo∣rishing citie, which was after named Con∣stantinople by Constantine the great. This Gallien hauing gotten the possession of this goodly citie, the townsmē wherof had yelded themselues to his deuotion, caused to be slain & murthred, (contrary to his word) al the in∣habitantes of the same (yong and olde) without mercie, none other escaping, than such as he coulde not come by. And he vsed like crueltie against many other good towns wherin his maner was to leaue no male vn∣killed, so bestly a bludsucker he was. Also this
other good qualitie he had, that Sardanapa∣lus was neuer plunged more deepely in dis∣ordinate lecherie and voluptuousnesse than he. These two faire properties of crueltie and lecherie, caused the most part of the pro∣uinces of the Empire to reuolt from his go∣uernment. In so much, that in dyuers coun∣tries there rose vp against him eyght and twentie captaines, whereof one got one pro∣uince, another got another, so as a great part of the nations subiecte to the Empire of Rome, did cut them selues quite off from their obedience to the Empire, which coulde neuer after that recouer againe his domini∣ons, but being extremely hated, was slayne by a captaine of Sclauonie. And when one came to him and sayd, syr, Fraunce is reuol∣ted against you. Well well (sayd he) shal we leaue our good chetre for those pyde coates? (for the Frēchmen then ware their garmēts embrodered with coloures.) And whē ano∣ther sayde vnto him, that Egypt was reuol∣ted from his obeysance: Wel wel (quoth he) cannot we forbeare the surplices of Egypt. The like wordes vsed he of other Prouinces, when tydings was brought him of their re∣uolting.
Wherevpon by the way I note, howe welnere ordinarily it happeneth, that when one Prouince or towne reuolteth, the reuoltes of other doe easily folowe, bycause naturally men desire change, and are neuer contented with their present state, but hope still vpon better, when it turneth commonly into worse. The example of which manner of reuoltment, is well to be seene in this Hi∣storie of Gallien, for after Fraunce was re∣uolted, the other Prouinces ensued one after another. It was also to be seene in that I sayde before of Nero, from whome as firste Fraunce and then Spaine reuolted, so the other Prouinces folowed. Ti. Liuius lib. 3. dec. 3. When Hanniball had wonne the iourney of Cannas against the Romanes, a great part of their subiectes one after another forsooke them, and willing∣ly yeelded them selues to Hanniball. Ti. Liuius lib. 7. de. 1. The like may be learned of the warres which the Romanes had againste their confederates, Appianus de bello Social. which reuolted one after another, yea and banded them selues together against them. De bello Gal. lib. 7. cap. 19. Caesar doth also write, yt after he had brought vnder his obeysance the townes of Fraunce: they of Autun, which were the first that drew
him into Fraunce, were also the firste that withdrewe them selues from him, and made the most part of the other townes to doe the like, in such sort, as he founde more painefull his gouerning therin at ye last, thā he did his conquering of them at the first. Wherevpon hee saide, that the french men are naturally enclyned to reuolting, when the way is once opened to thē. I could alledge an infinit nū∣ber of other examples to this purpose, but the matter is cleare inough of it selfe, & requireth no large discourse, and therefore I wil now returne to my purpose. Frois. lib. 2. cap. 95. 96. 97. 98. Lewes the last Earle of Flaunders (for after him the Earldome fell into the house of Burgoign, and from thēce into the house of Austrich, wher it now tarieth,) made great and grieuous warres a∣gainst his subiectes of Gaunt, bycause they were not to him so obedient as he woulde them (as people that in deede were alwayes too stubborne against their Prince.) He ha∣uing then continued a long and sharpe siege, by cutting off their victuals, brought a∣mongst them a maruellous famine, where∣through they were driuen into an vtter dis∣paire. The poore people desired the Dutches
of Brabant, the Bishop of Liege, and certaine other of ye nobilitie, to entreate for some good peace, with the said Earle their Lorde. The which the sayde Lords tooke great paynes to do, but the Earle would in no wise agree to any other ende, than that all the inhabitantes of Gaunt, should in a certain place come be∣fore him barefoote and bare headed, with hal∣ters about their neckes, demaunding pardon for their rebellion, and their pardonings ne∣uerthelesse to stande vpon his pleasure. Whē the poore Gauntois vnderstoode no better re∣medy to be hoped for thā that, they desperat∣ly determined (rather than so) to hazard them selues to dy with their swords in their hāds. Whervpō out of the town there issued about 5000. Gauntois (compelled therto by famin, as the wolfe is to the wood) which sped them towards Bridges, where the Earle their lord then lay with his power. And when they came somewhat neare the sayde towne of Bridges, their captaines, and certain Fryers that were with them, beganne to encourage them, & tolde them that their case was like to the children of Israell, which had humbled thē selues as much as might be vnto Pharao, and yet he had neuer the more pitie vpon thē.
And that euen as God had drowned Pharao in the depth of the sea for his rygour reached out to the Israelites: so woulde he punishe Lewes their Lorde for his crueltie extended to the Gauntois. Whilest the Fryers were thus preaching to the poore hungerstarued people, beholde, the armie of the Earle (which were fourtie thousande men in good aray,) came raunging towardes the sayde fiue thousande famished Gauntois, who (on the one side being past all hope of any fauor at their Lordes hande, and on the other side, readie to be swalowed vp by famine) deter∣mined verily to vanquishe or to dye, and therevpon fought so valyantly and despe∣rately, as they ouerthrewe the Earles armie, sacked his houses, and tooke his towne of Brudges, and gate vnder their gouernment all his townes of Flaunders, Audenarde on∣ly excepted. The Earle saued him selfe with∣in Brudges, after the ouerthrowe of his ar∣mie. And when Brudges was taken, he hid himself in the house of a poore woman, which bestowed him in a garret vnder a little couch, vpon the which hir yong children were layde to sleepe. The next morning he founde the
meanes to steale out of the towne secretly, disguised in a Costerdmongers apparell, wherwith he gat into Lisle, where he taryed in safetie. But after that time neuer ly∣ued peaceably in his countrey, for whereas before he had but only the Gauntois agaynst him, (whiche hee might easily by gentle meanes, haue brought vnder his obeysante:) he was after that banded agaynst by all the whole countrey. Roboam Kyng of Israell, 3. Re. cap.. 12. a Prince euill aduised (althoughe he were the sonne of Sa∣lomon a wise father.) Woulde needes put vpon his people greater tributes and sub∣sidies, than euer his sayde father dyd. The people opening to him their griefes, by way of complayntes, shewed them selues vnable to sustayne so great charges. Wherevpon Roboam brought the matter to his coun∣sell, to the ende they myght determine what best therein was to be done. The olde and sage Counsellours were of opinion, that his best was to graunt to his subiectes their de∣maunde, in not augmenting of their im∣postes, wherethrough he might at his newe comming to the Crowne, winne the hearts
of his people, to the rendring of their obedi∣ence and franke good wil to hys seruice. The counsellours whiche were yong (as well in iudgement as in yeeres, and suche as at this day there are too many of,) were of ye contrary opiniō, saying, that it was not mete for a kyng to graunt the people their willes, by doing whereof (sayde they) he shoulde re∣ceyue lawe of them to whome he ought to gyue lawe, and subiecte him selfe to them that ought to be subiecte to him: but rather, that he ought to make them knowe hym for their Prince and soueraigne Lorde, whose office was to commaunde, and theirs abso∣lutely to obey. Roboam folowing this opinion, woulde needs lay great taxes and impositions on his people, by reason whereof the most part of them (that is to say) tenne partes of twelue, rebelled against him, and raysed for their Kyng one Ieroboam. Wherevpon the sayd Roboam prepared an armie of 80000. men, for the repressing of those rebelles, wherein he lost both his labour and time, for Ierobo∣am continued King in peace. And from that time forth, that kingdome remained deuided
in two: Philip de Cō∣mnies lib. 1. cap. 3. King Lewes the eleuenth (as fine & subtil a prince as euer was in Fraunce) at his comming to the crowne gouerned him selfe very yll, in displacing and hindering of ma∣ny good and ancient seruitours, that had don great seruice to Charles the seuenth his father, in the recouering of his realme, the most part whereof, the Englishmen long time enioy∣ed. Wherewith the nobles being disconten∣ted, raysed against their sayde king a ciuill warre, which they called the commō welth. To them many townes and commonalties also adioyned them selues, by reason of the great impostes that the king put vpon them. But the wise king (knowing his faulte) sought all the meanes possible for the appea∣sing of that warre, therein folowing the ad∣uice and councell of his good friend Fraunces Sforze the Duke of Millaine, which councel∣led him for ye obtaining of peace, to deny no∣thing of their demaundes. And in deede by graunting their requests, he appeased those ci∣uil warres, and was al his life after serued of those noblemen & gentlemen, yt were against him in the same, towards whom he neuer re∣serued so much as any desire of reuēgement.
It may be sayd, that what the king did here∣in, was done vpon policie. But howe so euer it was done, the Frenchmen till these dayes were neuer so Italionated, as to beare malice long in their heartes. And this wise king woulde neuer hazarde his common wealth, by giuing of battell vnto his people, saying, that he would not commit his estate (which was so good and so great, as the king of a royall Realme) to the perill of so vn∣certaine a thing as a battell. And after the peace made, hee frankely confessed, that hee sawe him selfe in great perill of loosing his kingdome, and had determined in his mynd, to haue saued him selfe at Millaine, or else amongst the Switzers, if Paris had not helde with him, but bene wonne and possessed by his aduersaries. Froissart lib. Edwarde the seconde of that name King of Englande, for the plea∣sure of Hugh Spencer his chiefe mynion, made warre against his subiectes, and put to death many of his Princes and nobles with∣out anye order of iustice, in so muche as Queene Isabell his wife, with his sonne and hirs (to shunne his furie and crueltie) were fayne to flee into Fraunce, who after re∣turned
agayne into Englande with hyr sayde sonne, and a small force, which she had gotten by the meanes of a meane Gentle∣man called syr Iohn of Henawd, brother to the Earle of Henawd. And being aryued in Englande, founde all the people readie at hir commaundement, as those that had taken a great displeasure agaynst the King, by reason of his crueltie: So as she besieged hir sayde husbande, tooke him prysoner, and bestowed him in the Tower of London. Then caused she all the estates of the realme to be assembled, by whome Kyng Edward the seconde (for his crueltie committed a∣gaynst his nobilitie) was founde and pro∣nounced vnworthy to be Kyng any longer, and so was depriued of his dignitie. And whyle he was yet aliue, and prysoner in the sayde Tower of London, the sayde estates crowned his sonne Edwarde the thyrde their Kyng, of whome I haue spoken afore, and shewed that he did the like to his mo∣ther. Dionis. Hal. 4. &. 5. Tarquine the proud a King of the Ro∣manes, was by his people driuē out of Rome, as well for his gouerning ouer proudly, as for suffering his sonne to violate a woman
of honour named Lucrecia, and being thence banished, he sent his embassadours thither for the procuring of his peace, and restablishe∣ment of his estate: many gaue their consents to restore him, and had he proceeded in gen∣tle and tractable maner, there had bene great likelyhoode of the recouerie of his kingdome. But being vnable to maister his own pride, he gathered together as many as he coulde get to take his part, and with Porsena kyng of the Hetrurians (whome he raysed vp to ayde him) made warre againste the Ro∣manes. This war procured him such hatred of the Romanes which hadde bene his sub∣iectes, as they would neuer after returne vn∣der his obeysance: in so much as both he and all his posteritie were depriued from off the kingdome, and the estate of that Monarchie changed into a publike state. And from that time forth the name of King was deadly hated and abhorred among the Romanes. And no maruell though the name of King were so sore hated of the Romanes for one mans faulte, that euen when the same state returned againe to a Monarchie vnder Iuli∣us Caesar, neither he nor his successours wold
be called kings, but Emperours. For it hath happened so to dyuers other names. The name of Tyrant, which at this day soundeth so yll, and is of euerie man hated, was a∣mongst our Elders an honourable name, & signified none other thing but lord, insomuch yt Virgil whose onely drift in his Aeneiads, Virgil Eneid lib. 7. was to aduaunce the godlynesse & vertue of his Aeneas, calleth him Tyrant. Likewise ye name of Iudas (which signifieth a Confes∣sour,) was in times past reputed honourable, and yet by reason of one mans faulte, it is nowe taken for a traytour. And before the Emperour Neroes time, this name Neron (which in the olde Sabin tong signifieth no∣ble) was esteemed as a glorious name, espe∣cially after the days of Claudius Nero, which ouercame Asdrubal Hannibals brother, & his 50000. men: but for the offences of one only man, the same is now taken for a tyrant. So much may the wickednesse of one man do, to ye vtter defacing of a faire & honorable name for euer. God graūt that the vices of some of vs frenchmē, do not bespot ye name of Frēch∣man, which hath heretofore bin esteemed and honored throughout al ye world: which thing I am sore afeard of, if we mend not ye soner:
for alreadie in Germanie, they cal al french∣men indifferently Schelmes. Continuing our examples, I will recite you one which is the more to be noted, for that it was done by the way of iustice. After the death of the great Herode king of Iudea, Samaria, Galile, and Idumea, As Iosephus De bello Iud. lib. 18. cap. 1. 2. 3. there arose a strife and contention betweene Ar∣chelaus and Herodes Antipas his sonnes. Archelaus would needs make wars against his subiectes, vpon a verie slyght occasion, in suche wise, as for the giuing of one blowe, he caused three thousand persons to be slaine by his horsemen, whome he made to trauerse and runne through the whole assembly of his people. Wherevpon his brother Antipas sped him strayght vnto Rome, where before Augustus Caesar he accused Archelaus, for at that time welneere all the Kings of the world were subiect to ye Romane Em∣pire. The Iewes also sente from Iudea to Rome, fiftie Ambassadours, to accuse hym before Augustus, and to shewe how vnwor∣thy he was to raigne, that had vpon his peo∣ple committed suche crueltie: and that also there was no better curtesie to be loked for
at his handes, that woulde so soone after the death of his father (and immediatly vpō hys entrie) commit actes so cruell and vnnatu∣rall. In consideration wherof they besought Augustus to gyue them rather Antipas for their King. Augustus Caesar tooke knowlege of this matter, neuerthelesse, for that hee bare some fauour and friendship to Archelaus: be confirmed his succession in Iudea, Samaria, & Idumea, and assigned Galile to Antipas. But therewith hee exhorted Archelaus to the go∣uerning of him selfe thencefoorth more mild∣ly and gently towards his subiects. Arche∣laus returning into his coūtrey with so good speede at Augustus hande, behaued him selfe there, more cruelly than before. Wherevpon hee was agayne accused at Rome, and there condemned by the Senate, to whome Au∣gustus had referred the examination of the matter, in somuche that all his goodes were confiscate to the Emperour by sentence of the Senate, and hee him selfe was banished to Vienna in Dauphine, there to ende hys dayes, as he miserably did. After this iudge∣ment, Iudea, Samaria and Idumea, were ru∣led by suche gouernours as the Emperour
did establishe, as by Coponius and Annius Rufus in the raigne of Augustus Caesar, and by Valerius Gratus, and Pontius Pilate (that cruell man, whiche iudged our Sauiour to death) during the dayes of Tiberius. The conclusion is, that Archelaus for his warring and ouerrigorous dealing with hys sub∣iectes, miserably ended his dayes, and was the causer of the alteration of the state of hys countrie. Vpon this matter of alteration of states, I say by the way, that it hath of∣ten fallen out, and still dothe, that when Monarchies haue bin excessiuely corrupted with vice, they haue bin changed into com∣mon weales: and likewise when the com∣mon weales haue once bin corrupted, they also haue bin changed into Monarchies and kingdomes. The example heereof was seene in the nation of the Iewes, at whose beginning euen from the tyme of Moyses and Iosua, that people was gouerned in the fourme of a Monarchie (for those two were as chiefe gouernours one after another.) Afterwarde in the time of the Iudges was the same state chaunged to the fourme of a common weale, for the people were gouer∣ned
by a chosen number of auncients (except in time of warre when God alwayes raysed vp to them a Captayne (which they called their iudge.) But againe in the dayes of Sa∣muell it altered from a common wealth to a Monarchie, at whiche time Saul was cho∣sen King. After that, in the time of the Ma∣chabees, it was changed from a Monarchie to a popular state, howbeit, that to say the truth, it was a confused state, whiche had no manner of forme of good gouernement, and yet afterwarde it returned to the manner of a Monarchie in ye raign of Herode ye great, and was lastly put into the forme of a pro∣uince vnder ye Romane Empire. Likewise ye estate of ye Romanes was gouerned as a Monarchie frō the raigne of Romulus till ye time of Tarquine the proud, whose pride and euill gouernemente was the cause that the same state was changed into the forme of a common wealth. In that state ye Romanes continued vnto the dayes of Iulius Caesar, at which time it was so corrupted with riot, a∣uarice, & ambition (whereof the ciuil warres betweene Scilla and Marius, and betweene Caesar and Pompei may be a witnesse,) that it could not but alter and come agayne to a
Monarchie. Since ye which time that great Romane Monarchie hathe bene piteously wasted by the euill gouernmentes of many Emperours. And of the wast of the same, haue bin erected many common wealthes and great kingdomes, as Fraunce, Spayne, Englande, and other greater and smaller Monarchies. To bee shorte, these chaunges haue bene seene in the state of the Romane Empire, in lesse than .1500 yeare. Cesar de bel∣lo gall. lib. 1 cap. 13. France be∣fore the time of Iulius Caesar stood in the state of small common wealthes, which gouerned themselues apart the one by the other, by cō∣federations that they had together to reuēge them vpon strangers, as the Cantons do at this day. But ambition made them bandie, and make warre eache agaynste other, to proue whiche shoulde be the greatest. Of whome, when they of Autun had gotten the vpper hand as the stronger, those of Sequa∣nois their neighbours, feeling them selues the weaker, called the Almaines to their suc∣cors against them of Autun. The Almaines comming downe vnder the conduct of Ari∣onistus, serued them and occupied a good part of the countrie Sequanois for their wa∣ges.
They of Autun on the other syde de∣manded succor of the Romanes: wherevppon Caesar came into France, and vnder the co∣lour to succour them of Autun, and to chace Arionistus from the countrie that he occupi∣ed: he wonne to himselfe the whole countrie of France. So as it may truely be sayd, that that change of the Frenche state happened through the diuision that then was in Frāce, without the which deuision, Caesar had neuer vanquished them (what Caesar soeuer he had bin.) And truely we see by the histories, that alwayes till then, the Frenchmen had well canuassed the Romanes, yea and taken and burned Rome. In somuch that (as sayth Sa∣lust) Salust de bel∣lo Iugurthino the Romanes so feared them, that al∣wayes when they hearde the Frenche (to be in armes, yong, and old, priestes, and lay∣men, none excepted or excused amongst thē) were commaunded to arme them. Yea, they would openly confesse, that against all other nations they warred for the gaining of ho∣nor and glory, but ageinst the French men, for the preseruation of their liues. But Cae∣sar finding them in deuision, added oyle to the flame of their furie, partly by whiche po∣licie,
and partly by his valiancie he set vppon them, and ouercame them, changed their state from sundry common wealthes, to one only Monarchie. Plutarch in Caesare. Yea, thus muche more hee did, that as with the Romane power, he vā∣quished the Frenchmen, so with the French mens money, he obteyned ye Romane Em∣pire (another very good policie) for with the money that he gate in Fraunce, he corrupted the chiefe of Rome, through the fauour of whome, he was chosen Dictatour perpetual, which is as much to say as Monarch of the Romanes. So was the Realme of France by Caesar vnited to the Romane Empire, from the whiche they often after soughte to cutte them selues off, as in the ende they did. In the tyme of the Emperour Tiberius, Cor. Tacitus Annal. one Iulius Sacrouir of Autun made parte of Fraunce to reuolt, raysing certayne small assemblies secretely in the Townes, and exhorting the people, no longer to suffer neyther the continuaunce of the tributes (wherewith the Emperour oppressed them) nor the pride and crueltie wherewith the Magistrates (sente thyther from Rome) o∣uerburdened them. Also they reuolted vnder
the Emperour Nero, as well for his greate crueltie, as for his ouercharging them wyth greate paymentes of money (by mee before spoken of.) Lykewise vnder the Empe∣rour Gallien for hys greate riot and whore∣dome, Trel. Pollio in Gallienno. as before I haue touched. For the Frenchmen (sayeth Pollio) were in those dayes of suche disposition, as they coulde not abide a vicious Prince. And agayne, after they reuolted from the Emperoures, Probus, Dioclesian, and others, tyll they hadde quite cut off them selues agayne from the Empyre, and politiquely broughte their countrie into a self settled Monarchie, the which the Lord long mayntayne. Who soeuer woulde take vppon him the discouering of the infinite number of ex∣amples, whiche touche the alterations that haue happened in publique estates, from Monarchies into common weales, and from common weales into Monarchies (when corruption hadde once caughte them) shoulde neuer make an ende: but to mee it suffiseth to haue touched these fewe, to the ende that youre Maiestie by youre wisedome myghte prouide, that
the corruptions, whiche are nowe crept into France, and are dayly like to creepe further, bring not with them a change to the state (which God forbid.) For truely there is no∣thing that more foresheweth the alteration of an estate, than when corruption is seene to spread ouer farre into it. I knowe well that men can not be without faultes, neyther can Monarchies, nor common wealthes, bee so gouerned, as there may not in the gouerne∣ment be found matter of reproofe, but when al things in the fame are to be seene turned ye vpside downe, when vice is made vertue, and vertue made vice, when good men are ha∣ted, and euill men aduanced: in summe, whē corruption hath recouered the highest degree that it may reache to: then may it well bee sayd, (according as men do see continually) that an exchange of state approcheth. Wher∣withall is to be noted, that by the ordinarie course of worldly things, no one state can endure for euer. And syr, seeing that your kingdome hath endured this twelue hun∣dreth yeeres and more, you ought so muche the rather to feare, least in the state thereof, some alteration shoulde happen. And if in
Iulius Caesars time the strangers drawen in∣to Fraunce coulde fynde the way to winne the same: it is not to bee doubted but if it may lye in their power they will nowe doe the lyke. The Frenchmen, when they sawe the euill dealing of Caesar, repented their cal∣ling him into Fraunce, but then it was too late. Let vs therefore in tyme bee war∣ned by the harmes of our auncestours, so to prouide for our safeties, as we be not ouer∣taken as were the Troyans whiche became wise, but not til after such time as they were vtterly ouerthrowen. The seconde point. HItherto I haue (I thinke) sufficientlye spoken of the firste poynte of my treatie, that is to saye, that a Prince shall not fynde profitable, his making of warres agaynste his subiects. It foloweth now, that I come to say somewhat of the seconde, whiche en∣treateth of those miseries that ciuill warres do engender, and the profit that a good peace might bryng to youre Crowne, and poore Subiects.
Of the calamities that from ciuil warres do proceede, we neede not to make any long discourse, eache seeing and feeling the same in a thousand sortes of afflictions, touchyng their persons, losse of goodes, and deathe of parents and friends, and each knoweth (that hath any iudgemente) the mischiefes thereof to be such, as wil (if they continue) bring the realme to vtter destruction. For ther is none (that seeth what we see, and knoweth what wee knowe) but may thinke, that (the ciuill warres enduring) it will happē vnto France as it happened to ye two fighting Frogges, whiche when they had fought till they were weery, were by the Kyte that came to parte them (in eache foote one) carried away. And it is not to bee doubted, but the straungers whiche to that warre encouraged vs, are as gladde to see vs togither by the eares, as was the Kyte soaring (ouer the Frogges to see them fyght, whose fyghting he meant to make a furderaunce to his pray) as they hope ours shall one daye bee to theirs, when wee shall bee vnable any longer to mayntayne warres. And therefore it is, that some on the one syde, and some on the other, to the
proceeding on both sydes, gyue so great en∣couragemente. Ah Syr (sayth one) will you lose the glorious title of most Christian King heeretofore gotten by youre aunce∣stours, through their maineteyning of the Romane Churche? Will you sir (cryeth a∣nother) suffer your Subiectes to prescribe lawes vnto you, and to bring into youre Realme a newe Religion maugre youre will? will not you perfourme the agreemēt of the holy league, whiche is to abolishe whatsoeuer in fayth is contrary to the holy Church of Rome? The Frenchmen haue a∣foretime had this honor, to haue often passed the mountaynes, and to haue made beyonde the seas many iourneyes for the defence of the catholique religion, & holy sea of Rome, and must they now lose that glory? Philip August king of France, ouerthrew the Albe∣geois his subiects, & made of thē a great slau∣ter, for yt they would haue intruded into their countrey a new kinde of Religion, which by ye executiō was put away & abolished. Why folow you not then ye exāple of ye good king your predecessour? These & such other proper deuises put forth by ye Spanyards & Popes
Pencionaries, to encourage you to the set∣ting on fire the foure corners (yea and middle parte) of your Realme. But in the meane season, none dothe saye vnto you. Sir, you spyll, and vtterly spoyle youre Realme, in making warre against your subiects, whych kind of warre, no Prince did euer finde pro∣fytable. There is none that sayth vnto you, Sir, you bring your selfe in hatred of youre neighbours the Almaines, Englishmen, Scots and Flemings, from whom in time of neede more amitie might be drawen than may ey∣ther from the Italians or Spaniardes. None dare to you say, Sir, this cause of re∣ligion is not yet so broughte out of doubte, that the gospellers be vanquished in the er∣ror of their fayth: for they presented them∣selues at Poissi, in the time of your late bro∣ther, to mainteine the poyntes of their Reli∣gion, but my maisters the Prelates, were as then at no leysure to confute them: so that whether in fayth they erre or not, is as yet vndetermined. And therefore you shoulde not be so greatly moued as to execute them before they were condemned. And touchyng the councell of Trent they say, it is as it were
a determined sentence giuen of a selfwil, and that they ought neuerthelesse to be hearde, at ye least in purging themselues of stubborne dealing, as in deede they may well doe. Be∣sides this, there are that beate downe the sayd counsell as a thing of no force, as the late master Charles of Molin a very lerned law∣yer doth, who hath taken .xxx. or fortie ex∣ceptions to the saide counsell. And there are some of opinion yt men ought to be admit∣ted to haue a writ of error against the same counsell, as wel as against a wrong iudge∣ment in the Parliament of Paris giuen vpō ye hearing of the parties. Wherefore to exe∣cute the poore gospellers & to roote them out by peremptorie iudgemēt before they be duly condemned, and their reasons and defences herd, were too wrōgful & vnreasonable dea∣ling, seeing that ouerhastie iudgements are not vsed in lesser matters. Yea but (say they) they be rebellious and seditious, ha, that is a∣nother maner of matter. The things that I say at this present, are but to disproue the rea∣sons of such as help to kindle ye fire in Frāce vnder pretence of rooting out the enimies of the faith, for in that respect I saye, that that
point is not voyde▪ Touching that which is said that the gospellers should be rebels, they flatly denie it: put the case they  it cannot be denied but they haue these be  bin compelled by sundry greate  yet wer it no hard matter, by  to reduce them to obedience. Those which so sound ye trumpet, to pro∣uoke vs to ye warrs, & to ye staying of one a∣nother, care not much by what makes they do it, so it be don. For ye marke yt they  at, is yt we destroy ourselues with our owne proper forces, a thing to them indend, so it be done without their cost. The Spani∣ardes stande in hope to become greates, by our becomming lesse, and would gladly v∣nite Spayne with the lowe countrie. & they could (by ye gayning of France that id be∣tweene both.) And the potentates of Italy know very well, that were the Frenchmen once at rest, they would by and by vndertak some voyages thither, for ye recouerie of the realmes of Cycill, Naples, and the Dutchy o Millaine, as did the late kings of happy me∣morie Charles the eight, Lewis the twelfth, Frauncis the firste, and Henry the seconde.
They  be further the like part and no∣  the doing in as mch, not to bee  Henry ye thirde wherwith also, they sand n feare, least vnder the colour of su voages, Italy will one day be encou∣raged to crye liberty, liberty, if they shal once see suche mother King in Fraunce as was Chtes the ght. So take they pleasure to see vs at warre whilst they as lookers on lye at their ae in peace. But doth they and we (it we did wel) should more aduisedly looke to ye matter, than eyther to runne one vpō a∣nother, or to nourish ciuill diuetiōs amōgst our selues. For within little more than .80. yeeres, the Turk hath taken Constantinople from the Christians, & since he neuer ceassed ye enlarging of his limites vpō Christēdom, aswel wt the Iland of Rhodes & Cipres, as in ye land of Hungary & other places. And di∣ring our deuisiōs, he worketh his aduātage, wherof may beare good witnes the prises by him of late taken at the Goletta & at Tunis, wt the ouerthrow of the Spanyardes, wher∣through he hath made open the passages for ye enbarquing of himselfe at his pleasure, ey∣ther into Spayne, Cicill, Italy, Marcelles or Narbone, without any stoppe or stay. And
might he once enter into Italy (as god forbid he shuld) it were greatly to be feared that he woulde make him selfe Pope, with a shorte roabe. Wherefore holye Saint Peeter might do wel to looke to his own busines, & rather to solicite matter of peace to ye Chri∣stiās, thā to mayntayn in Fraunce such ciuill warres as is lyke to consume the strength of that Realm, which might in time to come be a necessary neighbour for Italies defēce. But are not wee maruelously blinded in our passions? For those my masters the po∣tentates of Italie which haue their factours in Frāce of great credit, are ye chiefe means, that we with ciuill warres are entertayned, taking pleasure to see vs buckle togither, no more nor lesse than did the auntiente Ro∣manes, when in their theatres they sawe the sword players kill the one the other. This was a kind of pastime accustomed to be she∣wed to the people, who tooke greate pleasure to behold such cruel spectacles (so full of im∣piety they wer) & euer accustomed to ye shed∣ding of bloud. And truly we Frenchmē are now become ye right successors to those aun∣tient Romanes (successors I say to their vi∣ces
not their vertues) in ye vsing our slaugh∣ters & desperate skyrmishes as sportes & pa∣stimes to please thē withall. I will not say holy S. Peter himselfe reioiceth in the effu∣sion of french bloud, for yt were an errour in ye fayth of holy church, after whom we must beleeue yt it can doe, speake, nor thinke any thing yt is euil: but what was his meaning, in making in Rome so greate bonefiers for ioye, and iolly generall processions in ye yere 1572. in September, vpon the ariuall of the newes of the Bartholmew conspiracie? To conclude vpon this poynt, certaine it is, that our ciuill warres (if they continue,) will bring muche pleasure and pastime to strangers (and it may be, much profite to) but not without our preiudice and vtter destruc∣tion. For what other may we looke for, than that those of vs which shall happen to escape the sworde (be they Catholikes, be they Gos∣pellers) shal not escape famine and those that escape famine, it may be, shall not escape the hande of the strange enimie, to whome they must then become seruants and slaues. Then will they lament those deade in the warres, wishing for death and can not dye. Besides
this syr, your Maiestie can not looke after ought else, than reuolts, rebelloins disobedi∣ences, hatred of subiects, and lastly, the vt∣ter ruine and ouerthrowe of your estate, (whiche God forbid.) And whylest these mischiefes are in hand (and before the storme come) you shal reape none other fruites than displeasures, heauinesse, despites, angers, treasons, troubles, and suche like that may hinder the health of your person, wherewith also ye must taste part of the peoples pouer∣tie, that will not or can not so fully furnishe you with money, as the necessitie of your case shall require. Otherwise, is there not occasion to feare some perticular daunger? Childerick kyng of Fraunce, for hauing onely offended a meane Gentleman named Bandille, whome he caused to be scourged, was slayne in am∣bush by him. What became of it? Bandille was not somuch as once serched for by Chil∣dericks successor, and as touching the fact, it was esteemed as a thing well done, in re∣uenging such an iniurie. And the gentleman was for that deede commended by the histo∣rians, as he was also of Ronsard, where he speaketh of the king Childerick, thus:
The King vnable for to rule him selfe through heate of wrath. The valiant Knight syr Bandil to a post last tyed hath In publike place, and causing him starke naked to be stript, From top to toe most cruelly with passing rage him whipt. Now Bandil stout and fierce of minde, conceyuing more disdayne Of so outrageous villanie, than passing for the payne: And feeding in his pensiue hart on purpose to requite, Will wisely for a time let slip the wreaking of that spite. But afterward (the shamefulnesse so sore his hart doth sting) He burning in disdaine and rage against the cruell king. And hauing no regard at all of scepter, crowne, or state, Will pay him home his hastie mode with stroke of blouddy fate: His hart will neuer be at rest vntill his hand haue shed His lord and maisters bloud, and wrought reuengement on his head. And is it not to be presumed, that there be at this day a thousād Bandils, which feel thē as much offēded as he did, your maiestie per∣seuering in the taking away of their goods
and liues? And shall ye not as readily finde Ronsards to prayse and set them forwarde in such enterprises? Be there not nowe also Magiciens that can torment (and by little & little) consume a body by his image or coū∣terfait, as well as were in the time of Valens and Valentinian the Emperours? Yes, this worlde is at this day more poysoned with Magitiens, Enchauntours, and Sorcerers, than it was these fiue hundred yeeres past. But these Hugonots (will some say) be of too good conscience, to vse those kynde of people. I answere therevnto, that there be of diuers sortes, some haue a right good conscience, and some none at all. There be wise, there be foo∣lish: there be sufferers, & there be reuengers: but moe without comparison out of order, than reformed. And be there not numbers also of Catholikes not contented: and of A∣theists not satisfied: which will make small scruple, to employ those Magiciens in re∣uenging of them selues? But to encounter with those enterprises, you shall do well sir to take councell of that gentle prince Arnus, sonne to Porsena King of the Hetrurians. Porsena in the quarell of another (that is to
say) to maynteine the tyrannie of Tarquin the proude, vndertooke the warres against the Romanes: who seeing this King to make them warre, for a thing that nothing touched him, tooke the matter verie haynously, in so much as there was founde amongst them, three hundred Gentlemen whiche conspired to goe in counterfet apparell, to King Por∣senas campe, to the ende there to kyll him. Q. Mutius was one of the conspirators, who being come inot the saide campe, & seing one of the kings seruantes set in a chayre brauely furnished (taking him for the king him self,) killed him with the stroke of a dagger: ha∣uing giuen this blow, he was taken and ca∣ried to the king, who demaunded of him for what cause he had so slayne his seruant: to whome Mutius wyth a greate courage (putting his hande into the fire that then presently there burned) answered after this manner. This is the hande that committed the faulte in killing thy seruant, where I ment to kyll thee, and therefore it is reason it suffer the payne due to such desert. Hereat was none more abashed than Poisena him selfe, who seeing the magnanimitie of this
iolly yong gentleman, commaunded him to be set at libertie. Mutius who looked for none other than death, seeing the Kyngs noble disposition, sayde vnto him: Sir, for as much as thou hast towardes me vsed a farre greater clemencie, thā I could in any respect haue looked for, I wil in recōpence of yt thy goodnesse, do thee truly to vnderstand; yt there are of vs .300. Romane Gentlemen, which haue conspired thy death, for the preuenting wherof, it shal be good that thy guard haue a good eye vnto thee. Porsena vpon those words more astonyed than before, caused an assem∣bly of his councell to consult what guarde he might best entertayne, for the keeping of him from those conspiratours. Amongst whome the gentle Prince Arnus his sonne, was of opinion that he was not so muche to consider of, what guard he shuld vse, as he was to prouide for his hauing no neede of a guard. Then his father asked hym how that myght be done: in making (sayth he) the Ro∣manes of enimies to become your friendes, which you may, and were best to doe, if you make more account of your life, than ye do of the maintenance of Tarquins wicked cause. The King beleeued his sonne, made peace
with the Romanes, and departed in safetie. A number of other miseries and calami∣ties that hang on ciuill warres, myght heere be discouered, whereof when I thinke, me semeth to see a Chimere or other hideous monster, accompanyed with all the euils, mischieses, and miseries that are in earth, sea, or hell, whereof (as of a detestable thing) it grieueth me to speake, or once to thinke: neyther woulde I serue as a Nosterdame to our poore Realme of Fraunce, in the fore∣shewing of those calamities and desolati∣ons, whiche dayly doe threaten vs (if oure sayde ciuill warres continue) but had ra∣ther to stande as a Ionas, in praying vnto God for his dealing towardes vs, as hee dealt towardes that great citie Niniuie, from whome for one amendment, he turned away the destruction before threatned vnto them. we haue already endured miserie inough, both to make vs wise, and to prouoke vs to amendment: if neither wisdome nor amend∣ment haue folowed thereof, let it nowe doe: It is better late than neuer. I wil herevnto adde (as it were in ye dete∣statiō of war) a sentence of the great Empe∣rours Augustus Caesar, worthy by al princes
to be noted. That good Prince was wont to say, that warres should neuer be taken in hande, but where hope maketh more shewe of profit, than feare can do of losse: meaning, where victorie may bring great profite, and vanquishment small losse: for those (sayth he) which will seeke small profite, and hazarde therefore great losse, may well be likened to him that fisheth with a hooke of golde, which broken off and caryed away, bringeth more losse to the fisher, than much fishe can recom∣pence. Let vs a little consider I pray you sir, what aduantage may growe to you by van∣quishing all the Gospellers? is it the cha∣sing of the Religion quite out of youre realme? Let it be so, yet can you not for all that so chase it out of the worlde, but that it may after your time returne agayne into Fraunce. And before ye attayne to that smal profite, ye are like inough to lose (what of your nobles and of your commons) an infi∣nite number of Catholikes, as the late king your brother, in his warres late passed (the more is the pitie) hath done. For let it be counted a small losse, the losing of so many braue Gospellers, as the curteous and right
noble Lewes of Burbon, Prince of Conde, the valiaunt Dandalot, the wise Admirall, the good Count Rochfoucault, the honest Te∣ligni, the braue captaines Bruoquemauds fa∣ther and sonne, Pilles, Monius, the Pardil∣lans, with a number of like other. Yea let the Bartholmewe iourney be reckoned for a braue politike exployre (although the Gos∣pellers so confesseth not) but doe rather in their Almanackes macke that feaste wyth blackt tes, in token of heauynesse, sorow, and blot euerlasting. Where me thinkes if rather deserued to haue dwelte in red let∣ters, in remembrance, that the same day all Fraunce was dyed red, wyth the bloude of hir childrē. And though nothing else (I say) were to be weyghed, the losse of so many notable Gospellers: yet is it nothing to haue soft so many valiāt and noble Catholiques? Is it little to haue lost Fraunces of Lorraine Duke of Guise, great maister of Fraunce? (verily a good and valiant Captaine, and an alter Charles Martel, which Ronsard thus writeth of.) Among the frenchmē Martell raignes with fame, As king of kings, though not a king in name.
Is it nothing to haue lost the good  d'Aumale his brother, the lustie Count Bri∣sooke, the curteous Count Martignes, wyth a greate number of other, wherethrough there remayneth at this day fewe good soul∣diers in Fraunce, (the nobilitie thereof being also well next extincte, through these in the ciuill warres: yea but some maister  maye chaunce to say, that the nobilitie may sone be renued, for the Kyng hath ¦wer of villaines to make noble men.  confesse that your Maiestie of ignoble  make noble, so farre foorth as to the inioying of the priviledges of nobilitie, and  aduaudment of the persons to great estat and preheminence: but I beleeue not th a Kyng of a Clowne or base artificer,  make a noble Gentleman, no  of a Bzarde or Kestrell can be made  Hawke. Nobilitie must from nobl ¦ture naturally proceede. And it can  be denyed, but there is commonly  apparance of generositie, in suche as  descended of nobilitie, than in fu  lineally proceeded from parentes of mea degree. For as sayth Ho.
Each breedes his like the Bull a Bull, the warlike horse, a horse: The cruell Eagle breedeth not Doue deuoyd of force. Yet will I not altogether deny, but some issued out of the meane places, become hono∣rable personages, and are replete with noble∣nesse, vertue, and knowledge, but those are verie rare. And therefore they that to encou∣rage you to the prosecuting of the warres a∣gainst your fithes, say, ye may all newe make nobilitie: speake bothe without rea∣son and good consideration, and there suche speaches are odious. But again to returne to Augustus Caesar. It is certaine that in the ciuill warres, as the gaine to be gotten by the vanquishing of the gospellers can (at the best hand) be, but smal: so may the losse to growe thereby, be (at the w hand very great, euen to the daunge∣ring of the state, if it should so fal out, that ye  with good policie) should bounde vpperood: And yt is a thing not altogether impossible, though your Ma∣iestie to your late brother haue hitherto had ye  for ye wars are iable, & ye aduētures
of the same daungerous, so as he that lo∣seth this day, is commonly a winner to mo∣rowe. The Beniamires after the ouercom∣ming of their aduersaries in two seuerall battelles, were in the thirde, of the same ad∣uersaries ouercome. And I woulde verie fayne aske of those yt counselled you to the besieging of Pouzin, and Graue, howe well they vnderstoode that saying of Augustus: was not that the right fyshing with a hooke of golde broken off and lost? cost not those two peeces fiftie tymes more than they were worth? neyther Pou∣zin nor Graue, with al their reuenues, goods, men, women, and children, being solde to the vttermost farthing, shall euer be so muche worth. Now coming to entreate of ye good∣nesse of this peace, alas my desire to see it well stablished in Fraunce, doth so rauishe me, as I knowe not at which ende thereof to begin: willingly would I prognosticate, that like honor and glory should happen vn∣to your Maiestie (if the Lorde were so plea∣sed) as in time past hapned to Augustus Cae∣sar, who after the ciuill warres were ceased in the Romane Empire (wherein him selfe
had bene a partie) stablished throughout the same a perfect, good, and sure peace, & there∣with setled the people in rest and tranquilli∣tie. Wel, I wil in hope of good hap that may folowe my happy desire, write this verse whiche Horace song in the honour of Au∣gustus, and so apply it to your Maiestie. AS I the deeds of Mars, did mynde in meetre for to bri And of his prayses to my harpe a dittie for to sing, Apollo did by wordes expresse, commaund me for to ceas And for to turne my note, to sing of glad and ioyfull peace: Which thou king Henrie, shouldst in France establish, so as Of corne & wine & all good fruits, should plentie haue by the Thou, thou art he, I say, that shal the golden age renue, By meanes wherof, immortal fame shal vnto thee insue. The doores of Ianus thou shalt shut: the terror of thy mace All euill and vngracious deeds by holy lawes shall chace. And vnder thee all holesome artes shall flourish new agein Which in the east shal spred abroad the honor that doth reig Within thy royal Maiestie. So daunted Mar shall be, In Henries reigne, that ciuill warres we neuer more shal se There shall no warre nor trouble be, in field nor yet in tow His power the frenchmē shal cōpell, their choller to lay dow Which draue them to such miseries. Al quarters of this lan Shall humbly and obediently submit them to his hande. Ther shal be neither great nor smal yt dare once break his he To heauen we shall aduance his praise in quiet peace and re Beseching God to graunt the house of Valoys to reteine The royal mace eternally, for aye in Fraunce to reigne.
Many are the commodities sir, that a good peace might bring to your people, which are (as it were) the husbands & traders by whose meanes your realme might become plentiful in corne, wine, siluer, gold, and al other need∣ful, pleasant, and profitable things: & thereby (thinke I) your state royall should be great∣ly augmented. For the chiefe part of a prin∣ces greatnesse, is the prosperitie and wealth of his subiectes (who bring poore, their prince can not be riche,) nexte the whiche a Princes force dependeth vpon his peoples willing obedience, but that render they not so wil∣lingly, when they are oppressed with warrs, and want wherewith to furnishe them, as when they are maynteined in peace, and by their tillage & traffike, haue those wantes supplyed. And surely the money that mainteyneth these vnhappy warres, employed vpon the entertaynment of straungers, and liberal∣ly bestowed vppon the well affected to∣wardes you, woulde purchase you no small strength. And might the Polonians once vnder∣stand, that your Maiestie had established a
perfecte good peace in Fraunce, to the con∣tentment of the professours of both the re∣ligions: as it is not to be doubted, but they woulde yeelde you muche the more affection and obedience: so is it to bee feared, if it should otherwyse fall out, that they wil pro∣uide them of some other king. And somuch the rather for that their late king Sigismond, did alwayes maynteine them, not onely in good peace, but also in the exercise of bothe the religious, the altering of their libertie wherein, can not but be to them a thing both newe and troublesome. The Almaines also (which amongst them selues for Religion haue had great warres, and by whose harmes we might learne, that force and violence, hath not power to com∣maund the conscience, (the guiding whereof is to be lefte to God onely) are people that woulde greatly esteeme of you syr, if once they vnderstoode that you had in Fraunce framed a peace to the lyking of bothe the Relygions. Yea they woulde be so glad of your neyghborhood, as ye myght and should commaunde their friendships in any necessi∣tie of war. A commoditie of no small value
considering that Almaine is the storehouse of souldiers, whereout may be leuyed armie vpon armie, without disfurnishment of the countrey, that neuer can be made barren of men of warre. And when I consider the small number of Christian Princes that liue in these dayes, wherein ye Emperour is alreadie decaying: and that the lawe of creating Emperours, called (Le bulle doree) forbiddeth the chosing of any moe than foure Emperours toge∣ther out of one house, and howe there haue bene diuers of the house of Austriche, (as Al∣bert, Frederike, Maximilian, Charles the fift, Ferdinando, and Maximilian, nowe raig∣ning) chosen one after another: Me thinkes there is no prince in the worlde, that might better aspire to the Empire than your Ma∣iestie. But to bring the same to passe, it be∣loueth you to winne the loue and fauour of the Almaines, whiche ye can no way better do, thā by ye erecting of a good peace in your realme, plausible to both religious, in ye ex∣ercise whereof, they now both gouerne & are gouerned, and haue their chamber composed of persons professing the one and the other.
True it is that bothe the sayde Religions through out all Almaigne be not vsed, by∣cause ther are not in all places people of both sortes, some place consisting of gospellers, and some of Catholiques: but in places where people of both be, both religions are exercised. If it then pleased God, that youre maiestie might come to be emperour (as that way yee might easily do) was there euer so great a king of France as you shoulde then be? mighte yee not then march from one of your Realmes to another though they bee 200. leagues asunder, still in your owne do∣minions? And (hauing the forces of Almaine at commaundement, with those of both your realmes) should there Moskouite or Turke be comparable to youre greatnesse? Some will answeare me and saye, that the Turke is a mightie and a puissant gouernour, hol∣ding vnder his obeysance, many realmes and prouinces. I frankly confesse it, but I reply therevnto as did Quintius a generall of the Romane army to the vaunting and bragging messengers of King Antiochus. This king was a great and mighty mo∣narque in the East, who lacked little of the
Turke in the enlargemēt of his dominions. His Ambassadours willing to feare thys braue Captayne Quintius, and thereby to make him retire out of Greece, (where hee was,) sayd vnto him, yt their master brought towardes him an infinite number of people, all well expert in warre, passing well ap∣poynted, and such as shot on horseback. And the more to astonishe him, they named vnto him diuers sortes of nations to be in Antio∣chus campe, some of the which this Captain Quintius had neuer heard named before (as Dahans, Elimeens, Cadusiens & suche others. Adding further that hee shoulde not haue to do with Hanniball of Carrhage, nor yet with king Philip of Macedony, but with the greatest part of Asia and Europa. Well (an∣swered Quintius) I will say vnto you, that youre talke putteth mee in minde of a Sup∣per, whiche mine host of Chalchis (a good companion) once made me. I being hys guest in the Sommer time when the wea∣ther was very hote, greatly maruelled from whence hee had gotten the sundrye sortes of venison, wherewith we were serued. Vppon which my maruelling, this good felowe (that
vaunted not as you doe) began for to laugh, confessing all those diuersities of seruices, to haue bin made of a tame swine, but dressed with varietie of sawces. Euen so (said he) all those sortes of people which you haue nowe named with diuers names, are all but Syri∣ans, for all theyr sundry names. Commyng agayne to my purpose, I say, that all those Nations vnder the Turkes obeysance, bee all but Easterlings, betweene whome and the westerne people, touching their men of warre, there is a great difference. For al the histories beare witnesse, that those of the West, with their small numbers haue al∣wayes vanquished them of the East with their greate numbers, as appeareth by the warrs which the Romanes haue made thē. If it bee replyed to me that the Turkes bee at thys daye more valiaunt, than were the auncient nations of the east, as being issued out of the warlike nations, inhabiting the South, I wil therevnto answeare, and that by two reasons. The one is, yt how warlike soeuer the Turkes are supposed to be: they haue by ye Frēch oft times bin vāquished, as in the voiage which they made into Leuant
vnder Godfrey of Bulloigne, when they con∣quered Greece, India, and Asia the lesse with their confines, euen to the mount Taurus. And not only so conquered those countries, but also them selues, and theyr successors raigned ouer them .26. yeeres, in the ende whereof, those successors fell in deuision and banded the one againste the other, and by that occasion they were all expulsed thence. My other reason is, that it is very likely that the Turkes since they came from the South partes to dwell in Greece, and other the East countries: are muche degenered from their naturall and firste noblenesse, as were the French that sometime went to dwel in that part of Greece, which after was called Gallo Grecia. For the firste that went thither were so braue, so valiant, and so warlike a people, as they not onely enioyed the countrie at their pleasure, but by their vertues and vali∣ances kept in awe all the kings and coūtries that were round about them, so far foorth, as they were glad to yeeld them tribute, for the enioying of their fauours. But in processe of time, that race so degenered, as Attalus a King in Asia first refused the paiment of the
tribute by his predecessors before payed, by whom (when they had long therefore assay∣led him with warre,) they were in the ende ouercome: and after that they became euery daye more cowardly than other, so as they were againe vanquished by the Romanes vnder the conduct of Captayn Manlius. And what should let your maiestie from doyng as much as did sometime those of the Frēch nation, vnder the conduct of that gētle God∣frey of Bulloigne? Seeing that the people of that countrie (namely the Greekes,) desire nothing more than their cutting off from their obediēce to the Turke, which is a bar∣barous tyrant, enimie to all lawes, godly∣nesse, knowledge, yea & to learning, where∣of that countrie of Greece was wont to bee the nourishing mother. It is also well kno∣wen, that the King of Moscouia is a very cruell tyrant, and so cruelly and barbarously reigneth ouer his subiectes, as they woulde most gladly be vnyoked from his subiecti∣on. Of other countries of Christendome I speake not, leauing for euery man of iudge∣mente to thinke, whether welneere anye thing shall be impossible to your maiestie,
hauing linked ye forces of your two realms with those of Almaine, and especially when your gouernement shall be fauourable and agreeable to youre subiectes; wherethrough also other nations will become desirous to submit them selues to your obeysance. We read that Charlemain your predeces∣sour was so wise & so good a prince, that all Italy desired him for their Lorde. And it came to passe, that (by the meanes of that good liking which the world had of him) hee was chosen Emperour. Xenophon writeth, that Cirus the greate Monarche in Leuant, was so gentle & modest in his gouernmēt y• those nations that neuer sawe (but had oney heard speaking of him,) desired to becomes his subiects, and this propertie he had, that he woulde leaue to euery nation their lawes, customes, liberties, and religions, without chaunging in the same any thing contrary to their consentes, which the Greekes called in one word Autonomie. The graunting of which, hath alwayes bin and is the very rea∣dy way to walke in for any Prince yt would either gaine any strange natiō, or winne the harts of his own subiecte. So vse Aleder
the great his conquests, contenting himselfe with the soueraigntie ouer those nations which he subdued, without altering of theyr estates, or forcing of their religions. The like whereof vsed the aunciente Romanes, when vnder their gouernment they brought any nation, for they willingly altered not ye state of the countries which they conquered, nor forced the people to the receyt of theyr lawes or religion, if they made any change, it was in diminishing the tributes for the drawing vnto them the loue of the people. and Iulius Caesar did euen so in his cōquests of Fraunce, for hee altered nothing of the states of those Cities whiche hee conquered, but vsed them with as muche curtesie and gentlenesse, as he possible might. If any ci∣tie rebelled, by gentle meanes he soughte to reduce thē vnder his obedience. And though he was oft constrayned to fetche them in by force, he vsed not (being victour) his victo∣ries cruelly, but was alwayes enclined to pardoning. To the vnfaythfull he forbare the rendring of vnfaythfulnesse, as one yt in such  woulde take no example of his aduersaries▪ And of a trueth, there was
nothing more furthered  Alexander, Cyius, the  Caesar, and suche other greate  han did the graunt of that  little care tooke the people for  resistance, when they  by be∣ing to their gue  submitted, they cases shoulde rather be much , shall any whit appied. The Switch  day with muche  entreat their subiects, saying;  strōger castels nor more , than those shal bee builded within the hands of the subiects. Who so woulde take vpon him the ∣rring at large of the greate benefites, that a good peace would bring to your crowne and poore subiects, might find mat  to fill a great volume: but I shall contente mee with what before is saide, adding only thys vnto it, that in hauing a good peace, ye shall shunne all the mischiefes and miseries that warres alwayes bring with them & though there grewe therevpon none other commo∣ditie, yet were the same alone sufficiente to moue you to the procuring of peace. Whych
grace foke,  of youro  to the  of  people. The  God  you  happy  Augustus, which  the  and  warres,  good and perd peace throughout the Empire of Romes The thirde poynt. resteth nowe that I ate vppon the  point, of the which I say, that it i not so muche impossible to establis a good  in  as many iudge it to be for the better . I will first answer to the difficulties whiche therein are alled∣ged. It is sayde that a peace cannot be made throughout all  withoute the per∣mitting of the  of both the  a thing  bycause it holdeth the Subiectes, in alities and deision. I can tentedly confesse that pea nnot otherwise be made, but I de∣nie it to be a thing insufferable.
The Turkes by their Alcaron, are bounde to become perpetuall sworne enimies to the Christians, and to detest Iesus Christe, in denying hym to be God, to reiect the holy Trinitie, neyther may they beleeue the ho∣ly Scriptures of the Bible: and they neuer crowne Emperoure but they solemnelye sweare him to continuall warre with the Christians. All the which notwithstādyng, the Great Turke, doth suffer the Christians vnder his obeysance to enioy theyr Religi∣on, wherein (paying their tributes) they liue peaceably without controlement or mur∣mure of the people. And euery man seeth the Turquish Religion, to be much more con∣trary to the Catholiques, than is that of the Gospell. For the Gospellers acknowledge Iesus Christe for God and man, and to bee the mediatour betweene God his Father and men: they allow of the Trinitie and ho∣ly Scriptures of the Bible. Yea they agree with the Catholiques, in the Articles of the Fayth. Wherefore then shoulde these two religions bee insufferable (the Catholiques and the Turkes being togither tollerable.) The Iewish Religion was and is mch
contrary to that of the Painims, for neuer did nation so much detest images and numbers of Goddes, as dyd the Iewes, notwithstan∣ding that they haue had and yet haue: (an in∣finite number of Ceremonies perticular to them selues) and contrariwise the Paganes haue had an infinite number of Gods with their temples full of images, and their cere∣monies and traditions cleane contrary to those of the Iewes. And is there not amōgst all the nations of the Painims (as Greekes, Parthians, Medes, Elamites, Mesopotamians and generally throughout all the East and West peoples,) Sinagogues of the Iewes? Yea, and it is lawfull to the Painims (a∣mongst whome they dwell) to make them selues Iewes, after the which done, they are called by the name of Proselites. We reade also of diuers Romane Emperours, (aswel Painims as Christiās) which haue suffered ye Iews to dwel vnder ye obeysance of ye Em∣pire, as Nerua, Antonius Pius, Constantine, Theodose, Valentinian, Gratian, Honorius, Arcadius, Iustinian & other. Dion in Nerua ca∣pitolinus in An Putat C. de Iu∣deis & Ge∣lic. And at this day, ye Pope, ye Venetiās, many townes of Italy & Almaine, suffer sinagogs of ye Iewes vnder
obeysance, and yet is the Iewish Religion muche more contrarie to the Catholiques, than is that of the Gospellers. Some perad∣uenture will say, that the French men wyll not suffer any Iewes in Fraunce, but haue alwayes expulsed them. I confesse that they haue ched them away, yet not for matters of religion, but partly for their cruelties committed vpon yong children (whom they robbed from the Christians,) as the histories make mention, and especially for the hatred that they bare to their vsuries: wherevppon they yet vse this prouerbe, when any is noted for a great vsurer, He is in vsury a very Iewe. Vpon the whiche occasion also the Italians heeretofore called Lombards (whiche with their great vsuries did robbe (as still they do) the realme of the treasure) haue bin chased out of Fraunce. In the best townes whereof (yea and that in the very harte of the same where diuers streetes and places, yet beare the names of Iewries) the Iewes shuld now dwell at their ease (as well as euer they did) were there none other matter to let them than their onely religion, whiche (though it bee muche contrary to that of the Catho∣liques)
was neuer the cause of their chasing out of Fraunce, where before their expulse∣mente, they hadde dwelte many hundred yeeres. Neyther can it bee denied, that the Pay∣nims Religion is cleane contrary to that of the Catholiques, and yet haue diues Pay∣nim Emperours suffered as many as wold, to become Christians vnder them, as Nerua, Anthonius Pius, and Alexander Seuerus. Dion i Nerua. A∣pio. Lam∣pridius in Alexandro. Traian also did secretly suffer them likewise to do withoute any search made after them. And those Emperours dyd not so in respecte of any good thyng they founde in the Chri∣stian Religion, the professors whereof they beleeued to be the wickeddest people in the worlde, in somuche as among the Paynim people, the only name of Christian was de∣tested and abhorred, witnesse heereof Sue∣tonius whych called the Christians, men of a newe (and malitious) superstition. And Tacitus sayd, that the people vsed the name of Christian as a matter of mockery and derision, the professours whereof were ha∣ted bycause of their wickednesse. Wherein Suetonius and Tacitus Suetonius in Nerone Cap. 16. Ta∣citus Anna∣lium. lib. 15 shewed them selues
good courtiers, taking pleasure with lying to please the princes and the people. Pliny the seconde, though hee was a Painim as they were, and lyued in their time, durst not lye so impudently, but of the liues of the Chri∣stians, (to the Emperour Traian) rendred a good testimonie, as in his Epistles is to bee seene. Seeyng then the Painim Emperoures had so euill opinion of the christians, where∣fore suffered he them to be Christened? Euen for the benefyte of peace? The Emperours Dioclesian and Maximian did greatly per∣secute the Christians, and that of purpose, to roote them out, in whyche persecution they did to deathe an infinite number, but when they sawe theyr crueltie nothyng to paruayle (but that for euery one they kilde, ten other encreased, Maximian at the last suffered, who so woulde to become Christe∣ned, and to exercise that Religion. As much myghte bee sayde of the Christian Empe∣rours, which did as well detest the Painims Religion, as dyd the Painims that of the Chrystians, yet woulde they neuer take vp∣pon
them she constraint of their consciences, but suffered to continue Painims as many as woulde. The Historiographer Marcellinus Am. Mar∣cellinus libro. 30. wit∣nesseth, that the Emperoure Valentinian (whyche was a Christian) vsed not to mo∣lest any person, for matters of Religion, nor euer commaunded that any shoulde worship eyther this or that, with one fashi∣on or other. Likewise also the Emperours Honorius, and Theodosius, I. Christia∣nis C. de paganis. (whyche were Christians) woulde not that the Painims should be for∣ced to be Christened, but caused an expresse lawe to bee made, that none should offende them, (eyther in their persons or their goods) vnder the pretence of Religion. If then the Christians haue suffered the Painims Reli∣gion, and the Painims haue likewise suffe∣red the Religion of the Christians. Where∣fore (to winne peace) will not the Catho∣liques suffer that Religion of the Gospel∣lers? Those two religions haue bin seene (sir) to dwel peaceably togither within your realme of Poland, as also in many towns of
Almaine, and wherefore should they not as well dwell peaceably togyther in Fraunce? Are the French men more hard to be tamed, more disobediente, or more barbarous and fierce, than other nations? It appeareth cleane contrary. For vpon the Edict of Ia∣nuary, the Catholiques were not greeued at all to see the Gospellers vse the exercise of their religion, though it were somewhat newe vnto them, but liued the one with the other togither in good peace, wherein al∣so they had till this time continued, if the vnhappy execution of Vassi (which was the welspring of all our warres, and of all the miseries and mischiefes which we haue since that time suffered or yet doe suffer) had not happened. I will not denie, but the warres and acts of hostilitie, passed betweene ye one & the o∣ther, haue bredde in the hartes of men, hautie minds, & euil dispositiōs, which may be som cause, that the Catholiques will now, (more hardly thā in the beginning,) suffer to come so neere them the exercise of the Religion: and the rather, for that many esteeme the same Religion to bee the cause of all the
sayde miseries and mischiefes whiche they feare, would exceede if it shoulde againe be reestablished in Fraunce. Wherevnto I an∣swere, that the people of any good iudgemēt, are not of that opinion, as those that well knowe (and it is in deede most true), that the ambition of some, with the desire they haue to commaunde, and their greedinesse by the robberie of other to enrich them selues, haue bene and are the only causes of our troubles, and that there the name of Religion, hath bene vsed but as a cloake or a curtaine to co∣uer those pretences. For some say, they wyll not suffer in Fraunce, any other religion thā the Catholike, as the most auncient, and that hath bene receiued from time out of mynde, since the time of great king Clouis: and o∣ther some say, they will folowe the religion refourmed, that was not only before Clouis, but also before the realme of Fraunce: and that they ought not in their consciences, to be forced: vpon the which controuersie these ci∣uill warres haue bene builded, but the chiefe aduauncers of the cause haue had in their hartes another maner of zeale than of reli∣gion, as men of iudgement haue well per∣ceyued
the common people (which iudge all things rashly) for that they esteeme religion to be the cause of our warres and calamities, stande in feare that (it taking place) the olde woundes woulde breake out and bleede a∣gaine. This vulgar opinion is not much to be passed on, bycause it always readily ran∣geth to the strongest parte. But for myne owne part, I beleeue that the best part of no∣bilitie, of the commonaltie, yea of the clear∣gie, for the obtayning of peace, would easily consent that the Gospel should freely be sta∣blished in Fraunce, till such time as God (to whome onely the clearing of mans heart by the light of his truth appertayneth) myght knit vs all in one kynde of religion, whiche we are to hope that he (who is the father of knowledge and discouerer of all things) will doe, after men shall awhyle haue re∣posed them from the ciuill warres, and cast quite off th stoutnesse and hatred whiche nowe blindeth their iudgementes. There is at this present no order, bycause each to the side be standeth on, sticketh fast each  saith to him selfe, my religion is good, and I will not steppe one foote from it. For where∣fore
saith he shal I now change my faith and beliefe, seeing I haue fought and borne ar∣mes in defence of the same? Beholde the reason men make at this day, of whome ye shall haue none other matters. But if their heartes were once a little vnfraighted of their stoutnesse and malice, they shoulde all easily see, that for hauing borne armes of a∣ny side, they shoulde not forbeare to folowe the trueth, nor willingly seeke their owne damnatiō. Stāding thē at this present, wtout any order to ioyne as in one religion, euerie wise man may see, that to this point it muste come, either we must nourish wars al ye days of our life in Fraunce: or in ye same suffer the vse of both the religions, and of two necessi∣ties, the least is to be chosen. For to think that the Gospellers will be easily rooted out, and wholly dispatched away, it were a meere madnesse (the experience of xv. yeres hauing shewed vs the contrarie.) And the histories beare witnesse, that often the smaller num∣ber hath ouercome the greater, and that one thousande souldiers (brought into extreame necessitie) are many times more worth, than tenne thousande other. There is surely as
much difference betweene murther ight  the conseruation of their consciences, win children, and goods, and suche as sight onely for wages: as there is betweene that one wolfe, whiche in his den defending hir yong ones is assayled, and that other (whiche ha∣uing no yong) through the wood at pleasur is chased. Nowe, if ye must in Fraunce eyther haue your ciuill warres continued, or both religi∣ons suffered: who seeth not of the two, suche sufferances to be most expedient? Yea but (say they) neyther the people, nor the clear∣gie will therevnto agree. I knowe not their mindes nor willes, but I shall prescribe such a reasonable meane, as woulde easily I am sure; procure their consentes, and that with∣out constraynt: the meane fyr is this. Let your Maiestie commaunde that patentes be dispatched to all the communalties of your townes, and to the Chapiters and Colleges of your clergie, wherethrough they may be done to vnderstande, bowe you are destr that your realme of Fraunce, should be re∣stored to reste and peace, and that the same can not be done but by the one way of these
two, that is, eyther by warre to ouercome and cleane note out all the pretended rebels: or by giuing them peace, with the graunting to them the vse of their religion. Wherevp∣on your pleasure, is, that they deliberate in their assemblies, and of their resolute aduices adueri you, which of those two ways they finde moste expedient, without vsing in the same eyther circumstance, or any if. And let it further to them be knowne, that suche shall prosecute the warres against the sayde pre∣tended rebel at the charges of their townes, communalities, Chapiters, and Colleges:) as  most expedient the folowing of the same, from the which charge also shall be ex∣empted all he as for the hauing of peace, are willing to accept the exercise of religi∣on. And I y thinke syr, that vpon the putting foorth of such patentes, all the realme will sone be sient to encline them selues to peace, le one being glad rather to accept the exercise of that religion (yea within their chiefe and fayrest Churches) than to mayn∣teine at their charges a wte, the ende and victorie whereof is so vncertaine. For tou∣ching the first they can not deny it for a thing
verie reasonable, that those whiche woulde haue wars, should beare of wars the charge, and those desirous of peace should from such charge be free: it is a thing ordinarily vsed in the ministratiō of iustice, where they con∣demne in costes, damages, and intrestes, such as prosecute any processe to the diffinitiue sentence, and discharge thereof such as in time breake off their sute: and let it so in this case he determined, and the charges arising to the rest, will appeare no small portion. For the furnishing and entertayning of an armie of 25000. footemen, and fiue or sixe thousande horsemen, will require no lesse charge than three hundred thousande crownes a moneth, which amounteth in the yeere neare to foure Millions of gold. If any shal say that many souldiers will be found which in this warre wil serue gratis, I can not beleue it, for there are at this day both footmen & horsemē much grieued for their nonpayments. Wherefore, the best they could doe, were first to pay those arrearages. And if they say yt your ordinarie finaunces may beare some part of such char∣ges: the contrarie is well knowne, they are otherwise bestowed. For the summes
of your reuenue, are no more than sufficient to the ordinarie entertaynment of the estate of your Court, and officers of your crowne: and the money ordinarily raysed of your tarts and subsidies, doth but discharge so many Garrizons as are this daye in the Realme, whiche in all your good townes and castels, must of necessitie be entertay∣ned, else woulde the pretended rebelles with some of them be at hoste. The ordinarie treasure of your fynaunces then being other∣wise employed: it shall be necessarie, that my sayd Maisters of the townes and Chap∣ters (which are desirous of warre) wylling∣ly determine them selues to furnishe yeere∣ly vnto youre Coffers foure Millions of golde, and that thereof they make to you an estate as of an yeerely rent, not to cease in their time, for it had neede to be a greate re∣uenue that shoulde maynteyne those warres all our life. But what answere will the aforesayde maisters of the townes and Chapters make? me thinkes I heare alreadie what my mai∣sters the Parisians will answere: a sirra, let al alone, for by Saint Iohn we had rather the
Hugonots preached where they listed, than we would disburse so much money as should maynteine warres against them, and after if in the ende they should get the better hande, they woulde robbe and spoyle vs of all that we haue: and thē what gaines win we there∣by? And my maisters of Lions, what will they answere? Our traffikes (will they say) by these ciuill warres are decayed, and no∣thing is left wherewith to sustaine vs, but the stockes of our shoppes. For since the de∣cay of those Hugonots in this good towne: we haue seene nothing else but miserie and hell. There were many good men of them, that loued well the profit of this towne, and therin maynteined such a good trade of mar∣chandise, as the towne was muche the better for, and the merchantes well liked of: and were we not better to suffer them with their Religion, than to aduenture the losse of all that we haue? They of Roan, Orleans, Tho∣losa, and all other good townes of Fraunce will answere no lesse. And to be shorte, ye shall finde few of such courage, but they will stoupe to the sufferance of the exercise of the sayde religion, (both within their townes
and without) to purchase peace, for the auoy∣ding of such burthens as the charges of those warres will require. And as for my masters of the clergie, they will be somewhat loth to agree herevnto. Neuerthelesse, when they shall see them selues driuen to the disburs∣ment of so great summes, about a thing the successe whereof they shall finde doubtfull and incertaine, they will looke better about them. Herewith it may also like your Ma∣iestie to doe them to vnderstande, that if they haue such zeale to chase this newe Religion, (which they call heresie) out of the realme of Fraunce, they must shewe their sayd zeale, not only in contributing of their money, but also in folowing of the warres, by seruing in their owne proper persons. The Leuites folowed the warres: and so did the Byshoppes and Prelates of Al∣maine. The Cardinall Fernase went al∣so against the Protestantes, and why, may not the clergie of Fraunce doe the lyke? Set foorth the yong Monkes that are vnder three score yeeres, and let those that be aboue tarie at home to say their Masses. They will answere by the wordes of Dauid, Zelus do∣mus
tuae comedit me. The zeale of thine house hath eaten the vp. That is to say (say they) that the Priestes ought to keepe their houses, but vnder correction, they take that passage of the Scripture amisse, for to the keeping well of Gods house & their own, it behoueth them to passe through a number of dangers. Of truth, if these good people were but some∣what neare touched with their being set for∣warde in their furnitures, to marche in the warres: their change of countenance would sōne be seene. I would seeme to thē a strāge Metamorphosis in lieu of a surplis to put on a corslet, in place of a myter to weare a moriō or burgner, in steade of a crosse, or an holie water sprinkle, to bandle a launce, or an har∣quebouse: where these were wont to be moū∣ted vpon mules, to ride vpon barbed horses or fierce coursers, or else to trot on foote: and as they lay erst vpon their soft beds, to lodge now vpon the hard ground (yea and that at the signe of the star:) I am wel assured, that their only apprehension of so straunge an ex∣change, would driue them to yeelde euen the leauing of their Temples, to the preachers of the Gospell. Marrie it is not to be doub∣ted,
but that vpon this Marte they would be assured, that those preachers nor their prea∣chings, should be preiudiciall to their goods and reuenues (a poynt verie requisite to be a∣greed vpon.) For they haue good reason, not to consent to the forgoing of their goods, (the sale of the same being to them forbidden vnder the payne of excommunication,) and their reuenues are needefull to their sustenta∣tion of life. The wise Salomon that sendeth vs to the Ante, sheweth vs (say they) that we ought not to suffer our Garners to be emp∣tie. The argument is good: For if the small beasts (as the Antes) haue some care for what to liue by, how muche more for liuing then ought to be the care of ye great? This way sir shal not be impertinent, to make the harts of your good subiectes, to consent to the accep∣tation of peace. And if they refuse peace, you are by that meanes to enioy their money, wherewith they can no lesse doe, than furnish you to the mayntenance of the warres, that make choyce of the same: But I verily iudge, they will like best of peace, as there∣vnto moued in respecte of their profite and quietnesse.
And this poynt being gayned, that your subiectes wil agree to the exercise of both re∣ligions, for the obtaining of peace: all other meanes to bring the same to passe, shall ea∣sily be compassed. For in that the Gospellers desire a reformation of iustice: the Catho∣liques and they agree, both feeling it good to haue iustice iustly administred. And it shuld be very necessarie, that a good search and sur∣uey through your Parliamentes shoulde be made (as well of the highest as of the lowest members thereof,) among whome shoulde many be foūd napping and faultie, that haue pouled and pilled good men, to their vtter vn∣doings. I meane not the sifting of the same too neare, only the notorious and grosse offē∣ders, (for their offences) are to be touched. And such a search or suruey shuld be no new thing. We haue of the like many examples. In the time of ye Romane ciuill warres, be∣tweene Scilla and Marius, Pompei and Cae∣sar, many were dispossessed of the Senators estate, yea euen by those with whome they tooke part. For euerie of those great conten∣ders sought the mean to make many friends in the Senate.
But Augustus Caesar (after he had gotten ye goale from his competitours,) was peace∣ably possessed of the Empire, and had esta∣blished peace amōgst his subiects: he streight sought reformation of the states and offices. And a speciall tryall made he of the Senate, as thervnto had slipped by vnlawful means, purging the same of such vnworthy persons, and so restored he it to the auncient beautie and dignitie. Sueto. in Au∣gusto cap. 35. The like (sir) were needefull in your Parliaments and other places of iustice in Fraunce. For the wise and good that now be there, shall not be grieued, that the corrupt whiche are among them by vnlawfull mea∣nes entred, should be cut off, to the encrease of ye honour of such as shal remaine. Treb. Polli in Valeriano. We reade that one of the principall charges of the Cen∣sours of Rome, was the chastising and dis∣placing of the vnwise and vnworthy Sena∣tors, which were many times chastised euen for very small faultes, and what inconue∣nience were it, if at this day the office of cen∣sure were somwhat amnogst vs brought in vre? Besides these points of the exercise of the Euangelicall religion, and reformation of iustice: there be many other necessarie points
to the making and perfiting of a good peace: whiche I meane to forbeare heere to touche, as things not expedient. I wyll nowe shew the meane howe suche a peace may be con∣cluded vpon and made. For the bringing to passe wherof, it shoulde me thinkes be ve∣rie good your Maiestie dyd as your prede∣cessours haue done, when they would yeelde a rule for any good peace of iustice or policie to passe in Fraunce. Their manner was to put their truste in certayne personages that were faythfull and wyse, suche and: so many as myght suffise, to the bodye of a Coūcell to any kingly estate, for their vnder∣standing in the formalities of iustice, in the poyntes of right, and in the perticulars that in any policie were to be considered of. And if it myght likewise please youre Ma∣iestie to cōmit to a dozen (or such other lyke number of personages,) the entreatie of all the perticulars of a peace: it seemeth to be the onely waye whereby all manner of matters, doubtes, and difficulties, might be decided and resolued. But it shall (sir) be needefull, that you shewe so muche fauour to the Gos∣pellers, as they may nominate one dozen of
such persons as they shall thinke meete (pro∣uided that they be good, wil (and apte men) out of the which number, you way those sixe to be of the number of the , by you so to be deputed to entreate of the said matters. And to those twelue (by your sayde Maiestie to be chosen) it shal be requisite, that ye giue a strong and large commission, for the hea∣ring of all plaintes and griefes, and the ap∣peasing & ending of the saie, together with the deciding of all suche articles, as shall to them by the Gospellers be preferred, in suche manner as may be moste furthering to the sayd peace and the common weal: And that what so euer shall be so determined and agreed vpō, may be of like weight, force and authority, as if your self (sir) in proper person, had decided and accorded it. Which good and large commission, being gyuen to those deputies: it were requisite that a place of no side to be suspected to them, were assigned to execute that cōmission in. As this good town of Frankford (myght it please you to permit their comming thither) is free from all sus∣pition, bycause bothe the Relygions, Ca∣tholike and Euangelike are therin exercised,
yea the verie Iewes haue heere their place of safetie, if not here, at Ausburge, where both Religions are lykewise vsed, or at Strasbrough where both parties shal be wel∣come, or else in some other good town wher into may be safe & sure accesse, as wel for the commissioners, as for all suche other as shall haue with them to doe. The sayd commissi∣oners also must by your fayde Maiestie be enioyned (vpō paine for euer to be banished the realme of Fraunce) not to depart thence, till suche time as they haue fully concluded, vpon so much as shal be necessarie, to the per∣fiting of a good perpetuall peace. No more than may the Cardinall from the Conclaue when they those a Pope. Nor the electors of the Empire, when they elect an Emperour. And it behoueth that it be further ordayned, that suche of the same commissioners as dis∣cent from the rest, be bound to yelde forth in writing, the occasion or reason of their suche dissenting, to ye ende that if the treatie there∣through become ineffectuall, as well stran∣gers as those of the french nation, may iudge and knowe, in whome the default doth rest, that the peace was not concluded, and that
then the reasons of both parties be to the world put foorth and published: whereby it may be seene who is in the right or wrong, by whiche meane all the worlde shall in the end come to iudge of both parties, & so iust∣ly hate the obstinate opinion of them, that by the letting of that good peace shall tumble Fraunce afresh into the miseries of warre. And if (by the grace of God) it shall happen all the articles to be resolued, concluded, and agreed vpon, by youre sayd commissioners, and the same by both sortes in two coppies (whereof they of each religion to haue one) to be signed: Let it then please your maiestie that vnder the name and authoritie of the same, it be put foorth in fourme of a perpetu∣all Edict (without altring any iot thereof,) and that the same Edict also bee stablished, sworne, and confirmed by your selfe first, in your full priuie counsell, then by all the prin∣ces and other councellours of the same, and after by all the generall and perticular e∣states, by ye gouernours of prouinces, towns and fortes, & their Lieuetenauntes, by all the Parliamentes, places of Presidentes, Bay∣liffes, Stewards, and their Liefetenauntes,
with all other your officers: and by the Car∣dinals, Bishops, Prelates, Chapiters and Colledges of your Realme. The fourme of which oth also to be, that each promise, and sweare before God, and vpon payne of loa∣sing their honours, estates, offices, and dig∣nities, with the encurring of your displea∣sure, as infringers of your peace, and vnder the damnation of their soules (as muche as in them is) to obserue and cause to be obser∣ued without fraude or guile, all things con∣tayned in the sayde Edict, nothing therein altered, by way of moderation, declaration, or otherwise, other than suche declarations and modifications as were made by youre Edict in lyke manner and fourme as was the sayde Edict of peace. The recordes of which othes, (chiefly those of the Lordes of youre priuie counsell,) the gouernours of prouinces and townes, the Parliamentes, places of presidentes, and prouinciall estates (ioyned to the sayd Edict) togither, with the actes of publication and establishment, to be imprinted: And that the sayd oth be yere∣ly renued, and giuē to all such, as shall here∣after be enstalled in any office royall, or take
the charge of any other office in the common weale. If it might please your Maiestie to think good of this platte layde for the bringing to passe of a perfect peace to be had in Fraunce, mine opinion is, that the Gospellers woulde well like thereof, and thervnto agree, though they be full (and not without cause) of mi∣strust, suspition, and dread to be deceyued, al things welneere beeing to them suspect. And to prooue that this way carieth with it some reason, and no whit toucheth the dero∣gation of your soueraigne authoritie, expe∣rience teacheth it to be a thing almost ordi∣narie to all Kings and Princes, when they are to deale with any matters of importāce, (be it with strangers or others, or when they will make any lawes or ordinaunces tou∣chyng iustice or pollicie in theyr kingdoms, or countries) to commit the doing thereof to commissioners and legates. When the late Kyngs of Fraunce youre predecessours haue made any good ordinaunces eyther of pollicie, or for the execution of iustice, with∣in youre Realme, wherein were contay∣ned the formalitie of pleas, the order of
iudgemēts, the maner of making contracts, and many decisions of rightes taken out of the lawyers hands: it is very certaine, that they were driuen in the same to vse as com∣missaries and Legates, their chauncellours, and other meete persons chosen out of theyr Parliamentes or priuie councels, (for they them selues neuer studied in the schooles, nor proceeded Doctours of the lawes, Ciuil nor Canon, to the furtheraunce of their know∣ledges in the making of such ordinances, but trusted their good and faithful deputies) and authorised what their saide deputies founde good and profitable for the common wealth, although suche resolutions proceeded not of their owne deuices, neyther did they well vnderstand thē. But when your predecessors would cause to be set downe in writing, the customes payable within youre countries, they did the same by the seruice of deputies and legates, and suche customes as were by the saide deputies and legates assessed and written: the Princes by a lawe authorised the perpetual payment therof. And when the Romanes liked to haue lawes made to rule rightly their common wealth: they ap∣pointed
ten Legates which made a collecti∣on of all the lawes and ordinances that see∣med to them profitable or necessary, eyther for the vniuersall state, or for perticular cō∣modities. Whiche said lawes, they placed in twelue tables, and had them in as great e∣stimation, as if all the people had made, de∣cided and established them. For seeing they were made by the authoritie and commissi∣on of suche as then helde the soueraigntie, it was al one, as if they them selues had made them. When the Emperour Iustinian col∣lected the ciuill lawes into certayne vo∣lumes which he called Code è digeste (gene∣rally vsed at this day) he cōmitted ye doing thereof to Tribonian, Theophile, Dorothe, and other notable lawyers, for him selfe vn∣derstoode nothing thereof, as witnesse the Historiographers, that saye he coulde not reade, so is it very certaine that hee neuer vnderstoode the thousande part of these mat∣ters contayned in the saide Code è digeste. Yet were those bookes neuerthelesse by hym aucthorised in his allowing of that whiche his commissioners by his commaundement did. And it was neuer fayde that those Ro∣mane
people, had done any derogation to their souereigntie, in their authorising of those ten persons, to the composing of those twelue tables, nor that the Emperour Iusti∣nian, nor youre predecessours, did any whit derogate their soueraigne authoritie by de∣puting commissioners, to make lawes and ordinaunces, that passed vnder their princes names and commaundementes, who as it appeareth, alowed of what their deputies so by their commissions had done. Where∣fore me thinkes the saying may be holden for voyde, that youre maiestie may not make an Edict of peace by commissioners withoute any derogation to youre royall authoritie or soueraigntie. No more shall be any thing againste the same youre giuing to the Gospellers, the nomination of the sayde number of persons, whereout your maiestie to choose the moytie for the ioyning with the like number, by your selfe to be named and chosen as legates or deputies for the bringing to passe of thys good worke. Your predecessors haue giuen ye nomina∣tion to two or three persons, of their courtes
of Parliaments whom they would to choose for them, meete men to supplye the offices of Presidentships & counsellours roomes, that were void in ye said courtes, as they haue al∣so done to Maiors, Consuls, Shireses, and other like officers of Townes, for the choo∣sing of vnder Baylifes, vnder stewardes, & other like petie officers, yet hath it neuer the more bin said, that your saide predecessors in graunting the saide nominations to theyr subiects, haue taken ought from their autho∣ritie royall, which lieth asmuche in creatyng of magistrates, as in making of lawes (as any man of iudgemente maye both see and vnderstand.) The Pope whiche saieth hym∣selfe to haue full power ouer the giftes of benefices, leaueth the nomination of the in∣cumbent not to two or three, but to one, not to princes, but to perticular persons, whiche commonly in benefiers haue the right of no∣mination, and the presenting of such persons to ye same, as to thē semeth good, without re∣seruatiō to ye said Pope of any election, but only ye institution: and if by suffering of the same, he thought any whit to derogate, the soueraigne power and authoritie, whiche
he hath ouer the said benefites, he woulde not (I warrant you) permit any such nominati∣on. So may it playnely be seene to youre maiestie, that your authoritie royall, shall no whit bee deminished, by the graunting of your good fauour to the gospellers in ye sayd nomination. Withall is to be considered, that it were a thing vnreasonable (with youre fauour) that all the sayd Commissioners shoulde be Catholiques, for by the ordināce of the kings your predecessours (by all the fourme of iu∣stice here and else where) and by the lawes deuine, naturall and ciuil, it is lawfull for the partie to accuse his iudge suspect, be it in matter criminal, or ciuil. And a iudge may be holden for suspect, not only if he be of kin∣red, alied, or Gossip, a friende to the partie adurrse, but also if he be enemie to the par∣tie that refuseth him, or if hee or any of hys kinne haue any interest (little or much) in the cause, yea if he haue at any time shewed hym selfe more affectionate on the one syde, than on the other, (as he may also in diuers other lesse causes of refusall.) And who is he that seeth not, that there is neuer a Catholique
in Fraunce, against whome these poore gos∣pellers cannot alledge (not one but) many and sundry causes of recusation? And if it be thought tollerable to holde a iudge for sus∣pect, and vpō that suspition to refuse him in matters of mean weyght: ought he not then to be refused whē he shal haue to deale with conscience, honor, landes, goodes, wiues, chil∣dren and life? And it ought not to seeme straunge, that I said it should be meere that the said peace by the said commissioners, were entreated of without the Realme, for there be many rea∣sons that require the same. Fyrst for that it is better (as sayeth Master Philip de Comi∣nes, a man wel experimented in the affaires of an estate) it shoulde be done farre off than meere, and that for diuers considerations, namely for the keepyng close of that whyche shall from tyme to time be agreed vpon, till all be concluded and finished. For as in a paynted table he that veweth ye first draught, shall finde in the same little or nothyng to hys contentment, yet after, the whole work beeing perfited, doth please him very well: Euen o, if during the time of the treatie
(and before the conclusion of all thynges therein to be argued) some peece thereof a∣greed vppon shoulde bee published: many were lyke ynough to gaynesay and controll that peace, that vpon the sight or bearing of the hole resolution, woulde fynde good cause of contentment, bycause that he which is not satisfyed in one poynte, may be satisfyed in another. And as the Doctors of the lawe say, it standeth not with good reason that any should iudge of a lawe or of an Edict, without hauing redde the same from the one ende to the other. And as it were a thing very hard to decide or deale with any thyng within the Realme that should not inconti∣nent be deuulged▪ so the reprehensions and sclaunders that would follow suche diuul∣gation, might be an infallible cause that no∣thyng shoulde bee done, but that entended good worke broken off and laide aside. Be∣syde that, there is no place within youre Realme, but is suspected of the one syde or of the other. For the Catholiques will not goe to Nismes nor to Rochell, and the Gos∣pellers will bee as vnwilling to come at Paris, Lions, Tholosa, or other like place,
so that for the doing thereof such a place is to be chosen as may be sure and free for al that shall there in haue to doe. And therefore it was that in times past when they woulde holde any councill for the examining of a∣ny newe doctrine newly come abroade, for place where the councell shoulde be holden, was chosen within the prouince where suche doctrine was abroade, or else in some other such place neere therevnto, as was both sure and commodious. Therefore was it also that by the ordinaunce of your predecessors no inquest mighte be taken, nor any iustice proceede in a place by any of the parties hol∣den suspected, as in the house of the kinsman, ally, or speciall friend, to him that caused the inquest to be enpauelled: but an indifferent place therefore by the iudge was to be cho∣sen, and by shal reason may all the townes in Fraunce be suspected: For if the suspition of a place be curiously to be looked to and ad∣uoyded in small things: how muche are they to bee looked to in a matter of so greate a weight as is the seeking and concluding of a peace? And where I sayd it should be meete, that
when the commissioners coulde not  vpon some articles of the treaty they whiche refused to agree and goe through shoulde giue out by their writings, the reasons of their dissenting and standing aloofe, to the end the worlde mighte see who were in the fault: it is not a matter vnreasonable. For such as shall yeeld (as meete is) to the agree∣ment of all things that right and reason shal finde expedient for the common profit, shall not finde it euill, that a reason be rendred by them, that otherwise, in their passions will bee wilfull: and therefore if any refuse so to do, it shal seeme yt they want good wil to see ye way that shuld bring al things in fro yt are to be foūded vpō equitie & cōmon profit. Neyther aught to to be euil taken what I spake touching othes. For as the common saying is) he that wil wel pay, wil willing∣ly become bound: And your maiesty alrea∣dy by youre saide last Edict of October ap∣proued this poynt, when ye promised in the word of a king, to cause to be obserued what¦soeuer should be agreed vpon, and to make the fame passe in maner of a recorde, with the consents of your Parliamentes, towns and commonalties of your realme.
I shall thinke my selfe wel iffied syr), (in all humilitie and reuerence) to haue she∣wed vnto you (as to my naturall prince) the three poyntes whereof I haue before entrea∣ted. Most humbly beseeching your Maiestie to take the sa in good part as in that is pro∣ceeded from the heartie affection of a good french subiect, that wisheth all encrease of ho∣nor and prosperitie to your crowne, and qui∣etnesse to your poore subiectes. And if it shall please God to moue you to thinke so well of this plot (layd for the building of a peace) as you will appoint and charge commissioners with the dealing in the same I wil settle my selfe to the opening of suche other perticular meanes for the bringing thereof to passe, as are not meee at this present in writing to be discouered. But amongst other things, I will open vnto them howe needfull it were that a good  should be made for ye bani∣shing of Machiae for euer out of Fraunce, as one that hath bene the greatest lyar, & im∣posture that euer was in the World, the an∣cient Romanes, Greekes, and Frenchmen, and all other well ruled commonwealthes, hauing bin ruled leane contrarie to his doc∣trine.
And that his disciples whiche haue brought into Fraunce the obseruation of his precepts, haue bene the very cause of the ciuill warres and miseries of the realme. It may be that his precepts be good and necessarie for those of his nation, for they reach (among o∣ther things) the nonmaking of account of a∣ny religion, otherwise than for the keping of the people in a superstitious feare and obedi∣ence: vpon which his opinion might be in∣ferred, that the Turkish religion (wherefrom God deliuer vs) might safely of any be re∣ceiued, for by the same the Turks holdeth his subiectes vnder suche feare and obedience, as they refuse not at his commaundement the murthering of them selues, thinking there∣vpon to flee straight to their Paradise, that floweth with mylke and hony. He sheweth also, that a Prince should beare good counte∣nance to all promise muche, and keepe touche in nothing, more than sireth to his aduan∣tage. Moreouer, his disciples vse these faire persuasions. If it be profitable to a Kyng (say they) to tooke out and destroy such hou∣ses and such olde him doe it, without taking any aduise  what may folowe of his so
doing. Such as haue brought into Fraunce the obseruation of Machiauels precepts, haue not well considered, that the Frenchmen in nature farre differ from their nation. The French are naturally religiōs, louers of ver∣tue, and take no pleasure neyther in falsify∣ing of their fayth, contemning of their honor and reputatiō, nor in the sheading of bloud. If the Macheuilians be endued with those good qualities: let them there kepe them, and folowe their Doctors doctrine, that was the greatest Atheist that euer the worlde bred, with his companion the Aretine, as their writings doth openly shew, so as they keepe them selues from poysoning of our Frenche nation, with those their abhominable vices. But I will reserue till another time (when it shall better fall out to the purpose) the spea∣king more largely to my Lords & Maisters the Macheuilians, whome I will then shew, that al their policie & sufficiēcie, is none other than a brutish ignorance, accompanyed with a wicked heart and will: and that they ne∣uer read the good histories writtē in Greeke, Latin, or Frenche, or if they haue read, they neuer well vnderstoode them. I will for this
time proceede no further, but make an end of this present declaration, the which I once a∣gaine most humbly beseech your Maiestie to take in good part, so as it may passe from this good towne of Frankford to your handes. Praying the Creatour of all things, to en∣due you with his grace, shortly to establish a good peace in your poore Realme, so muche torne and spoyled by these warres paste, by meane whereof, all your subiectes may ren∣der vnto you their good and willing obe∣dience. The same also preserue you in happy prosperitie, and encrease you with much power and honour. FINIS.
