11564.5 99850122 15306
Phisicall and approved Medicines, aswell in meere Simples, as Compound obseruations. With a true and Direct Iudgement of the seuerall Complexi∣ons of Men, & how to minister both Phisicke and Medicine, to euery seuerall Complexion. With the making of many excellent Vnguents, and Oyles, as also their applica∣tions, both for Gargarismes & Inflamations of the Face, and other diseases incident to the body of Man, aswell Chirurgicall as Phisicall. With The true vse of taking that excellent Hearbe Tabacco, aswell in the Pipe by fume, as also in Phisicke, medicine and Chirurgerie. LONDON Printed for Mathew Lownes, dwelling in Paules Church-yard, at the Signe of the Bishops head. 1611.
To the right Worshipfull Sir Ed∣mond Carey Knight. YOu may peraduenture wonder (most worthy Sir) or if not your selfe, yet many others (I am sure) will, why I, being an old man, and in my declining age long since, would be so inconsiderate as to set pen to paper, and write a discourse of Tabacco. But I pray you giue me leaue to speak for my selfe and to answer both the one and the other. Isocrates (the famous Orator) wrote the sweetest and most eloquent Oration of his, called Panathenaica, after hee was fourescore yeares of age: and the same is reported of the di∣uine Plato, who continually studied, and wrote of diuers points in Philosophy when he likewise had passed the Eighty yeere of his age, and so continued to his dying day, as Iohn Pierius in Oloris Hieroglyphico saith. The famous lawyer Baldus began to study the ciuil Law at three of the clocke in the afternoon (at what time king Deiotarus began to build a Ciuity) I mean, when he was an old man: and yet hauing an excellent, prompt, and praegnant wit, and a natural inclina∣tion to that kind of study, he became the most excellent man of his time. And although you will grant old men to bee sub∣iect to many imperfections and weaknesses, yet on the other side you must confesse, that yong men are much tainted with lightnesse, inconstancy of mind, and ouermuch folly. Indeed old men are not so strong, quick, sprightfull, and deliuer as
the yonger sort are: but yet in counsell, wisedom, experience and iudgement, they farre outstrip them; and by these ver∣tues, not by the other, noble and glorious enterprises are at∣chieued and brought to passe: and this questionlesse was the true cause that mooued Augustus Caesar that mightie Em∣perour, to make choise of no Captain that was vnder three∣score yeares of age, in his whole armie. But why I, being of these yeares, should take in hand to write of Tabacco, I know deserueth wonder: but the truth is, that being long detained prisoner in the Kings bench, more vpon malice of some few, than any merite of mine owne, and there seeing all sorts of people taking the fume of this hearb without any difference of age, condition, sexe, or respect of naturall constitution of any particular bodie, I then began to write a little of it for my owne recreation (my minde being then fatigated with o∣ther serious affaires, and caried away with other distracti∣ons) little thinking that that which then I wrote for my own priuate delight, should euer come to bee a prettie volume, as now I perceiue it is. Which after I had done, I acquainted some of my friends with the same, who instantly importuned me to commit it to the presse. There is no man now adaies, nor heretofore hath beene, that euer I could either see or read, who hath not writ too partially of this plant, and not distinctly and plainely, as (I hope) in this smal work I haue done. Besides, I haue added my owne censure (though verie sparingly) of the writers hereof, as well strangers as those of our owne countrey. I haue fur∣ther discoursed of the diuersities of names giuē to this plant, with the nature and qualities thereof, to what diseases or griefes it is most appropriated, and with what formes it is best prepared & with what correctors; which I suppose few or none hath attempted: and yet whatsoeuer others herein
haue brought to light, though it bee neuer so little, I haue sincerely giuen thē their due worth & honor, so farre forth as the merit of their vertue deserued. In the kingdom of Ca∣stile in Spaine, as Carolus Clusius writeth, there is such great plenty of Ledon (a kinde of wilde rosemarie) which of the inhabitants is called Ardiuieia, as there this is growne to a common prouerbe: Quien al mont va, ymas no puede, Alomenos ardiuieja. Hoc est: Quicunque montem accedit, potius quam ina∣nis redeat, vel Ardiuiejā (plantam vilissimam) colligat. So rather than I will sit dronishly idle, will bee doing of some∣what, yea, thogh it be to write but of so mean a subiect as Ta∣bacco. Some besides may also imagine that I doe nothing; but Aranearum telas texere, that is, in a friuolous matter, and of small moment, spend infinite and curious labour: so that I had more need sometimes to craue pardon for my long dis∣course about this subiect: wherein though many things may want to the satisfaction of an affected and search∣ing head, yet I am sure here is inough to warrant the dis∣charge of my good will, and to repell the censure of the scru∣pulous. Facilius est reprehendere quam imitari: and some can reproue without authority, which wil not allow proofes with authoritie: such they thinke their credit is with some people, as Pythagoras was amongst his owne schollers, who thought Pythagoras speech a sufficient warrant to prooue any thing, onely alleaging, Ipse dixit. I doubt not there bee many Pythagoreans, that stand too much in their owne conceite. But to speake truth, and to make no better of my selfe than I am, I am farre vnlike Pytha∣goras, my words carrie no such weight of credit, as that my bare affirmation should barre any man the libertie of
contradicting me: I am rather like the Duke of Venice, who of himselfe can doe little, and is like the Priest at Masse which putting on his golden garment, and making a goodly gay shew, seemeth to be a great man; but if any com vnto him and craue some friendship at his hands, he will say, you must goe to the Masters of the parish, for I cannot pleasure you o∣therwise than by preferring your suit: and so it is with me. Cum relego, scripsisse pudet: quia plurima cerno, —me quoque qui feci, iudice, digna lini. When I re-read, I shame I write: for much I see, My selfe, who made them, being iudge blotted to be. And therefore (right Worshipfull) fearing the like cen∣sure vpon mee, that hath happened vnto others, I haue presumed to dedicate these my labors vnto you, & to shield them vnder the patronage of your noble name, trusting that as you haue alwaies been not onely a fauorer, but also a sup∣porter and maintainer of learning and learned men, so you will accept in good worth this rude and compendious trea∣tise, defending it as a patrō, & receiuing it with good wil as from a well willing friend. Thus with encrease of Worship, prosperous health, and Gods graces, I commend you to the Almightie. Your Worships most humble at com∣mandement, Edmund Gardiner.
To the Curteous and friendly Readers. THere be some, I make no question, which in this iudging world will censure me, ei∣ther to be too idle, and to haue little else to doe, or imagine mee too curious for committing to the presse this little book: whose criticall censures, & byting stings I doe little esteeme, so that I may heare or know, that these trifles as they are accounted, will doe any good. Many fault-finders, enuious carpers, and malicious sy∣cophants (for malice is euer working of mischiefe: & what is it that cankred Calumnia cannot inuent?) will readily reprehēd, but this chiefly that I haue been too open in publishing medi∣cines. But friendly and indifferent Readers, I for your sakes wil sustain willingly this blame, and for your good & content∣ment will be readie to vndergoe more, and meekely to submit my selfe (if cause so require) to a prouoked patience. I send forth this worke to you that are studious and desirous of lear∣ning, not to sophysticall mount-bankes, cozering quacksal∣uers, & such like false iugling deceiuers with their paradoxi∣call innouations: whose countrey soile is to them a wilde cat, and who abuse all good arts wheresoeuer they come or abide. I must confesse that I haue vsed some store and varietie of ex∣amples, not thereby to vendicate to my selfe much reading, to arrogate to my selfe great learning, or that I coueted my dili∣gence to be praised. For I desire to bee cured of ignorance, which I cannot be vnlesse I confesse the same: and that dili∣gence deserueth but a slight and bare commendation, if any one of his own accord shal voluntarily take vpon him a need∣lesse,
vaine and vnnecessarie labour. But this was my scope, this the whole drift and marke I especially aymed and shotte at, that seeing the fume of this Indian Tabacco to be vsedly and abusedly taken of all sorts of men, all condiions and estates, to shew according to my simple skill the true vse of it, and to remooue out of their mindes the errors that ma∣nie are possessed if not bewitched withall, and to bring both their mindes and bodies to a better temper and moderation: which thing as hitherto, for ought I know, hath not beene performed by any, nay scarselie attempted. But now per∣chaunce whilest I labour to please all, I displease all: If it be so, Iacta est alea, the dice are throwne. If any saying heere dis∣please anie queasie stomacked Tabacconist, for remedie thereof, I would wish him to passe lightlie by it for feare of further offence. Physicke is a large profession: and euerie one as he is affected taketh one or other part to be illustrated, set foorth, and brought more to light by his labour and in∣dustrie: one in the Anatomie as Caspur Bauhinus, Salomon Albertus, Gabriel Fallopius, Andreas Vesalius, and Arantius of Bononia. Another in the historie of Plantes and knowledge of Simples, as the most learned Maister Iohn Gerard Cittizen of London, Carolus Clusius, Andreas Matthiolus, Rembert Dodoens, and others: A third in Fishes as Rondeletius; and o∣thers, in other huing creatures as Conradus Gesner, and some in Mineralls, as Rodolphus Agricola, haue beene found singular. And surelie they are not to be denied their due commendati∣on, who in other smaller matters of Physicke haue done some∣thing, as namely those that haue corrected bookes, haue made commentaries vpon auncient authors, and translated out of the Greeke and Arabick tongues into the Latine or our own vulgar. In this so great a haruest of fertill wittes, and ex∣pence of time, wherein manie men and the same verie learned and well practised haue taken paines, one thing remaineth vndone, that no man in my iudgement hath sufficiently entreated of this Plantnamelie Tabacco, which is so much in vse amongst all English men. For either they doe commend it too much aboue measure, attributing to it so many great and
excellent vertues, as I thinke is scarse possible to finde in any one hearbe, or else on the contrarie they were so farre out of the way, as that they altogether contemned and discommen∣ded it: so that that which was to be well liked, they haue quite omitted, and that which is plaine, euident and manifest to all mens senses, they haue quite either denied or marred: for —Quid nobis certius ipsis Sensibus esse potest, quo vera ac falsa notemus? What can more certaine be than sense, Discerning truth from false pretense? But if this my labour may bee gratefully accepted, as with good will it is offered (as I doubt it not, if you please to cen∣sureiustly thereof) I shall be encouraged thereby to publish and set forth in our natiue language, other workes intreating more copiously and fully of Physicke, and no lesse needefull to be knowneand published. So I wholly referre my selfe to your fauours and courteous constructions, still resting Yours in all kinde affection, Edmund Gardiner.
The names of all those authors and learned men, whose authorities are cited in this present Worke. A Ristoteles. Alciatus. Andreas Theuetus. Aegidius Eurartus. Auicenna. Augerius Ferrerius. Alexander Trallianus. Apianus. Aetius. Andreas Matthiolus Se∣mensis. Amatus Lusitanus. Albertus Magnus. Banisterus. Carolus Clusius. Cardinalis Cusanus. Cornelius Celsus. Carolus Stephanus. Cornelius Tacitus. Catullus. Dion. Diodorus Siculus. Galenus. Guido Pancirollus. Garceas ab Horto. Galfridus Chaucerus. Dioscorides. Guilielmus Camdenus. Fracastorius. Hesiodus. Homerus. Hippocrates. Hieronimus Cardanus. Hercules Strozza. Herodotus. Guilielmus Clusius. Vlrichus de Hutten. Laurentius Ioubertus. Horatius. Iohannes Langius. Iohannes Leo Afer. Iohannes Gerardus Anglus. Iohannes Liebaultius. Iohannes Heurnius. Iohannes Baptista Porta. Iohannes Hollerius. Iohannes Bruerinus. Iunenalis. Lucretius. Iosephus Quercetanus. Ludouicus Vertomanus. Petrus Bellonius. Titus Liuius. Terentius.
Ronssaeus. Paulus Aegineta. Iultus Palmarius. Theodorus Zuingerus. Strabo. Publius Ouidius. Martialis. Paracelsus. Suetonius Tranquillus. Mercurius Britannicus. Richardus Hackluit. Nicolaus Monardus. Petrus Pena. Matthias de Lobell. Seneca. Vergilius. Plinius. Theophrastus. Philon. Philaretes. Xenophon. Tibullus.
In commendation of the Author. AS farre as Boreas clappes his brasen wings, So farre thy fame graue Gardiner shall flie. Pleasure and profit both thy rare Worke brings. Who rightly reads, will say as much as I; That thou of all doest yet deserue the praise, And to be crowned with a crowne of baies. One, with disgracefull and despightfull words, This soueraigne Simple basely discommends: A second, loftie glorious tearmes affords, And grace too great vnto this Simple lends. Both are extreames. The golden meane is best: Which here thou keep'st: thy Worke excels the rest. Reioyce, O Britaine, that thou hast brought-forth A Gardiner of such admired skill. Thou showest the vertue, the effect and worth, Of this rare Simple, the good vse and ill. Then vse it well, for Gardiners good sake: And from his Garden a choise flower take. Io: Serl. Edward Michaell, In commendation of his learned friend Master Edmund Gardiner. THe Author well deserues the Tipe of fame, To be conioyned to his honest name, For setting forth (vnto his Countreys view) Tabaccoes praise now in his brightest hue. In lieu whereof, the guerdon he doth craue, Is but a kinde respect of him to haue. For, all his paines, taken for your delight, Is for to shew Tabaccoes vse aright. Read then his worke, with iudgements brightest eie: And thank him kindly: Thus with me replie; Gardiner Adigu: thy Work deserues such praise, As few men giue, in these our latter daies.
The triall of Tabacco. MAny men haue, many times, sette foorth to the publike viewe of the world, diuers books entreating speci∣ally of one subiect, and those either in praise or dispraise of the matter they wrote of: but yet amongst all writers or exscriptors there haue beene in my iudgement no treatises so often divulged, so greatly discoursed of, and presented to the eies of the world (especially of late time) as those, that discourse of Indian Tabacco, one liking, another discommending and dispraising, according to the seuerall whirles of their affections, either in part or in whole, this famous plant: so that a man may not inaptly say of it, as Virgill the Poet doth concerning the diuersitie of opinions for the admis∣sion of the Graecian deuised horse into the walles of Troy. Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus. The wauering multitude, as each man findes, Consists of many and contrary mindes. Virgilius Aeneid. 2 And in respect of the Writers, Patrons, and defen∣dants of this rare plant on both sides, I may not vnfitly vse this saying of Horace:
Caedimur, & totidem plagis consumimus hostem. We by our forces are beaten, if not staine, We with as many stroakes waste them againe. Horat. li. 2 epist. 2. 29. There is such hard hold and tough reasoning on both sides. Now although I be Medicorum minimus, yet you must remember it was said of old: Scribimus indocti, doctique poemata passim, seeing no other to vndergoe this taske, I haue boldly aduentured to vnbuckle my selfe (for you know who is so bold as blinde Bayard) I haue I say not being thereto commanded or compelled, as the answer to the booke called Worke for the chimney Sweeper was, but of my owne forwardnesse, and the desire I had to sa∣tisfie the world heerein in some sort: protesting, (as in the inferiournes of the stile may well appeare) that neither vanitie of glorie, nor selfe presumption, (being of many the most vnworthy to haue enterprised this taske) nor o∣ther priuate respect, then duty to my good friends (that haue requested this at my hands) and zeale to my louing country men, hath made me to publish this booke. For I saw the discourses heerein in my poore vnderstanding to be faultie, defectiue and halting, considering that one side too much extolled the vertue of this plant, and ano∣ther side as much on the contrarie abased contēned & re∣jected it. So to giue some satisfaction to both sides, I haue made choice of the middle, being as I take it, the more secure way, thou it be a very hard matter to keep right in the mid-path, and to decline neither to the right nor to the left hand. Iust a pari premitur veluti cum pondere libra, Prona nec haec plus parte sedet, nes surgit ab illa.Tibul. li 4 heroic. ver. 4. In English thus: As when an euen scale with equall weight is peized,
Nor falles it downe this way, or is it that way raised. Wherefore to performe that precisely which I haue promised solemnly, & seeing this discourse must be sent a∣broad & cōmitted to the hāds, the eies, the noses, the ears, the mindes & the iudgements of a great nūber of all sorts, I will first beginne with one that is furthest off it, Monar∣dus a Spaniard of Siuill, who hath written verie largely of it in his treatise of the west Indian Simples: but because he is already translated into English, I wil (left I should seem actum agere) referre that which he hath very large, to his owne volume. For that which hee hath gathered is like∣wise sound in other Authors, wherof heereafter you shall heare more, when we come to discourse of the vertues of Tabacco. Charles Stephen, and Iohn Liebault, & Andrew Theuet all three Frenchmen, haue writ of this plant, and so hath Aegidius Eurartus. Carolus Clusius likewise in his comment vpon Garcaeas, Destirpibus et Aromaticis In∣dicis, and Iohannes Baptista porta in his eight booke, and eleuenth chapter of his Natural Magick doe highly com∣mend this plant, as a thing most excellent and diuine. But amongst them all, and from them all for his admirable knowledge in plants, our owne Countrie-man Master Iohn Gerard Citizen and Chirurgion of London hath ca∣ried away the palme, as best deseruing it, to whome I may well apply that saying of Lucretius: Qui genus humanum ingenio superauit & omnes, Praestrinxit stellas, exortus vti aetherius sol.Lucret. l. 3 Who from all mankinde, bare for wit the prize, And dimm'd the starres, as when skies sunne doth rise. Another likewise of our countriemen, calling himself Philaretes, hath lately writ a booke against Tabacco, en∣tituled Worke for Chimney-sweepers: which booke, ano∣ther
hath friendly and modestly answered. In the be∣ginning of Philaretes booke one I. H. hath made these discommendatorie verses against Tabacco. Pitie it is such smoaking vanitie, Is Englands most esteemed curtesie. Oft haue I heard it as an old said saw, The strong digesting hungry Camels maw Brookes stinging nettles, and the vilest weedes, That stinking dunghils in ranke plentie feedes: But t'is a toy, to mocke an Ape indeede, That English men should loue a stranger weede. To whome E. G. maketh answer. Fie, fume at fumigation, And fret at thy owne nation, It wants not approbation, That drugs should worke purgation, Oft times more worth in vilest weede, Then in manured Garden seede. It is no toy, but truth indeed That one soile should another need. Philaretes seemeth to inferre in his second reason and some other places of his book, that by the frequent vse of Tabacco, wee ought iustly to suspect and feare the same to bee a mightie drier, decaier and witherer of our radical and vnctuous moisture: and in respect thereof breedeth consumptions: But yet it seemeth (by his leaue) not so much to breede hectike feuers and consumptions, as ap∣poplectike and cephalical passions, because many abusers thereof haue died sodenly: and wee see that the braine
doth suffer from it by protopathie, rather then by deute∣ropathy, the organ whereby it is receiued being so neere a neighbour to the braine. I wonder it is not discussed how it puffeth vp & plumpeth some, when he concludeth that it wasteth and dissipateth the vnctuous moisture, & sub∣stantiall nourishment, by dissipation of naturall heat, and decay of spirits in our bodies. The same Author likewise (though a man of excellent learning, exact iudgement and reading) seemeth to vrge too farre, when in his seauenth reason against Tabacco, he sticketh not to affirme, that this hearb seemed to bee first found out and inuented by the diuell, and first vsed and practised by the diuels priests, and therefore not to bee v∣sed of vs Christians. But I will both answer him and the Spaniard Monardus (from whome hee hath fetcht his ground) at one word thus; that it is certaine that the di∣uell did not finde it, but Nature gaue it, and Nature doth nothing in vaine, according to that protrite axiome in Philosophy, Natura nihil fecit frustrà. If the diuell did finde it, yet we may esteeme it as well as hidden treasures descried by spirits at the request of wicked mē. But in my opinion we ought to iudge of the infinite power of Na∣ture with more reuerence, and with more acknowledge∣ment of our owne ignorance and weakenes. For, that it was a plant created by God, when first euen by the word of his mouth all things were framed, I iudge it not amisse for any man to say and thinke: and there is no scholler so meanely learned, but will by reason conuince them both, and read a lecture of contradiction against them vpon the progresse of Natures workes; hauing his ver∣tues and faculties infused into it from aboue, whereby many finde great ease and comfort as well as by other plantes and Simples. For vnlesse God himself had bene
the author of it, why should it be endued with such noble and excellent properties: for Ni Deus affuerit, viresque infuderit herbis, Quid, rogo dictamnus, quid panacea iuvent? If God helpe not, and into herbes infuse A working power, in vaine we medicine vse. Aristotle (the monarch of our moderne learning) see∣meth not to speake awry, when he saith: Multa sciri posse, quae nondum scita sunt. Many things may be heereafter knowne, which as yet lie hidden in the deepe dungeon of obscuritie, not manifested; as the quadrature of the circle, and the manie vertues both of this and other herbes, not yet knowne to the world: which hidden and secret ver∣tues though at this present they are not reuealed to Na∣tures interpretors, yet hereafter they may: so that we may rightly conclude: Maximam partem eorum quae nesci∣mus, minimam partem eorum quae scimus aut scire pos∣sumus, to which purpose Cardinall Cusanus hath writ a booke De docta ignorantia: Wherfore I suppose none will bee so mad to imagine that such a noble plant could come by chance, or bee inuented by the diuell, whose excellent vertues the profoundest can scarse per∣fectly vnderstand. By this wee may see the wonder∣full workes of God, how that he can make things strange, great, and incomprehensible and wonderfull to mans indgement. Therefore it is a thing impertinent, to seeke out the causes and reasons of some things, as many men doe, and daily goe about to doe, for there are many secrets in Nature, the knowledge whereof is reserued and kept to the onely creator: also of many other that might bee heere alleadged: but for that it is not my argument, I omit it to come to the rest. Philaretes my good friend saith, that Tabacco is hurt∣full
because it is hot and drie in the third degree, which Monardus (saith hee) and others haue affirmed to come neere to the third degree of excesse in either qualitie. But it seemeth not so hot because it blistereth not, nor yet ex∣ceedingly heateth, and that deletery malignity which he adscribeth to it may be quintessentiall, although not ele∣mentarie. And with him I will not deny, but that some malignitie (out of question) is in Tabacco, yea, I wil adde further, that there is in it some poison also, as there is in some other strong and vehement purgers, but yet it may bee with cordiall and cephalical aromatikes alaied as wel as Scammony, Elaterium, Euphorbium, Coloquintida, tur∣bith and some others. Besides, diuers medicines doe either retaine, loose, or change their force and power, according to the diuers constitutions of those natures to whome they are giuen. For it is a hard matter to finde any remedy that may doe absolute good, without some slight touch of harme, vnlesse by art it be refined. Thus you see I haue beene a little bold to trump in my friend Philaretes way, where I thought hee tripped, esteeming him yet for no lesse then a louer of vertue and honestie, as his name im∣porteth, and a man of good iudgement and learning. But I will come into my path againe, and acquaint you first with the diuersities of names & titles giuen to this herbe, and so will I passe to his vertues and properties. This herbe with the Franks or frenchmen hath beene most commonly knowne by the name of Nicotiana, be∣cause one Nicot a French Embassadour to the king of Portugall, sent this hearb first into France, and so gaue it his name. Others againe, that by tradition haue noted the meanes frō whence they receiued this herb, haue called it Herba
Reginae, and Queene mother herbe, for that when Monsi∣eur Nicot had first knowledge thereof, hee sent and com∣mended it to Katherine de Medices, the Queene mother of France, (who died before she had reeled vp her spin∣dle) and shee first caused it to bee planted in that king∣dome. Others there bee that do tearm it Hyoscyamus Peruuia∣nus, Henbane of Peru, Herba Sancta, or Sacra, and Sana sancta Indorum: but vpon what ground I know not, vn∣lesse it be for the singular vertues and faculties that are found in this plant, as by the same reason Lignum Indicum or Gutacum is called sanctum, because it is so helpfull, and restoreth to cure a great many sicknesses and griefes; as the learned in Physicke doe very well finde. Wee know indeed by practise, that an infinite number of diseases are cured by Tabacco, euen à capite ad imos vsque pedes, from the crowne of the head to the verie feete: so that in regard of his noble vertues, it was thought necessarie that it should bee entituled with some glorious name, as we also see done to others. For Philon the Physitian called his A∣lexipharmacal medicines, Deorum manus: and at this day Physitians haue graced & nobilitated some of their com∣positions with splendidous titles; calling one Manus Christi, another Benedicta Laxatiua, Catholicon a third, and some others by the strange and superstitious names of Puluis sanctus, Gratia Dei, Apostolicon, vnguentā Pau∣linum and the like, as Vlrichus de Hutten, a Knight of Ger∣many hath writ in his book De Morbo Gallico, & the 6. chap. It is also entituled Petū: & Lobelius, & Peter Pena do make it a kinde of Symphitum: and other while a kinde of Hyoscyamus luteus: but yet they stick somewhat at that. So hauing discoursed of his seuerall names, we will make
a step to his description, his secret and rare qualities; and not forgetting by the way, to tell besides of the hurt some receiue thereby, with the true and right vse also. And first you shall heare what Carolus Clusius saith. Nicotian (saith he) so tearmed of the French, of the Spa∣niards Tabacco, of the Brasilians Petum, hath beene long vsed of the Indians, especially of the inhabitants of Hispa∣nia Noua, for the curation of woundes. It was brought but a few yeares since into Spaine, rather for the decking vp of their gardens, as being a strange plant and seld seen, more then for the hidden vertues of the hearb: but now it is much more famous by reason of his rare qualities then for his elegancie and beauty that it carrieth in a gar∣den. The common people of India vsually tearme it Pi∣cielt: for the name of Tabacco first came from the Spani∣ards, because there was such plentie of it grew in a certain Iland called Tabacco, according to the name wherof they haue christned it. Andrew Theuet saith, that the Americans haue a se∣cret herbe which they name in their language Petum, the which most commonly they beare about them, for that they esteeme it marueilous profitable for many things: this herbe is like to our buglosse. They gather this herbe very charily, and drie it within their little cabanes or hou∣ses. Their manner to vse it is this: they wrap a quantitie of this herbe being drie, in a leafe of a Palme-tree which is very great, & so they make rolles of the length of a can∣dle, and then they fire the one end, and receiue the smoak thereof by their nose, and by their mouth: they say it is verie wholesome to cleanse and consume the superfluous humors of the braine. Moreouer, being taken after this sort, it keepeth the parties from hunger and thirst for a
time, therefore they vse it ordinarily. Also when they haue any secret talke or counsell among themselues, they draw this smoake, and then they speake. The which they doe customably one after another in the warre, whereas it is very needful. The women vse it by no meanes. If that they take too much of this perfume, it will make them light in the head, as the smell or taste of strong wine. The Christiās that do inhabite there, are becom verie desirous of this perfume, although that the first vse thereof is not without danger, before that one be accustomed thereto: for this smoke causeth sweats and weakenes, yea, foaming at the mouth, suddaine falling downe, and conuulsions, as I haue seene in some. And this is no such strange thing as it seemeth, for there are many other herbs and fruits that offend the braine, though that the taste of them bee pleasant and good to eate. Plinie sheweth, that in Lyncestis there is a fountaine that maketh the people drunke, that take thereof: Like∣wise another of Paphlagonia, which as Ouid saith in the 15 booke of his Metamorphosis will cause a man to bee no lesse drunke then if he had copiously quaffed a great deale of wine. His words be these: Quem quicunque parùm moderato gutture traxit, Haud aliter titubat, quàm si mera vina bibisset. This I know will not be receiued of all men for truth, and yet Philosophers doe witnesse that there is in Escla∣nonie by Apollonia, a fountaine comming out of a rock, wheras is seene to proceed a flame of fire, whereby al the waters adiacent are as boyling. They haue in diuers pla∣ces of Hisp. Noua many hot springs of water, as aboue all other I haue seen in the Prouince of Mechuacan. In a plain field without any mountaine, there is spring which hath
much water, and it is so hot, that if a whole quarter of beefe, be cast into it, within one halfe houre, it will bee as well sodden, as it will bee ouer a fire in halfe a day. I haue seen half a sheep cast in, & immediatly it hath been soddē, & I haue eaten part of it: & this hath the learned Hackcluit set down in his booke discoursing of the voiages of the English nation, by the relation of Henrie Hawkes a mar∣chant, who liued three yeares in Noua Hispania. I will proceede a little further in relating strange things in na∣ture. In Bactria in the Citie of Boghar, there is a litle riuer running through the midst of it, but the water is vnhole∣some, for it breedeth sometimes in men that drinke there∣of, and specially in them that are there borne, a worme of an elle long, which licth commonly in the legge betwixt the flesh and the skinne, and is pluckt out aboue the an∣kle with great art and cunning. Diodorus Siculus reporteth, that in Egypt there was a poole, the colour of whose water was vermilion, which being drunke would reueale secrets. Strabo speaketh of a fountaine in the Citie Leuca, of a most horrible smell. Besides, this is verie strange, that there is a fountaine be∣sides Haslea, which neuer riseth but early in the morning, at high noone, and at the shutting of the euening. And if therein any euill thing bee cast that may corrupt the same, Theodorus Zuingerus mentioneth, that for certaine daies after it will not rise at all. There is a fountaine in Salmac in the countrey of Caria, which as Strabo wri∣teth, maketh men effeminate and lither. That of Aphro∣dosium in Pyrrhea, causeth barrennesse, as Plinie noteth: and such like a man man may easily finde, if any will take paines to read ouer the booke, entituled Britannia, writ∣ten by that most learned and famous gentleman master
Wil. Camden (the best antiquary of our age) he shal there I say, haue plenty wherat to admire, & peraduēture to giue satisfaction to that which here I haue set down for truth. Some, I doubt not, but will imagine this not to bee true, but altogether false, the which I haue spoken touch∣ing the natures and strange qualities of these waters, and of this herbe Tabacco, as though Nature could not giue such power to things; yes truely and farre greater, as shee hath also giuen to beasts according to the diuersities of countries and regions. Wherefore then should it leaue this countrey of America, (wherein God included the greatest gulfe of mankind) void of such a benefite, being naturally proper to it, and being temperate without com∣parison more then others? As in generalitie, Africke yeel∣deth the best Mules; Europe the best Lions, (as Herodotus and Plinie make report) onely to be found between the ri∣uers Nestus and Achelous: the one coasting Abdera a ci∣tie of Thracia, the other being a floud of Epyrus, separateth Acarnania from Aetolia. So in particular, we find Eng∣land yeeldeth the greatest store of good sheepe, wooll, tinne, and lead: Muscouia the best Bees, yeelding honie and waxe in plentie, and the best furres. Wherefore a learned Physician is to obserue, what store of vegetables, either of woods, trees for fruite, or plants, the countrie yeeldeth: for euerie country hath his commodities and singularitie of them, fitted by the prouidence of the eter∣nall God. As we read of in Asia and Virginia, singular Ce∣dars and Pine trees: So we haue experience, that for firre and Deale trees, Denmarke, Bohemia, Pomerania, Russia, Norway, and the New-found land, are notorious. For Vines, France: for apples, peares, plums, and such ordi∣narie fruit the realme of England. For oranges, lymons,
pomgranates, and such like, Spaine and other hot coun∣tries: for Oyle and Oliues, Candia, &c. As for the second, concerning things hid in the veines and wombe of the earth (for what shall we neede to en∣large this discourse with the huge woods to bee found in Germanie, Bohemia, Muscouia, and Ireland, or with the notorious vegetables of other nations) namely, the mines of mettals, and fossiles, wherof there are such sundry spe∣cies, as it may seeme impertinent of vs to be further tou∣ched, considering so soone as they are discouered, they be committed to writing. Some besides will not grant this to be true, but altoge∣ther false, that Andreas Theuetus writeth, that Tabacco keepeth the Indians from hunger, and thirst, for a certain time, although that our Epicureall Tabbacconists will sufficiently refute the contrarie: for they will say, and for a need sweare to it, that they can liue a whole weeke to∣gether, neither eating nor drinking any other sustenance. And if they wil not be cōtented with this our witnessing and affirmation, let them read Herodotus, which in his se∣cond booke, maketh mention of a people in Africa, li∣uing onely with hearbes. Apian rehearseth, that the Par∣thians being banished, and driuen out of their countrey by Marous Anthonius, liued with a certaine herbe that tookeaway their memorie: neuerthelesse they had opi∣nion that it did nourish them, though that in a short time after they died. Master Stephen Burrough did see some Lappians eat rocke weedes as hungerly, as a cowe doth grasse when she is hungry. I saw them also (saith hee) eate fowles egges raw, and the young birds also that were in Cleanly. the egges. The Indians will liue seuen or eight moneths in the warre with meale made of certaine hard and drie
rootes, in the which some would iudge that there were no nourishment or sustenance at all. And they will tell strangers, who arriue in their coasts, that they haue heard say of their fathers, that before they had the knowledge of the best rootes, they liued but with hearbs, and wilde weeds, & roots like brute beasts. There was they say, in their country a great Charaiba, that is to say, a Prophet, the which came to one of their young maidens, and gaue her certaine great roots, named Hetich, shewing her, that she should cut them in peeces, and then plant them in the earth: the which she did and since they haue alwaies con∣tinued from father to sonne: the which roots haue so well prospered, that now they haue so great aboundance that they eat little other food, and it is as common with them, as bread is with vs. The old Poets and ancient people of the world did conceit, that the Gods themselues did feede vpon nothing but Nectar and Ambrosia; yea, and that some of them had worse cōmons, & meaner meats, as they write of Ro∣mulus (who being a God as they say) liued vpon turneps. But, I thinke, that they rather alluded vnto the pouertie and simplicitie of feeding that was vsed in former ages, wherewith Romulus was so well acquainted. The Poet Martialis seemeth couertly to insinuate, that they eat the same meats in heauen, wherewith in earth they were inu∣red to feede vpon, in these verses: Haec tibi brumali gaudentia frigore rapa Quae damus, in coelo Romulus esse solet. Therefore ought not the Storie of this Gentleman Tabacco, bee thought so strange, for men to liue with∣all, as thought the like had neuer been heard or read of in histories, and times forepassed. The people of the East
and West India haue diuers kindes of fruits proper only to those regions, as Nature bringeth them forth, and yet they liue long, and well disposed, being strong and of ro∣bustious constitutions: yea, they will liue (I meane the people of America) a whole weeke together with one groat, which neither the Spanyard, nor any nation in the world can doe, as Petrus Martyr saith. And for their long liues, we may read in the learned Hackluit, discoursing of the voiages of the English nation in farre distant parts of the world, who introduceth the example of the King of Balloboam, being one hundred and threescore yeeres of age, when captaine Candish arriued at the Iland of Iaua Minor, and yet he was liuing after that many yeares, at that time when the Hollanders trauailed thither to the towne of Bantam, which is the furthest part in the world from this realme of England, being measured geome∣trically. Therebe many who thinke it strange, that some nations liue onely with fish: and yet he that is but meanly trauailed in Histories knoweth, that the poorest sort among the West Indies, liue more with sea-fish, and o∣ther like meats than with flesh. The same is true in this our Isle of Britaine, especially among the Cornish men and Scots: yea, our elders in times past liued onely with fish, as many sects in religion both in these dayes, and in former ages did. The lawes of Triptolemus (as Xenophon writeth) did defend and forbid the Athenians the vse of flesh. Therefore it is no strange thing to liue with fish onely. First, in our Europe, and before that the ground was tilled, men liued more hardly without flesh or fish, hauing not the meane to vse them, and yet notwithstan∣ding they were stronger, and liued the longer, being no∣thing so effeminate, as now in our age.
Americus Vespusius, one of the best Pilots that euer was, coasted almost from Ireland vnto the cape of Saint Augustine, by the comandement of the King of Portin∣gale, the yeare 1501. And since another Captain the yeare 1534. sayled vnto the region named of Giants. In this Region between the riuer of Plate, and the streight of Magellane, the Inhabitants are verie mightie, named in their language Patagones, Giants, because of their hie sta∣ture, and forme of bodies. They which first discouered this countrey tooke one of them finely, being twelue foot long, who was so vneasie to hold, that 25. men had inough to doe about him: and for to keep him, it behooued them to binde his feet and hands in their shippe, notwithstan∣ding they could not keepe him long aliue, but for sorrow and thought (as they say) he died for hunger. Thus you see I haue plainely shewed that people dwelling in some regions, though faring hardly, and poorely nourished, yet notwithstanding are men both of good complexions, of personable and heroical, nay Giant-like statures, and long liued. And this may seeme to bee a little beside, though not altogether out of the way. Trinidada Tabacco hath a thicke, tough and fibrous Descrip∣tion of Tabacco, or Sana sancta In∣dorum. roote, from which immediatly rise vp long broad leaues, and smooth, of a greenish colour, among which riseth vp a stalke, diuiding it selfe at the ground into diuers branches, whereon are set confusedly the like leaues, but lesser: at the top of the stalkes, stand vp long necked hol∣low flowres of a pale purple, tending to a blushe co∣lour; after which succeed the coddes or seed vessels, in∣cluding many small seeds, like vnto the seede of marie∣rome. The whole plant perisheth at the first approach of winter: in hot countreys it is sowen all times of the
yeare, but when it first sprouteth vp, it must be defended and preserued from cold, and planted neere vnto a wall for the beautifying thereof; for, in such hot Regions as Spaine, Naples, and Africke, it continueth green a whole yeare together, as Buglossum semper virens, Telephium minus semper virens, Rossmarie and the Bay tree with vs in England doe. It was first brought into Europe out of the prouinces The place. of America, which of some (though I know no reason for it) is called the West Indies, in wich is the prouince or countrey of Peru: but being now planted in the gardens of Europe, it prospereth very well, and cometh from seed in one yere to beare both floures & seed. The which I take to be the better for the cōstitution of our bodies, then that which is brought from India, and that growing in the In∣dies, better for the people of the same countrey; not∣withstanding it is not so thought nor receiued of our ta∣backians: for according to the English prouerbe, Farre fetcht, and deere bought, is good for Ladies. Tabacco must be sowen in the most fruitfull grounds The time. that may be found, and carelesly cast abroad in the sow∣ing, without raking it into the ground, or any such paine or industrie taken as is requisite in the sowing of other seedes, as I my selfe haue found by proofe, who haue ex∣perimented euery way to cause it quickly to grow: for I haue committed some to the earth in the end of March, some in Aprill, and some in the beginning of May, because I durst not hazard all my seede at one time, least some vn∣kindly blast should happen in the sowing, which might be a great enemie thereunto. It is hot and drie, & that in the second degree, as Monar∣dus The tem∣perature. thinketh, and it is withall of power to discusse or re∣solue,
and to cleanse away filthy humours, hauing also a a certaine small adstriction, and a stupefying, or benum∣ming qualitie, and purgeth by the stoole. And Monardus thinketh that it hath a certaine power to resist poyson. And to prooue it to be of hot qualitie and temperature, the byting qualitie of the leaues doth shew, which is ea∣sily perciued by taste. Also the greene leaues layed vpon vlcers, draw out filth and corrupt matter, which a cold simple would neuer doe. The leaues likewise being chaw∣ed, draw forth fleagm & water, as doth also the fume takē when the leaues are dried: which things declare that this is not a little hot. For what things soeuer being chewed, or held in the mouth, bring forth fleagm & water, the same be al accounted hot, as the root of pellitory of Spain, Saxi∣frage, master-wort, betony, and hyssop, with other things of like power. Moreouer, the benumming qualitie here∣of is not hard to be perceiued: for vpon the taking of the fume at the mouth, there followeth an infirmitie like vn∣to drunkennes, & many times sleep, as after the taking of Opium, which also sheweth in the taste a byting qualitie & therefore is not without heat; which when it is chewed and inwardly taken, it doth forth with shew, causing a cer∣taine heat in the chest, and yet without troubling of wits, as Petrus Bellonius in his third book of singularities doth declare: where also he sheweth, that the Turkes doe of∣tentimes vse Opium, and take one dram and a halfe thereof at one time, without any other hurt following, sauing that they are thereupon taken, as it were, with a certaine light drunkennesse, vertiginie, or giddinesse in their braines. And Hollerius in his practise telleth vs, that hee knew a Spaniard take halfe an ounce of Opium, and yet neither death, nor deaths harme followed. So also this Tabacco
being in taste byting, and in temperature hot, hath not∣withstanding a benumming qualitie. Hereupon it seemeth to follow, that not only this hen∣bane of Peru, but also the iuyce of poppie, otherwise cal∣led Opium, consisteth of diuers parts, some byting and hot, and others extreame cold, that is to say, stupefying and benumming: if so bee that this benumming qualitie proceede of extreame colde (as Galen, and all the old Physitians hold opinion:) but if the benumming qualitie, or facultie, doth not depend of an extreame cold temper, and that in the fourth degree, but proceedeth of the es∣sence of the substance; then may Tabacco be both cold, and also benumming; of temperature, hot and benum∣ming, not by reason of his temperature, but through the propertie of his substance, otherwise then a purging me∣dicine, which hath his force, not from the temperature, but from the essence of the whole substance. Before I proceede any further to shew against what sicknesses this herbe Tabacco most preuaileth, I will first briefly declare, what sicknesse is, and how many sorts or kinds therof there be, that I may be the better vnderstod in the discourse following. Sicknesse (then) is an euill af∣fect contrarie to Nature, hindring of it selfe some action of the bodie. Of sicknesse there be three generall kinds, whereof the first consisteth in the parts similar. The se∣cond in the parts instrumentall. And the third in both parts together. The first kind is called of the Latines, Intemperies, that is to say, euill temperature: which is either simple or com∣pound. It is simple, when one qualitie only doth abound or exceed too much, as to be too hot, or too cold. It is cō∣pound, whē many qualities do exceed, as when the body
is too hot and too drie, or too cold and too moist. The secōd kind is called Mala constitutio, that is to say, an euill state or composition: which is to be considered, either by the shape, number, quantitie, or site of the member, or part euill affected or diseased. The third kind is called, vnitatis solutio, that is to say, the loosing or diuision of the vnitie: which as it may chance diuersly, so it hath di∣uers names accordingly. For if such solutiō or diuision be in a bone, then it is called a fracture. If in any fleshie part, then it is called a wound or vlcer; in the veines a rupture; in the nerues or sinewes, a conuulsion or crampe; and in the skinne, an excoriation. Againe of diseases, some be called Long, and some Sharpe and Short, tearmed of the Latines Morbi acuti, which be perilous, and doe quickly kill the bodie. The Long do carie a greater time with it. And yet moreouer there is sicknesse by it selfe, and sick∣nesse by consent. Sicknesse by it selfe, is that, which be∣ing in some member, hindreth the action thereof by it selfe. Sicknesse by consent, is deriued out of one member into another through the neighbour-hood and commu∣nitie that is betwixt them: as the paine of the head, which commeth from the stomack, because they communicate and impart their dammages from one to another by cer∣taine sinewes, passing and being common to either of them. Thus the learned Physitians which write of mans bodie doe diuide sicknesse. Now if any man will curiously diue and search into the nature of these, Tabacco being giuen in his due time yeeldeth no small releefe and comfort; for according to the old saying: Temporibus medicina valet: data tempore prosunt: Et data non apto tempore vina nocent.
Physicke at times doth helpe: giue wine in season, It also helpes: too much brings out of reason. And Seneca saith: In morbis nihil est magis periculosum quàm immatura medicina: in diseases there is nothing worse or more dangerous then vntimely giuing of medi∣dicines, and out of due season. And againe, this saying of Liuie agreeth thereto. Et scio medicos, plus interdum qui∣ete, quàm mouendo atque agendo proficere. For according to the times and seasons of the yere, the qualities of medi∣cines are to be considered. For some are more familiar to some bodies at some seasons of the yeare, then at other∣some againe and fitter applyed to amend and correct the distemper of parts, and to expell euill iuyces. For who knoweth not that the spring is accounted the holesomest: which Galen calleth temperate, but Paulus Aegineta (his Apo) Aetius and the Peripatetikes affirme to encline ra∣ther to hot and moist (for there is nothing in Nature ab∣solutely temperate) and this season is most agreeable to the best habite. It is for the most part good for sickly constitutions, or at leastwise, it hurteth not: for as Hippocrates in his third booke, Aphorisme the twentieth, saith, it causeth madnesse and blacke Iaundise, leprosie, coughes, ring∣wormes, morphues, or staynings of the skin, and many vlcerous pustules, and breakings out with paines of the ioynts: not so much through the fault of the aire, but through the strength of Nature, being then fortified and made more liuely by the temperate heat of the spring to expel superfluities, and to separate naughtie humors, & to thrust thē forth to the more ignoble parts. The same heat helpeth likewise Nature, being readily disposed & willing to make a secret and insensible transpiration thorow the
bodie, by which it ought to bee expurged and auoided. So that the nature of this season ought to be regarded, as well in the often taking of this medicine Tabacco, as in others also: so that I iudge it not the safest to vse Tabacco at this time, vnlesse by the aduise of the learned: for to take it without difference and immeasurably as some a∣busers doe, must needes doe hurt, and I am sure a great deale in some of these fore-recited griefes. Summer is hot and drie, subiect to bilious or cholerick diseases. The beginning of the summer admitteth the diseases of the spring: but the midst breedeth vsually, con∣tinuall and burning feuers, bleareyednesse, tertian agues, vomiting of yellow choler, cholericke fluxes of the belly, paines of the eares, and vlcerations of the mouth: putre∣factions of the lower parts; especially when the summer besides his heat, is enclined to ouermuch moisture, and that no windes blow, and the weather bee darke, fowle, close & rainie, or that pincerna pluviarū, I mean the south winde, which bringeth much raine, doth much blow. And redde and angrie wheales by meanes of much and often sweating, being either cholericke, sharpe, or byting, doe abound. For they sting and gnaw the skinne, making it ytchie, angring, and exasperating it after the fashion of some sore. So that in this season, and for these remem∣bred griefes, no man, I trust, will grant Tabacco to bee verie holesome. But if any spitting Tabacconist bee so much bewitched, as that hee still must long after it, and cannot refraine, he shall heare the Epigram of the noble Poet Hercules Strozza, which hee wrote against a great Gourmandizer or belly God. Let the Tabacconist be his owne interpretor, or make what morall he please, and thus it is.
Saepè bibis, quò saepè vomas, & saepè voracem Distendas miseri corporis ingluviem. Quin si fortè tenax stomacho cibus haeserit, hunc vel Dextra, vel in fauces indita penna ciet: Tanquam sis genitus perdenda ad vina, nec vlli Te natura alij finxerit officio. O dignum laqueo facinus; quodcunque voratur, Turpiter ingeritur, turpiùs egeritur. Thou quaffest oft, to vomit much: by which thy riotous guise, Thy bursten belly strouteth out, in strange and monstrous wise. And if by chance thy meat within thy stomacke sticketh still, Thou streight doest seeke to force it vp, with finger or with quill: As though (belike) Nature thee made onely to drinke downe wine, Beast as thou art, and to no o∣ther thing did thee assigne. Hang such a slaue: what ere goes in tis filthy out of doubt, And cramd into his greedie gorge, must needs goe filthy out. Autumn is drie and somwhat cold, very vnequall, that is somtimes hot and somtimes cold. It is euill for those (as the spring is) that haue any consumptions or putrefaction of the lungs, (for cùm folia decidunt & germinant, moriun∣tur tabidi:) It causeth for the most part verie deadly griefs and diseases, yea and many of those that were rise in sum∣mer, likewise quartane agues, and wandring swellings,
and hardnesses of the spleene, dropsies, stranguries, fluxes of the belly, paines of the hip or hanch, squinsies, short∣nesse of breathing, Iliaca passions, epilepsies, frenzies, and melancholicall passions. So that in this season which we call the fall of the leafe, we must not too often vse Ta∣bacco, vnles with great warinesse & aduise of the learned: and for this season, a man may say of Tabacco in some sense, as Hesiodus speaketh of his fathers dwelling place or the village called Ascra, that it was . Hyeme mala, estate molesta, nunquam bona. Euill in winter, bad in summer, but neuer good. The winter quarter is cold and moist and flegmaticke, verie subiect to destillations, plurisies, inflammations of the lungs, lethargies, stuffings in the head, murres and pose, coughes, paines of the breast, sides and loynes, ver∣tiginies, swimming or giddinesse of the braine, and apo∣plexies. So that in most of these, it must of necessitie bee concluded, that Tabacco is a noble medicine, and fit to be vsed. For you see that in complexions and mens na∣tures, some are well and indifferently affected, and others againe either well or ill in winter. And so much for this. Now as good regard and consideration is to be obser∣ued, and kept in Tabacco taking, concerning the seasons of the yeare, so likewise the same precise order is to bee obserued for complexions. All they therefore that either of the nature of their own bodily state, are of a drie com∣plexion, or by any defect in their parents at their birth & procreation; or finally, by any accidentall mishap or cu∣stome of liuing, as by want of foode, thought, watchings, heauinesse of minde, or immoderate labour haue com∣monly bodies slender and thinne; and their skinne (where
drinesse is great) scuruy, rugged, vnseemely and lanke, swart and yelow, that are faced like Death, and leane as a rake: and to conclude, that are in all respects resembling the physiognomie and shape of Enuie, described by Oui∣dius, must in any wise banish Tobacco farre from them, as a thing most pernicious. Pallor in ore sedet, macies in corpore toto, Nusquam recta acies: liuent rubigine dentes: Ouid. lib. 2. Metam. Risus abest, nisi quem visi mouere dolores: Nec fruitur somno vigilantibus excita curis, Sed videt ingratos, intabescitque videndo Successus hominum, carpitque ac carpitur vnà. In English thus. A face like ashes pale and wanne, A bodie scraggie leane, A leering looke, and teeth all furr'd with drosse and filth vncleane: Her stomacke greenish is with gall, her tongue with venome fraught: And neuer laughes, but when mishap or harme hath others caught. No winke of sleepe comes in her eyes: and rest she none can take; For fretting carke and cankred care her watchfull still doth make. Full sore against her will it is that any man should thriue, Or prosper in his businesse: for that doth her depriue Of all her rest and quietnesse: thereat the hellish Elfe Doth stampe and stare, doth fret and fume and pines away her selfe, And to her selfe a torment is: for, seeking to annoy The wealth and state of other folkes, her selfe she doth destroy.
So then as the case standeth, seeing that Tabacco is so hurtfull to drie complexions, it must of necessity be ve∣rie good and holsome for those men that are of moist constitutions: for he that is of this temperature, hath a bodie soft, not rugged and rough, white skinned; his veines and ioynts not standing out, nor greatly appea∣ring; his haire plaine and flat, and for the most part thick withal. Their taste and smelling, and other obiects of their senses be blunt and grosse. And if withall they be cold, they are for the most part, in minde and wit doltish and dull, slouthfull and lumpish: finally, neither by nature, neither by vse, forecastfull, sharpe-witted, nor craftie: by reason their naturall heat is languishing and feeble, and drowned with moist and cold humors: and therefore also their memorie is verie faileable, obliuious, & nothing at all (in a manner) retentiue. Their speach, as likewise their pulses, and manner of gate, slowe and dull. And because commonly they be assailed with many and sun∣drie diseases, for that they be giuen to sit still, louing their ease and idlenesse, whereby many crude and raw humors are heaped vp in their bodies, it must needs bee graunted that Tabacco being hot and drie in qualitie, must of ne∣cessitie do them much good; and euen no lesse than la∣bour and exercise doth in wasting waterish and cold su∣perfluities. For sluggishnesse and slouth (as witnesseth
Cornelius Celsus) dulleth the bodie, but labour and exer∣cise maketh it firme and lustie: the one bringeth old age before the time, and the other making youth to last long. And therefore strong motions and exercises, and likewise taking Tabacco are more requisite for these persons: for otherwise cold and moist humours would too much in∣crease, and heat quaile and be enfeebled. But I purpose now briefly by the way, to shew the na∣ture and conditions of a hot and drie complexion, and of cholericke persons, and finally by what markes and to∣kens they are to bee perceiued, discerned, found out, and knowen, to see whether Tabacco be fitting these kinde of people or no. And first to speake of the outward signes. A bodie of this constitution is hot, slender, leane, muscu∣lous, of decent bignesse, and meane stature: of colour they be brownish, aburne, or somewhat ruddie, specially when their angrie mood is vp, or their bodies set in a heat with exercise: and some bee pale and yellowish. Their skinne rough: their heart-strings and veines bigge and apparant, and not lying hidden vnder the flesh: their tongue rowling at pleasure, readie and flowing in vtte∣rance: their haire blacke, and in some curled and natural∣ly frizled, whereas the heat and drinesse is very great and vehement: their noses (for the most part) are crooked like a Haukes bill, they haue tongue at will, and are as Iuuenalis the Poet fitly saith in his 3. Satyr. Ingenium velox, audacia perdita sermo Promptus & Isaeo torrentior, obiter illos Esse putes quemuis hominem; tum dicier aptè Grammatious, rhetor geometres, pictor, aliptes, Augur, schenobates, medicus magis omnia nouit.
In English thus: Of dapper wit, and desperate bolde, fine phras'd with gallant grace: More eloquent than Isaeus, for euerie time and case. Ech person can they aptly play, At ech art can they aime, At Grammar, Rhetricke, Geometrie, Painting, and for the game, At Sooth-saying, and cunningly vpon a rope to dance; At Physicke, Magicke, ripe are they and free of euery Haunce. And therefore sithence those persons are of hot com∣plexion, and that in their bodies yellow choler is prae∣dominant, which is compared very aptly to fire, it must needs fal out, that tabacco being a hot plant, is very hurt∣ful to them, & in no wise to be vsed; for this is not the way to subdue and alter, but rather make one more cholericke and hot. For if a man should still cherish and nourish it with his like in temperature, hee should doe nothing else but Flammam oleo extinguere, as the prouerbe is, quench the flame with oyle, and adde fire to flaxe by exusperating the distemperance, and increase the tyrannie of this hot humor, by making it the more vehement. So that in dry & hot bodies we must haue no refuge or succor to tabacco, considering that in constitutions that be quite contrarie, we finde that it doth much good. For we see that if men haue their stomackes surcharged with aboundance of loathsome, clammie, and tough fleagme, Tabacco doth scoure and cleanse it away more than any other, and (if ta∣bacconists
say no more than may bee warranted for truth) than all other helpes, and meanes whatsoe∣uer. Tabacco consequently doth much good vnto all such, whose heads are filled with moistish vapours: for those fumes or reekes, striking vpwards as in a stillato∣rie, grow into a thicke, and sniuelly fleagme, whereby through coldnesse of the braine, the parties become sub∣iect and open to sundry diseases, as the poze, murre, hoars∣nesse, cough, & many others; of which sort is the rheume or destillation of humours from the head, wherewith in Romney marsh, and diuers places of Essex, Kent, and the Isle of Ely, both rich and poore, high and lowe in winter season are much troubled, and finde by experience to be true, and yet many of them be very healthy, and as sound as a bell. Praecipuè sanus, nisi quum pituita molesta est. Horat. li. 1. Epist. 1. In English thus: In perfect health and throughly sound, But when that fleagme doth much abound. Insomuch that I am sometimes driuen into an admi∣ration, to consider how such abundance of filthy humors should rest in the head, which Nature one while at the mouth, another while at the nose and throat, expelleth and purgeth. Because the colde complexion is cleane opposite and contrarie to the hot constitution: and for that this is the worst of all others, and furthest from that state which is best: I will addresse my next speech to speake somewhat of it; to the end, I would haue men resolued whether Tabacco be holsome for them or no. And because colde
is cleane contrarie to heat, it must of necessitie be conclu∣ded, that Tabacco is very holesome for colde complexi∣ons seruing as a helpe in the office of concoction and di∣gestion, considering that in this state of bodie there lack∣eth heat sufficient, and the other powers and faculties na∣tural, are not able for the weakness of the instruments and organes, to attract and digest that nourishment that is moist, nor to make it like and consubstantiall with the bodie and members. I haue known many of this complexion, that through grosse and clammie glewish flegme, haue gotten the Le∣thargie, or drowsie euill, the Apoplexie, the crampe, pal∣sey, and wrie mouthes. There is none of these persons, but hee aboundeth, and is repleat with much fleagme, and flegmatick excrements, which maketh them lumpish and sleepie, forgetfull, slow of bodie and minde, and pale coloured, except sometimes at the comming of their e∣speciall friends they bee heated with wine or good Ta∣bacco, and therby haue dumps driuen out of their minds: for by this meanes their colour is made fresher, and all drowsinesse banished and chased out of their minds. As the time of the yeare and different complexions; so likewise the custom and frequent vse of Tabacco is to be regarded. Some haue reported, that it little auaileth, and that it profiteth a hot complexion nothing at all: but ex∣perience (the mistresse of wisdome) hath not shewed it to be iniurious to either. For if a man haue been often inu∣red to the taking of it, it can doe no such great harme, as it doth in a man that taketh it seldome; for, Consueta ma∣la minùs sunt infensa: accustomed euils are the lesse hurt∣full or offensiue: and Custome is another Nature; and we ought, as Hyppocrates saith, to haue no lesse regard vnto
it, than to our owne proper and engraffed temperament. Gaudent naturae consuetis semper. And againe, Consuetu∣do plurimum potest, repentiná{que} ab ea digressio non parùm oblaedit corpora. Com. 2. in prognost. Cap. 11. Consuetum quod est, bonum est, vel saltem minùs nocet ijs, quae naturâ quidem innoxiâ sunt, sed nunquàm in consuetudinē perue∣nerunt. For, as the same Galen in another place saith of meats, we may likewise say of medicines: Ciborum vim & naturam ab experientia quisque sua magis quàm à ra∣tione dijudicet, Com. 4. de v. r. in c. 89. And againe, Ventriculus amplexatur ea & longè faciliùs concoquit, quaecun{que} cum voluptate assumit, auersatur autem ea quae displicent: vnde nauseae, flatus & fluctuationes subsequun∣tur. Com. in Aph. 38. lib. 2. For wee finde by experience, that if a man in time of health haue acustomed himselfe to the continuall drinking of cold water, and hath felt no offence nether in his liuer, bladder, stomach, nor any other part, it is manifest that he findeth ease and reliefe by that which another not acquainted withall possibly cannot: yea, Physicians which proceede by reason and experience doe confesse, that there is a great force and vertue in Cu∣stome, liuely shewing the nature of euery particular bo∣dy, which, as I said euen now, Hippocrates himselfe ex∣presly auerreth, writing that a moist diet is best fitting for those persons that haue any Feuer; adding yet further, Especially (saith he) to children, & such as haue been long vsed and acquainted themselues by custom to such a diet: and consequently we must yeeld somewhat to custome; for he saith, that bad meats and drinkes being accustoma∣bly taken, are farre safer than others, if a man should so∣dainely alter old custom, and take others farre holesomer. For if one dine, which hath not vsed himselfe to it, hee is
by & by made weaker, heauy, dul, lumpish, lazie, & sickish: and if besides this he take his supper, hee shall soone feele windinesse, sowre belchings, and loosenesse of the belly; for the stomacke being repleat and ouercharged with such an vnusuall burthen, which before was wont to bee drie and emptie, now swelleth, distendeth, and with paine stretcheth it selfe out. So yet againe there be some labo∣ring men, which hauing stomacks like Estriches will dis∣gest yron, and fall to their victuals thrice in a day without any bones at all: for, Ieiunus stomachus rarò vulgaria temnit. Hungry dogges will eat thirtie puddings, as the Irish man said. There be others found, which will make a good large dinner, but take no suppers at all, (and con∣trariwise) so that if contrarie to custome they doe suppe, they shall finde themselues to be troubled with heauinesse in the belly, so that they cannot sleep without much tum∣bling and tossing. So then my conclusion is, that if one haue but accustomed himselfe to take Tabacco, hee must not sodainely leaue it, but by degrees. So that it is no maruell, if any not acquainted with taking the fume of this hearbe, if it cause a vertiginie or giddinesse in the braine, epilepticall accessions, inclinations to fainting and sounding, head-ach, dimnesse of sight, and other diffe∣rent effects, as I haue often seene. We may say the like of wine, ale, beere, and the like, to which diuers men are not inured but by long custome. How great the force & power of this cruell tyrant Cu∣stome is, that creepeth in by little & little, insinuating and cōueighing himself slily into our natures, so that at length he will be so malepart, as to vendicate the whole rule and gouernment of our bodies, prescribing and limiting new lawes, euen such as it selfe pleaseth, and abrogating olde
ancient orders, constitutions, and fashions, Theophrastus in his 9. booke de Histor. Plantar. Cap. 18. plainly sheweth by the example of one Thrasias, who durst venture to eat whole handfuls of Helleborus albus: and of Eudemus Chi∣us, who sitting one day in the open mercate, tooke two and twentie potions of the same Helleborus, and after that went to supper, and dispatcht his other ordinarie affaires & busines, without any vomiting or perturbation of sto∣macke or bodie. Hee had by degrees accustomed his bo∣die to it, by first taking a little at once, & afterwards he en∣creased the quantitie by little and little, vntill at length he durst take so much thereof as was incredible, and neuer felt hurt. Sit hence therefore that neither reason nor Philosophie can bridle or ouer-rule the power and force of custome, it is no maruell though mans bodie be ouer-mastred ther∣with: which in my conceit ought to be a good lesson to many Physicians, to regard and marke well the proper constitution and state of euerie mans bodie, & to what he hath bin most inclined or accustomed, being withall very diligent and carefull to administer nothing rashly, and at aduenture (as many blinde medicine-giuers and receit∣men doe) neither yet any desperate or vnknowne thing vnto any; for such, are no better than murtherers before God, if their Patients prooue not well vnder them. Nei∣ther let couetousnesse ouer-rule them, as those Physici∣ans and Surgeons that dally with mens bodies to get much money: but let euery one account it his dutie to doe good to all. And in so doing, they shall finde God their Phisician, not onely of their bodies, but of their soules: whereas otherwise the saying of our nation may be applied fitly vnto them, Physicians cure your selues.
The leaues of Tabacco at this day bee onely in vse (al∣though for want of them, some doe make vse of the seeds) and because they would haue them in a readinesse, they thrust them thorow with a needle and thread, and so haue them to drie in the shadow: and afterwards at their pleasure, vse them either whole, or being brought into powder. Because of his heat and drinesse, it must needs make hot, resolue, mundifie, & a little adstringe, as one may easily iudge by his vertues that hereafter follow. The drie leaues of Tabacco are good to be vsed, taken in a pipe set on fire, and suckt into the stomacke, and thrust forth againe at the nostrels against the paines of the head, rheumes, aches in any part of the body, whence∣soeuer the originall doth proceede, whether from France, Italie, Spaine, Naples, India (being all pockie hot coun∣treys) or from our familiar and best knowne diseases. Those leaues doe palliate and ease for a time, but neuer performe any cure absolutely: for although they emptie the bodies of humours, yet the cause of the griefe can∣not be so taken away. But some haue learned this princi∣ple, that repletion requireth euacuation, that is, fulnesse craueth emptinesse, and by euacuation assure themselues of health: but this doth not take away so much with it this day, but the next bringeth with it more; as for ex∣ample, a Well doth neuer yeeld such store of water, as when it is most drawne and emptied. My selfe speake by proofe, who haue cured of that infectious disease a great many, diuers of which had couered or kept vnder the sicknesse by the helpe of Tabacco as they thought; yet in the end haue been constrained, to haue vnto such a hard knot a crabbed wedge, or else had vtterly perished. Fleagme in mans bodie, as it is diuers; so diuersly it
must be altered: for being by nature cold and moist, it easi∣ly is conuerted into thicknesse, or hard & tough sliminess, and in regard of his tenacious qualitie, it is verie difficult to be remooued: for it doth not very easily giue place, either to the vertue expulsiue, or yeeld to an attractiue medicine. And to cause it to be pliable and yeelding, there be fiue things required; namely, heat, siccitie, attenua∣tion, abstersion, and cutting or diuiding, which wee call incision: all which properties Tabacco is furnished withall, and adiudged fit to be vsed in all tough and vis∣cous humours wherewith the bodie is ouer-charged. Mercurius Britannicus in his third booke De terra Au∣strali antehac semper incognita, in the description of a cer∣taine countrey, tearmed Morouia (where none but fooles dwell) I suppose that it lyeth nere Portugall, for that coun∣trey is reported to abound with fooles, as England is said to sauour of vanitie; he wondered (I say) at one thing and mused aboue the rest, and that not without iust cause, that many of the Inhabitants there do liue neither vpon bread nor meat, as other nations for the most part doe, but on∣ly on the smoke of a certaine vnholesome hearbe, which they taking at their mouthes, forthwith againe thrust forth at their nostrels, seeming as it were, so many smoa∣kie chimneys. Many men stand in doubt, neither can it be fully resolued whether the cockscombly Morouians lear∣ned this fashion frō the poor naked Indians, or the Indi∣ans from them. There be some hold opinion, that certain Indians dwelling neere vnto Torrida Zona, were the first inuentors and finders out of this smokie medicine, that inwardly also they might turne blacke: for you must ima∣gine, that their Morian-black huc pleased them won∣drous well, and they iudged it no reason that the inward
parts should any whit differ or varie from the outward. Howsoeuer it be, this is certaine, that when their noses are filled, their purses many times are emptied, and the patrimonies of many noble young Gentlemen, haue been quite exhausted, and haue vanished cleane away with this smoaky vapour, and hath most shamefully and beast∣ly flyen out at the masters nose. But yet this may seeme verie strange, yea as strange as the rich mans kitchen in Cheap-side, which had no fire in it for sixteene yeeres to∣gether, that whilest these lustie yonkers and tabacconists eleuate their noses on high, snuffing vp the fume verie gallantly, that their kitchens in the meane space haue beene key-colde. They that choppe away their patri∣monies for the vanishing smoake of Tabacco, are scarse so wise as Glaucus, who was so madde headed, as that hee would needs change and giue away his armour of gold, which was prised to be worth one hundred Oxen, with the yron armour of Diomedes, that was scarse worth nine Oxen. The famous Poet Homer maketh mention of this bartering in the sixth of his Iliades, in these words; . Id est, Aurea are∣is, centenaria nouenarijs: or as Alciatus hath translated it, lib. 2. Praetermiss. Proqúenouem centum, preferro tradidit aurum.He gaue away one hundred for nine, and gold for yron. Some vse to drink Tabacco (as it is tearmed) for wan∣tonnes, or rather Custom, & cannot forbeare it, no, not in the midst of their dinner or supper: which kind of taking is vnholsome, & very dangerous, if not slouenly; although to take it seldom, and that physically may do some good,
and is to be tolerated. Othersome there bee that spend whole daies, moneths, times and yeares (for the most part) in Tabacco-taking, not sparing to take it euen in their bed, seeking by all meanes possible to hinder and peruert the course of Nature, and naturall order: which thing is both a great misspending of precious time, and a great empairer of bodily health, accelerating by these disorders their owne deaths, before either Nature vrge, Maladie enforce, or Age require it. Wherefore wee ought euer to remember that golden Aphorisme of reuerend Hippocrates; Non satietas, non fames, non aliud quidquam bonum est, quod modum excedit. And againe, . Hoc est: adeoque in vniuer∣sum nimium, Naturae bellum indixit. A man may haue too much of his mothers blessing. It was death for any magistrate, or any one placed in high authority and of∣fice amongst the people of Locris, to drinke any wine; vnlesse for healths sake, the Physitian had prescribed to the contrarie: so I could wish the like lawe to our huff∣snuffe Tabacconists, that misspend the flowre of their youth in this smoaking vanitie. Thus you see that Ta∣bacco is a fantasticall attracter, and glutton-feeder of the appetite, rather taken of many for wantonnesse, when they haue nothing else to doe, than of any abso∣lute or necessarie vse, which is much to bee discom∣mended: but I commend the syrupe aboue this fume or smoakie medicine. Surely, if wee did obserue time, and the golden meane (so much spoken of) Tabacco it selfe is no more to be dis∣liked or reiected, thā Boleti escalenti, because the emperor Claudius Caesar died with eating of them; whereof both
Plinie in his two and twentie booke, chap. 22. Cornelius Tacitus in his twelfth booke, Suetonius Tranqaillus in Claudio. cap. 44. and Dio in his 58. booke make large men∣tion. The Storie is this: There was in times past, as there is now adaies, a kinde of Fungus esculentus, a kinde of Mushrom, which was thought to be a dish fit for Princes in regard of their delicate taste and holesomnesse, yet at length it grewe infamous, because Agrippina the Em∣presse poysoned Claudius Caesar her husband with them, either hee surfeiting through his greedie eating, as King Iohn did with eating of Lampries, as some of our histo∣ries report, (for both these Princes took a singular de∣light in either of these meats) but some say, the King di∣ed with peares; some, with plums; but most hold that he was poysoned by the hands of a pole-shorne Monk of Swinsted Abbey in Lincolneshire: the like is supposed, that the wicked woman added a little poyson to these mushroms, because she would be rid of her husband the Emperour, to the intent to settle the gouernment, and to set the crowne vpon her owne sonnes head Nero, who in∣deed succeeded Claudius in the Romane Empire. Hence proceeded those quips and taunts of Iuuenalis the fa∣mous Poet, who liued in those daies, against these kindes of mushroms, called of the, ancients, Boleti: in his first Satyre. Vilibus ancipites fungi ponentur amicis, Boletus domino: sed qualem Claudius edit Ante illum vxoris, post quem nil amplius edit. And in the sixt Satyre: —minus ergo nocens erit Agrippinae Boletus: siquidem vnius praecordia pressit
Ille senis, tremulumqúe caput descendere iussit In coelum.— Hence also proceeded that bitter taunt of wicked Ne∣ro his successour, tearming Boletus , hoc est De∣orum cibum, the meat of the Gods; because Claudius Cae∣sar died with eating of them, and the superstitious genti∣lisme imagined that their Caesars or Emperours after their deathes were translated into the number of the Gods. From hence likewise it was, that Martialis vttered this imprecation: Boletum, qualem Claudius edit, edas. And this common versicle is not yet quite forgotten: Boleti lethi caussa fuêre mei. But it is a thing not so much to bee wondred at, that poysons haue been foisted amongst mushroms, and mix∣ed also with other meats; for wee read in histories, that they haue been giuen in Sacrifices. For Victor the third Bishop of Rome was killed with poyson that was con∣ueighed into the chalice, whereof hee dranke when Masse was celebrated, not without the scoffes and mockerie of his enemies, who said, It was a verie diuine draught that sent Victor in such post haste without much adoe to the ioyes euerlasting. In this point therfore, I would frame vnto our Tabac∣conists this hortatorie admonition, that they keepe a mo∣deration in receiuing the fume thereof, and that likewise they take it not, in case it be infected with som poysonous qualitie, as it many times is, lest this Epitaph be inscribed on their graues: Here lieth he had liued longer, if He had not choakt himselfe with a Tabacco whif.
Tabacco of all men is concluded to be a verie holsome medicine, for rheumes, paines of the head, &c. and yet in the vse of Tabacco, and such hot medicines there must be a great discretion that all be done in due season, and ra∣tionally: for if so bee, that one vse hot medicines verie much, and a long time in passions of the braine, hee shall doe more hurt than good, inducing a neshnesse, softnesse, or flagginesse of the muscles and fleshie parts; their fi∣bres being relaxed, the proper nutriment of the muscles being dissipated and exhausted, and another excrementi∣tious and waterish humour comming in place, that is no∣thing apt to nourish, so that many times weaknesse of the sinewes doe proceede from these causes: for the strength of the sinewes consisteth in a mediocritie of siccitie. Furthermore it bringeth an astonishment, benumming or senselesnesse of the braine, causing as it were a resoluti∣on both of sense, motion, and of all the actions of the braine, besides fluxes of bloud at the nose, the veines be∣ing loosened, faintings or swounings by a dissipation and wasting of the spirits, and resoluing of the membranes. The Priests and enchanters of the hot countreys, doe take the fume thereof till they be drunken, that after they haue lien for dead three or foure houres, they may tell the people what wonders, visions, or illusions they haue seene, and so giue them a propheticall direction, or fore∣telling of the successe of their businesse: but the Diuell is a liar, and the father of that facultie, his end is horrour, his meane abuse, and his intent mischiefe. The weight of foure ounces of the iuyce of Tobacco being drunke, purgeth both vpwards and downewards, and procureth after a long and sound sleep, as I haue lear∣ned of a friend by obseruation, affirming that a strong
countrey-man of a middle age, hauing a dropsie, tooke of it, and being wakened out of his sleepe, called for meat and drinke, and after that became perfectly whole. Here, since we haue begun to speake of purging, I think it not besides the way, and our businesse in hand, if I tell you that which most concerneth purgatiue medicines. First therefore it must bee certainely knowne, whether those bodies that are to be purged bee first rightly prepa∣red, or not. There must therefore regard be had, if you will haue them rightly purged, you must first giue them some gentle preparatiue. And for this purpose it is requi∣red, that the bodie abound not with crude & indigested humours; that the liuer, spleene, lungs, and other noble in∣ward parts haue no inflammation, and the like; as when the veine is exceeding hot burning and red, and the Pati∣ent haue a strong Feuer: for in these and the like cases, pur∣ging medicines must not rashly be giuē. So that there are three things necessarily to be obserued in euery right pur∣gation of the bodie: the freenesse and libertie of the pas∣sages, preparation of the matter offending, & the power and strength of nature. Nicolaus Monardus saith, that the leaues of Tabacco, being made hot, are a present remedie for the paine of the head, for an inueterate head-ache, and for the paine of the head called the megrim, that hath beene of long continuance, if so be the paine proceede of any cold, win∣die or waterish humours: and they must be often appli∣ed and layed to, vntill the griefe be cleane gone. Before the application of this kinde of remedie, some vse to anoint the head with oile made of the flowers of oranges: & not hauing that, I think, Oleum costinū, irinum, oleū Euphorbij, Oleum anethi, and Chamaemelinum, or some chymicall oile
of thyme, or fennell seede, or calamint were not amisse. It ought to be taken physically (not foolishly) in a pipe, for the same purpose once in a day at the most, and that in the morning fasting, against paines of the head, stomack, and griefes in the breast and lungs: against catarrhes and rheumes, and such as are troubled with coldes, murres, the pose, and hoarsnesse. The same hearbe and fume, is prooued to be singular good against the tooth-ache: for it doth not onely cease the paines of the teeth, which proceed of any cold cause, the tooth being first cleansed and scoured with some lin∣nen cloth, dipped in the iuyce of this herb, and a pill made of the leafe being put into the tooth, but also hindreth and restraineth corruption and rottennesse of the same from any further increase. And this standeth with good reason: for if the paine either of the head or teeth proceed of colde, and this hearbe being of a hot and drying qua∣litie, must needs make against it, prouoking, stirring, and moouing thereby the expulsiue facultie, or melting the humour contained and bred in the braine; or else draw∣ing to it especially from the former ventricles of the braine into that part, which by reason of the vse, is called Infundibulum (which is nothing but a deepe cauitie in the forepart of the third ventricle of the braine, which at length goeth aboue the seat of Sphenoides:) we may not vnfitly tearme it, the braine tonnell, for from thence the humours fall into the mouth, and by that meanes are pur∣ged, and voided away. I my self know a man yet liuing in Northhāptonshire, being verie much and a long time vexed with paine and coldnesse, especially in the hinder part of his head, who hauing tried the skill and medicines of many Physicians,
and nothing at all preuailing, he was at length counselled to take Tabacco in fume; which hee yeelding vnto, after a while all the paine vanished away. And this stan∣deth with good reason: for the Tabacco looseneth the fleagme, and those pituitous humours that are bred in the head and breast, drying and coroborating the braine verie notably. And if this man had taken Tabaco, with vngula caballina, iris, thus or sulphur in fumigation, no∣thing could haue been deuised more excellent. For confirmation of this, Iohn Heurnius in the first booke of his method, ad praxin, telleth a storie of him∣selfe, how plentifuly it draweth slimie and pituitous hu∣mours from the mouth and nostrels, by taking the fume in a narrow pipe: for (saith he) it searcheth euerie corner of the braine, and is caried into the eares: and I dare bold∣ly auouch, that this hearbe is specially and peculiarly ap∣propried to the braine, being by a most easie passage ca∣ried thither, washing, purging, and clearing the braine from all corruption and filthinesse: for about a yere since being much pained with the tooth-ache, I boyled this hearb in water, adding to it some chamomile floures, and holding a spoonful of this warm decoction in my mouth, I did presently spit it forth, and so doing certaine times together, about two houres after, the paine somewhat a∣bated. The next day following, when (as my maner was) I went to a garden I had in the suburbs, and there bending downe my head to pull vp some grasse or weedes, there dropped, and flowed downe in great quantitie from my nose a great deale of moisture, as yellow as saffron, or a Kites foot, hauing the verie sent of Tabacco, and forth-with all the paine of my teeth ceased. In all my life, I cannot call to remembrance, that either bloud, or any
other superfluous humour, besides flegmaticke and wate∣rish superfluities, euer came out at my nostrels; but neuer in all my life did I see any thing more yealow, then this moist humour was that issued from me at that time. So this being granted, I can see no reason, but that one may safely vse this as a Suffitus, or a holsome hot per∣fume, as well as we doe myrrhe, masticke, pitch, Styrax, frankensence, turpentine, Castoreum, Ladanum, the gum of Iuniper, cloues, and the like being cast vpon the coles, and vsed for the griefes abouesaid. But peraduenture some will obiect and say, that Tabacco is of an ingrate & vnpleasant sent, so that many therby are brought to fain∣ting or swouning, euen by the smell thereof. To whom I answere, that it is true: and yet notwithstanding, I thinke a Calfe with one eie may easily see, that some of these forerecited medicines haue a farre more noysome, I may say loathsome smell, than this Gentleman Tabacco hath. The iudgement concerning sweet sents in diuers men, is diuers; nothing almost being common one with ano∣ther: so that quot capita, tot sensus, looke how many sun∣drie different visages and faces, so many discrepant iudg∣ments, concerning the excellencie of this or that odour. For with one, the sent of Cinamon is more fragrant than that of muske. With another, cloues seeme to surpasse them both. To another, a Rose is held more odoriserous than any of them all. So that concerning the diuersitie of sweet smels and sauours, you shall euer haue diuersitie of iudgements: so that when all the cards are cast vp, this must be the full decision, and finall determination, that those things must be chosen, which be most familiar to euery mans nature, whether meats or medicines, and those to be refused that be contrarie.
Galen the Prince of Physitians, in his Method of curing, doth affirme, that there be certaine medicaments, which by the proprietie of their nature & vertues, do more pro∣perly respect one part thā another: as for example, Agri∣mony, Hepatica nobilis, absinthiū, and all kinds of Endiue or Succorie, direct their vertues more specially to the li∣uer, then to any other part or particle of the bodie. Glans vnguentaria, germander, capers, Scolopendriū, & Ceterach called milt waste for his effects, tamariske, Cortex salicis, dancus, scordiū, calamint, asarabacca, & som others respect the spleen peculiarly. Saxifrage, betonie, calcifraga Anglo∣rum, otherwise called Perchepier, polygonū selinoides, the roots of Smallach, of Dancus, fennell, berries of Iuniper, and the seeds of melones, the reines, and vreters. The fit and proper medicines for the breast and lungs, are, the roots of fennell, of horehound, hastula regia, Scabious, Reisins of the sunne, figges, Hyssop, thyme, oke of Ie∣rusalem, licorice, barley, and fussilage, called of some blinde Physicians farfara. Mints, cynamon, wormewood and galangall, are excellent for the stomacke. For the Heart, saffron, bugloss, borage, balme, roses, basill, saun∣ders, pearle, the Bezoar stone, and gold it selfe: for as old Chaucer the English Poet saith of one of his Pilgrims a Physician, that trauailed among the rest to Saint Thomas of Canturburie, and that verie truly; For Gold in Physicke is a cordiall: Wherefore he loued Golde in speciall. Penirial, mugwort, sauin, calamint, peony, mirrh, saffrō, borax, are medicines fit for some womens griefes. Celan∣dine & eic-bright respect the eies. The sea onyō, Chamepi∣this psillium, and hermodactils, direct their vertue chiefly
to the ioynts. Staechas, Laurus, rosemarie, the male pio∣nie, misseitoe of the oke, galangall, Castoreum, betonie, margerome, sage, and our Tabacco, doe especially re∣spect the braine. Wee must also know that there bee some medicines which of their owne proper nature are offensiue to some particular parts, either by some manifest qualitie that is in them, or by some hidden propertie. For the often vse of Thus, Mel Anacardinum, and the hearbe called balme (wherewith Bees are so much delighted) doe offend the braine, perturbing the rationall facultie. Vineger is hurt∣full to the lungs and vterus. Fat things offend and sub∣uert the stomacke, causing a loathing or detestation of meats and drinkes. Sweet meats and fruits cause tumors and swellings in the liuer and spleene. Colewort, parsley, and hempe-seede hurt the eyes. Teuksburie mustard, and all sharpe things will haue a man verie soone by the nose: the Virginians, and other people of America, can∣not endure it, for if the eat any mustard with fish or flesh, they will make many a sowre face at it. Quicksiluer, as it is thought, is a great enemie to the braine of man, but more properly to the eares. The often eating of leeks, will corrupt the teeth, & lytharge hurteth the tong. The fume of Harts or Goates horne being burnt, causeth a conuul∣sion to any that is troubled with the falling sicknesse: and the same is reported for a truth, if any epilepticall person be wrapped in a Goate or Deeres skinne, and some say that the fume of Sulphur worketh the same effect. Neither is it to be pretermitted, that there be some me∣dicines, which being externally applied, doe bring both speedie, and certaine helpe and health, which being taken into the bodie, doe much hurt, and endanger the life. For
example sake, the vse of verdigrease, aes vstum squama aeris, Cadmia, Pompholyx, litharge, ceruse, & the like all these are vsed with good successe to outward vlcers & sores: which notwithstanding must not be taken inwardly, for any vl∣cer within the bodie, but in stead of them, Hyposistis, the flowers and ryndes of Pomgranates, balaustians, galles, Terra Lemnia, Sumach, the iuyce of Roses, Acacia, and the like, which are of great vertue for the curation of in∣ward vlcers, neuer offending the stomacke, liuer, or any other of the inward parts. It would be too long to set down all things that might here in this place be inserted: and although my ciesight be not so good as Linxius, who from the promontorie of Lillibey in Sicilia, did discerne and see the ships in the port of Carthage; yet I am sure, by that which I haue intro∣duced, one may plainly see, that a true Physitian ought to haue the facultie and naturall knowledge of euery thing concerning diseases, or wounds in the bodie or minde of man. For the remedying of all which, there are two things requirable; namely, the simple knowledge of eue∣rie liuing and inanimate thing, whether of minerals, vege∣tables, sensible Animals or of man, and the experience how each of these in seuerall countreys, and bodies haue their certaine operations. And seeing without doubt, God hath planted in the worlde meanes (either of Simples or of Compounds) to remedie any sicknesse, or cure any wound, although the knowledge or meanes doe not alwaies sort to ones desire, yet is not the true meanes to be neglected. And though God haue fitted euerie climate and countrey with good meanes, to relieue the ordinarie diseases and grieuances of men: yet we see for want of knowledge in Physitians, either how to vse the
Simples of their owne countries, or how to compound them aright, according to the dose of euery bodie natu∣rall, they are enforced to search into other countries for ayde. For, though we haue, as other countries, manie singu∣lar thinges to remedie the decay or disquiets of Nature; yet seeing the Simples of other countries, for some par∣ticular bodies and griefes, are more naturall then many Compoundes of our owne, and the skill is lesse to applie them, why should not Necessitie make Physitians tra∣uell for knowledge, as the olde wife for neede. We see the artificiall Bezoar-stone to be lesse profitable for some bodies, then the naturall. The fayned Sanguinis Draco∣nis, then the right which is brought from Africa: and our owne Tabacco in England or Europe, then that which naturallie groweth in America; for the diffe∣rence of climates and soyles alter much the natures of e∣uery thing. And so of such like adulterate resemblances, which necessitie and mens gaines haue laboured and ar∣ted. But lest I should seeme to wander too farre in the wildernesse of Nature, I will now returne to Tabacco againe. The suffumigation of Tabacco being taken, is a good medicine for the starknesse or stiffnesse of the neck, called Tetanus, and for any paines or aches in the bodie, procee∣ding of the cause that Tetanus doth. The iuyce or distilled water, is very good against Ca∣tarrhes, the dizzinesse of the head, and rheumes that fall downe to the eyes, for stuffing in the head or nose by meanes of colde, against the paine called the meagrim, if either you apply it vnder the temples, or take one or two greene leaues, or a drie leafe moistened in wine, and
dried cunningly vpon the embers, and laid thereto. Sternutatories, especially those which are made of Ta∣bacco, being drawne vp into the nostrels, cause sneesing, consuming and spending away grosse and slimie humors from the ventricles of the braine. These kind of reme∣dies must needs doe good where the brain is repleat with many vapours, for those that haue a lethargy or vertiginy, in all long geiefes, paines and aches of the head, in conti∣nuall senselesses, or benumming of the braine, and for a hicket that proceedeth of repletion. Rec. Piperis, Zinziberis, ana ℈i. Pyrethri, Foliorum siccorum tabaci, ℈ij. Trita naribus inspirentur ante cibum. Another Sternutamentorie. Rec. Foliorum siccorum tabaci, ℈ijs. Zingiberis, Pyrethri, ana ℈iss. Radicum Hellebori albi, grana 6. Puluerisata commisceantur, & fiat sternuta∣mentorium. Ex fistula naribus parùm infletur. Those sternutatories which are very forcible, vehement & strong, as Euphorbiū, Helleborus albus, & the like to these, must not be blown vp into the head, but rather put into a boxe, the same being a little shaken, & so holding it to the nose, to draw vp a little at once. But Tabacco is not so vio∣lent, and therefore may in my iudgement bee safely put
in practise. Besides, sternutaments are not so fitting, where the braine or head, the breast and lungs, doe abound with verie crude or raw humours and superfluities; by rea∣son that they doe mooue, trouble, and shake those parts too much, and too vehemently, which ought rather to be moderately comforted, warmed, and suffred to bee let alone quietly, that those crude iuyces might the sooner come to better digestion, and then afterwards to be spent and carried away. For otherwise the braine and chest with this preposterous proceeding will be the more stuf∣sed and ouer-charged. But when the humours there set∣led, are come to some concoction, then sneesing medi∣cines are taken with good successe, and doe preuaile very much. It is therefore euer the safer course, rather to vse Sim∣ples then cōpounded medicines, because of their excee∣ding force and violence. To end in a word, sneesing, as Cornelius Celsus (our Latine Hippocrates saith) in disea∣ses of the lungs is verie dangerous. Thus then you plainely see, that all medicines, and es∣pecially Tobacco, being rightly and rationally vsed, is a noble medicine; & contrariwise not in his due time with other circumstances considered, it doth no more than a Noblemans shooe doth in healing the gout in the foot, or a precious Ring a crampe in the finger, nor a Diademe the paine in the head, or as Lucretius the Poet saith; Nec calidae citiùs decedunt corpore febres, Textilibus si in picturis ostró{que} rubenti Iacteris, quàm si plebeia in veste cubandum est. Feuers no sooner from thy bodie flie, If thou on arras or red scarlet lie Tossing, then if thou rest On couerlets home drest.
Tabacco cleareth the eie-sight, and taketh away the webbes and spots thereof, being anointed with the iuyce bloud-warme. The oyle or iuyce dropped into the eares, and the fume likewise receiued into the eares, is good against deafnesse: a cloth dipped in the same, and laide vpon the face, taketh away the lentils, rednesse and spots thereof. An Errhine or Nasale for stuffing in the nose, and for defect of smelling. Rec. Piperis. Pyrethri, Tabaci ana ʒi. Olei naturalus balsami q. sufficit ad incorporandū. Cum melle q. s. fiat Nasale. Another Errhine. Rec. succi Tabaci, ℥i. Olei amygdalarum amararum ʒi. Masticis subtiliter pulverisatae ℈i. misce. Trahatur naso dum ore reddatur. This that followeth is good for an old pain in the head, and sharpeneth the eye-sight. Rec. Succi tabaci vel sanae sanctae Indorum, Cicla, betonicae, ana ℥i. Bulliant cum vini albi ℥ij. Oxym. scillitic. ℥ss. Fiat errhinum.
Another. Rec. Sinapi. gr. 5. Pul: fol. sicc. tabaci. Piperis albi, ana ℈ss. Ladani, Cerae, ana ʒiss. misce. Fiat Nasale, pyramidis vel tent. forma. When wee are to vse strong Errhines or Nasales, the mouth must be full of water. If after the taking of these kindes of medicines, the nostrels do smart or suffer much paine, then may it bee taken away or diminished, either with womans milke, oyle of violets, or vnguentum Ro∣satum. They that haue sore eyes, must not deale with them, nor yet they that either haue, or are subiect to vlce∣rations in the nose, or such persons who suffer much head-ache caused by the French pockes: for if they bee too busie with them, their noses perhaps may in the meane space be in danger of falling downe flat. Neither must these Errhines, or Nasales be compounded of any venomous matter: for so there may growe vlcers, and filthie sores in that part. Lastly, when you take them, there must care be had that the nose bee not filled too full; least that respiration, and drawing in of the breath, bee thereby letted or hindred: nor yet to bee vsed (especially in deafnesse or dulnesse of hearing) but when the bodie aforehand sufficiently is prepared and purged, as Alexan∣der Trallianus the learned Physician saith. The leaues of this hearb being decocted in water, are good against the paines of the breast, an olde cough,
asthma (the nature of which disease is to stoppe the pas∣sage of the winde and make vs breath vneasily) and the griefes which arise of colde and waterish humors. In like manner an celegma, linctus, or lohoch, made of the decoction of the hearbe is excellent good against the same griefes. Sometimes the fume cureth those that be asthmatike, but then it is necessatie that the bodie first be cleansed, if occasion so require. A sirupe made of the decoction of this hearbe with sufficient sugar, and so taken in very small quantitie, dis∣chargeth the breast from rotten and phlegmaticke mat∣ter. But heere in these cases we must prouide carefully a∣forehand, and well see to it, and beware that we vse not these Suffumigations and smoaking perfumes of Tabac∣co, where there is any spitting of bloud; for the small veines thorough the acrimonie of suffimentes are ope∣ned: neither yet are they to be vsed in drie diseases of the breast: and when they are to be most vsed, the whole bo∣dy ought first to be purged. Now for my owne conceite, I haue proued that Ta∣bacco being taken with styrax, calamita, and the powder of tussilago or coltes foote, helpeth these fore-remem∣bred griefes. And to this, besides mine owne experi∣ence, you shall haue the testimonie and attestation of Mathias De Lobel and of Peter Penor, two learned men, in their Herball entituled, Stirpium aduersaria noua, expressly affirming that there is not a more effectuall or speedie remedie against the consumption of the lungs, and such as be asthmaticall, and such griefes also as pro∣ceede from plentie of tough and viscous humours. And And thus would I prescribe it:
Rec. Foliorum sanae sanctae Indorum. Styracis. Sandarachae. Terebinthinae. Mastiches. ana partes aequales. This medicine being rightly vsed, will deserue due com∣mendation, in regard it helpeth those which are short winded, or haue any slimie and flegmaticke humours growne to matter or suppuration. It also doth much good to pleuriticall persons, and likewise for the cough. For a verie moist breast, the leaues of Tabacco applied, are prooued to bee singular, without any other thing ad∣ded to them. For those medicinall meanes that doe ad∣stringe, or be of a verie drying qualitie, are not rashly to be layed vpon the breast. I knew my selfe a verie learned Gentleman dwelling at Buckworth in Huntingtonshire who had long languished of an Orthopnoea; so that by reason of too many slimy and waterish humours which distilled downe from the braine into the chest, his lungs were so choaked, that hee could not breath, but by holding his necke vpright, insomuch that many times, especially in the night season, he was in danger to be suffocated: by meanes of which, and his ex∣treame cough, together with an extenuation of the whole bodie, he was adiudged Tabidus of most Physicians that visited him, yea and to be almost past all hope of recoue∣ric, and one of the Physicians being first asked his opinion, concerning the sicke Patient, cast out these words:
Virtus lassa cadit, soluuntur frigore membra, Vitáque tartareas fugit indignata per vmbras. Faint fals his courage, and his limbs doe faile for want of heat. His life disdaining, packes to hell, where Pluto hath his seat. And because I being his familiar friend, and one that was best acquainted with his whole course, and order of Physicke & diet, which was both rationally prescribed, and diligently taken and obserued, yet nothing taking ef∣fect that was administred, when al men thought he would haue died, he was at length counselled to take Tabacco in fume: which he daily did, and onely by this way by little and little, he recouered his former health and strength of bodie. His friend before spoken being a Doctor of Phy∣sick, and he who had cast forth the two former verses, see∣ing the sodaine mutation, and wondring at the good suc∣cesse, he thus againe pleasantly and conceitedly answered. Mors aderat, cymbám{que} Charon remós{que} parabat: Asseruit medicina senem iam aetate trementem, Restituit{que} nouas effoeto in corpore vires. In English thus: Now death appeares, and Charon ready stands To giue him passage with his boat and oares: But Physicke frees the old man from his hands, And him afresh to life and strength restoares. They that haue seene the proofe hereof haue credibly reported that when the Moores and Indians haue fainted
either for want of food or rest, this hath been a present remedie vnto them, to supply the one, and help the other. The vse of masticatories or apophlegmatisms, are much commended, and fitly practised against the affects and passions of the head, teeth, and wind-pipe: and speci∣ally they correct inueterate hurts and maladies, and such as be of long continuance, such as be dulnesse or dimnesse of the eye-sight, deafnesse, pustules of the face & head, & when the nostrels haue any vlceration in them, to auert and take away their fluxe of humours. And to effect this, these that follow are much commended, videlicet, Hyssope, the rootes of Iris, acorus, gentian, ginger, and galingall, but chiefly Tabacco: I will set downe some form of these masticatories, that you may take your choyse where you please. Rec. Zingiberis, Caryophillorum ana ℥j. Sanae sanctae Indorum, Piperis ana ʒss. Staphisagriae ʒij. Mastiches, ℥j. Fiant pastilli addita cera, vel ʒij. cortic. cappar. addduntur. Another Apophlegmatisme. Rec. Sanae sanctae Indorum, Mastiches, ana ℥j. Ex cera in pastillos avellanae magnitudinis for∣mentur.
An Apophlegmatisme is also made of moist things, whē as the decoction of sharpe things is held in the mouth, as thus: Rec. Sanae sanctae Indorum, Thymi, Origani, ana p. j. Vuarum passarum, Staphisagriae, ana ʒij. Cubebarum, ʒiij. Sinapi, ʒj. Coquantur ex aqua. Gargarismes also are much vsed for all passions of the mouth, and the Almonds, for inflammations, and to deterge and cleanseslimy and flegmaticke humours, and for vlcers: and for these causes, Tabacco must of necessitie bee commended, and put in the first ranke. A Gargarisme to cleanse tough and viscous fleagme. Rec. Fol. tabaci, m. j. Flo. steehados. Flo. rorismarini, ana p. j. Glycyrrhizae rasae, ℥j. Passularum, Ficuum, ana paria decem. Coquantur in aqua hordei integri. In colat. liss. dissolue mellis ros. col. ℥iiij. Misce.
Another Gargarisme for putride, rotten, and filthie vlcers of the mouth. Rec. Foliorum tabaci, ligustri, Rosarum rubrarum, Rubi bati, Rubi saxatilis, Fragaria sterilis, ana q. v. Coquantur omnia in vase sictili nouo ex aqua, & fiat gargarisma. Another Gargarisme for the Almonds of the throat that are inflamed. Rec. Foliorum rubi Idaei, Foliorum tabaci, Trifolij acetosi, ana q. s. Coquantur in aq. q. s. ad tertias. Iuricolato adde syr. aceto. Simplicis, ℥ss. Syrupi myrtillorum, ℥jss. Misce. These gargarismes are of notable force and vertue to intercept, and stay the fluxion of humours into any part, to hinder inflammations, to cease paine, to cleanse, de∣terge, and bring to curation all vlcers, and soares in the mouth oriawes. A gentle Gargarisme for these intentions. Rec. Sanae sanctae Indorum, Serpilli, ana m. ss.
Caricarum pinguium, ℥ij. Aquae q. sufficit. Fiat coctio. Rec. Huius decocti, l. ss. Oxymelitis simplicis, ℥ij. Misce. If you will haue it a little stronger, then mixe some spices with it, mustard-seede, and the like: or in stead of water, take the iuyce of sage, calamint, hyssope, or cost∣marie, with Oxymel scilliticum. But here lest I should seem to be too prodigal in the prai∣ses of Tabacco, I must (by the way) aduise you to be very warie & circumspect in the vsing of it in masticatories, and such medicines as be Saliuā ducentia: and first that if you mix any other ingredient with it, you must be verie care∣full that they bee all of a pleasing odour and smell, that they may be held in the mouth the longer time without a∣ny loathing detestation, or irksomnesse. And secondarily, wee must be verie precise in altogether abstaining from Tabacco, in case there bee any vlcers of the mouth or throat, likewise in inflammations of the lungs, and in hot sharpe rheumes and catarrhes, that destill or drop downe right into the lungs: so that Tabacco must not bee pre∣scribed to any that is subiect, aptly disposed, or in danger to fall into any these fore-rehearsed griefes and passions, neither yet is it rightly vsed in vlcers of the lungs, least the humor through an euill custome might fall down thither; but in this case, errhines for diuersion sake are fitter, which are a forme of medicines, ordained to purge the braine at the nose. And this I take to bee the chiefest, and most safe course to be obserued in the administration of this
famous Tabacco, for these griefes aboue repeated. If after the vsing of these Masticatories, or any Apo∣phlegmatismes, any thing cleaueth to the roofe of the mouth or palate, it is to bee washed or rinsed with some warme water, or rather in some decoction of lico∣rice and barley. There is also another thing especially to bee obserued, concerning masticatories and errhines, that they all ought to be of a hot and sharpe qualitie and nature, and besides that, of a pleasant taste and sent, because therby the spirits animall, may the better bee refreshed and comforted, and likewise that the expulsiue facultie may the more readily and liuely be stirred vp, and prouoked with such things as be of a sharpe and piercing operation and vertue, to fetch away that tough slime, or other thicke humours and grosse superflaities contained in the head. Neither ought they to haue any malignitie, or euill qualitie in thē, such as be coloquintida, scammonie, & turpethū: for the membrane of the mouth is all one, & of the very selfe-same substance with the tunicle of the stomack; the mouth therfore and the Oesophagus being hurt, and offended, they doe easily communicate their dammages to the stomack. And hence it proceedeth, that such persons wil complain oftentimes that their meats which they haue receiued, do seem vnto them to bee both bitter, and of a stinking and vnsauourie taste. Galen saith that we must altogether refraine from these errhines and masticatories, vnlesse necessitie vrge thereto. And doe you not thinke there is an extreame necessitie, when through an intollerable and vehement paine of the head, there is danger feared of an apoplexie, epilepsie, blindnesse, or the like? Will not a greater danger and hurt
redound to the whole body by means of any of these, thē there will by offending the mouth with any distastful sent or ingrate odor? Wherfore I conclude, that euen of ne∣cesity, wee must sometimes bring them into vse. We must abstain from such things as be very ingrate & vnpleasant, as staphisacre, iuyce of Tithimals, of the wilde cucumber, & Tabacco, being to many the worst of thē al. So then when al the reckoning is cast vp, as Galen in the se∣uenth of his Method affirmeth, the properties, qualities, & natures of euery particular mans cōstitution & tempera∣ture, ought throughly to be considered & sifted. You shal find some men, that if they go about to dispatch any busi∣nes in the night, to which they haue not bin accustomed, they cannot by any means fal to any rest or sleep. Some a∣gain there be, that if they tast of any thing that carieth but the bare name of a medicine, forth with they will so abhor & loath it, as they cannot chuse, but must needes disgorge themselues, reiecting al that is in the stomack: which thing (saith he in the first book of Alimēts) is partly to be refer∣red to custom & partly to be attributed to the proper & peculiar nature of euery mans tēperament. And he intro∣duceth an exāple of Arias the Peripatetike, who being by nature of a thin & slēder body, & hauing the mouth of his stomack very cold, so that vpō euery litle occasion of coo∣ling it, he would straight waies be taken with an hicket, & by means thereof, durst neuer be so hardy as to drinke or taste cold water, at length being taken with a feuer, & con∣strained of som physicians cōtrary to his custom to drink cold water, hee presently died. And yet with others a∣gain, we see it falleth not out so; for vnles you boldly giue them to drink some colde liquor fit for them you shall ve∣ry speedily bring their life into great danger: For
Hic satus ad pacem: hic cast rensibus vtilis armis. Naturae sequitur semina quisque suae. For as I haue touched a little before, there are some men found, who can by no meanes brooke, or away with sugar, honie, oyle, or vineger, and the like, wherewith notwithstanding a great many doe feed full sauourly, and are thereby well nourished and refreshed. The selfe-same thing is to bee obserued in taking this or that medica∣ment. I know some of such diuers and different natures, that they are more offended with Cassia fistularis, than with Rubarb or Agarick. Others again there be that can more easily away with Diagredium, being corrected, then with Rhubarbe; at whose smell, yea, and many times, at the ve∣ry naming of it, they are so disquieted and moued, as they are readie to cast vp all in their stomacks. In some persons a Glister worketh very strangely, causing such a garboile, rumbling and rowling, that it many times (ascending vp∣wards) commeth out the wrong way, I meane at the mouth: and yet you shall haue the same persons nothing squeamish at the taking of any Purge, though neuer so bitter or loathsome in taste. Othersome cannot endure a Suppositorie, which will easily admit a Glister. We shall see some in other matters, and enterprises, to con∣tend euen with the most valiant, that dare venture life and limbe, that cannot yet endure the letting of bloud; and euen before the instrument touch them, their hearts will turne into liuers, and so fall downe in a swoune: whereas weaklings; milke-sops, and spider-catchers, corner-cree∣pers, and cowards in other matters, and meacockly wo∣men
wil suffer and endure a verie large quantity of bloud to bee taken from them, without any shrinking, the least paine, trouble or disquiet that may be. By all which it is plaine and manifest, that the nature of euerie sick Patient is to be wel considered, and the proper curation to be fitted to him; and againe, because the pro∣prietie of each mans nature and complexion is ineffable, and cannot aptly in words bee vttered, nor in any exact science bee comprehended or described, I pronounce and adiudge him to be the best Physician of euery griefe, and sicknesse, which hath already acquired, and attained vnto such a certain way or method, by which he can both readily know and discern the temperaments, and natures of men one from another, and by a good and rationall coniecture, prescribe fit and conuenient remedies. For, to thinke that there is but one common and beaten hie way to cure all persons alike, as blocke-headed and dun∣sticall Empiricks, and quacksaluers imagine, is meere madnesse. For why? a common and generall man is not cured, but each one particularly: one hauing one di∣stinct temperature, and another man being endued with another particular nature, and different constitution. So then to draw to an end of this discourse, because I haue been caried beyond my compasse futher than I thought, our chiefe studie and care must be, to know certainely of what temper euery mans bodie is. For medicines doe either retaine, lose, or alter their vertue and qualities ac∣cording to the diuers natures of each seuerall constituti∣on, to whom they are giuen. And this, besides our owne practise, may be further confirmed by Hippocrates, l. 3. de Morb. Ac. where he flatly telleth vs, that melicratum in some persons is diuretike, with others diaphoretike, and
with some againe it causeth purging. And so may wee say of our Tabacco, that with some it is accounted and estee∣med to be of an excellent sent; but others againe cannot endure it. And thus I will stop my course a while in my full careere. The leaues of Trinidada Tabacco, being warmed vn∣der the embers, neuer shaking off the ashes, and applyed and laide often warme to the stomacke, doe much helpe the great shiuering, or exceeding shuddering coldnesse thereof, and windinesse in the same. Some for the coldnesse and winde in the stomacke, vse to take the greene leaues, and bruise them in their hands (prouided that first they bee a little anointed, or dipped in oyle) and then make application to the stomacke. The leaues of Tabacco being bruised, and put to steep in vineger, and applyed as an vnguent vpon the stomacke, are found by experience to bee very good against the ob∣structions of the stomacke and spleen: on which parts a∣gaine the leaues warmed, or a linnen cloth dipped in the warme iuyce thereof, must bee laide on: but in defect of the leaues, the powder of Tabacco being made, and wrought vp with some common vnguent that is aperient or opening the obstructions of these parts is much com∣mended, if so be that the obstructed and swelled parts be therewith a good while anointed. The women of America, commend this hearbe in all crudities, rawnesse, and ill digestion of the stomacke, es∣pecially in children, and such also as be of riper yeares: and they vse first to anoint the lower parts of the belly with cōmon oile, & then the leaues being rosted vnder the em∣bers, to be applied to the same forepart of the stomack, and also to the back directly against the same. These leaues
thus rosted and applyed, doe much soften, and gently purge the belly, prouided alwaies that you doe renew, and refresh them, so often as neede is. An Vnguent for a colde stomacke. Rec. Oleorum, Macis, Menthae, Absinthij, ana ʒij. Galangae, Garyophyllorum, ana ℈j. Corticumcitri, Calami aromatici, ana ℈j. Sanae sanctae Indorum, ʒss. Cerae nouae quod sufficit. Fiat vnguentum. You may to this vnguent adde a little muske if you please. But if windinesse and colde haue much preuailed and proclaimed open warre to the stomacke: then for surenes sake, after the application of the former vnguent, it will not be amisse to lay on it this or the like Scutum. Rec. Sanae sanctae Indorum, Absinthij, Maioranae siccae, ana ʒjss. Caryophyllorum, Ligni aloes, ana ʒj. Seminum foeniculi, Baccarum lauri, ana ʒijss. with a little cotton stitched, quilted or interbasted between two fine linnen clothes or silkes, with laces or strings tied or sowed to it,
(as will be fittest) let it bee applyed to the region of the stomacke: Or this Sacculus to be thus prepared for the coldnesse, and windinesse in the stomacke and spleene. Rec. Foliorum sanae sanctae Indorum, Florum chamomillae, ana m. j. Foliorum pulegij regalis, Centaurij minoris, Absinthij, ana ℈iiij. Seminum Rutae, Sem. Erucae, Nasturtij hortensis, Barbareae, ana ʒjss. Beat them all into grosse powder, and of these make a Sac∣culus, as before applying it to the place affected. Another Sacculus which is good to resolue and molli∣fie, fit to be vsed in a drie and schyrrous spleene. Rec. Salis communis, Seminis cumini parùm torrefacti, anam. ss. Florum meliloti, m. j. Fol. sanae sanctae Indorum, m. j. ss. Radicum ebuli, ℥j. Seminis thysselij, ʒ. v. Misce. Siccētur in tegula, & tenui include liuteo, fiat Sacculus ad formā splenis, qui, vsus tempore, acerrimo aceto, in quo candentis molaris lapi∣dis frustum extinctum sit, rigetur. Of these make two bagges, to be applied to the spleene, one after another. In making of any Sacculus to bee applyed to the sto∣macke,
the powders must not exceede one ounce and a halfe; for oftentimes ʒvj are sufficient. This plant then, as you heare, by the testimonie of M Iohn Gerard, Carolus Clusius, and other learned men, cureth winde, coldnesse, and stopping of the stomacke and spleene; in regard that as all men by sound experi∣ence finde, it consumeth moist and waterish humours in all parts of the body, taking away, and cleansing the su∣perfluous sliminesse, and such other like tough and con∣gealed matter, which caused loathing of meat, and other oppilations: so that this hearbe rightly vsed; must needes disperse winde, in regard of his hot qualitie, stirring vp an appetite, and desire to meat, by reason of that milde and gentle adstriction, and cleansing vertue it hath. So that he which is well acquainted with the noble qualities, and hath made true grounded experience, concerning the right vse of this plant, needs not be so sollicitous to run, and gad in all haste to the good towne, when his belly a∣keth or is griped, for a pinte of maluefie, a penie pot of sherie-sacke, hippocras, aqua vitae, rosa-solis, or Doctor Stephens water, to heat their mawes, when they are a lit∣tle troubled with gripings in the bellie by meanes of winde: Or yet to haue readie in their closets and studies, nutmegs, or ginger condite, diatrion pipereon, sugar∣cakes and jumbles, manus Christi, aromaticum rosatum, and the like, much lesse to buy plaisters, or vnguents. And yet we must, as I haue praemonished, not bee too knack∣hardy in the vse of it: but withall this prouiso must be cari∣ed in minde, that in the imbecillitie & weaknes of the sto∣macke, we doe euer commixe withall such things as doe strengthen the liuer, either because from thence the natu∣rall spirits be diffused, scattered, or let run into the whole
bodie, or at leastwise because it is the shop of bloud. And when by meanes of a verie hot liuer, a colde fluxe of humours annoyeth, wee must by all meanes possible refrigerate the liuer as the cause, and then the stomacke will so much the more easily returne into his owne tem∣per and nature. So that in this case, Tabacco is not so excellent as many suppose. Lastly, in the application of hot remedies to the stomacke, moderate adstringents must be commixed. Tabacco is giuen with good successe to such as are ac∣customed to swoune, and are troubled with the colicke and windinesse, against the dropsie, the wormes in chil∣dren, the piles, & the sciatica or gowt in the hanch, or hip. Some will thinke it strange, that it will cure panting and beating at the heart, and Syncope stomachica, as I haue found by practise, that it hath remedied these griefes: and yet others I haue knowne, that found so little ease there∣by, that euen by comming into the place, where the fume is receiued, they will bee ready to faint, and fall into a swoune, or vtter failing of strength. Well then, for re∣solution hereof, we must moreouer consider, and adde to my former discourse, that by the particular nature of each singular indiuiduall vnder the species of man, is manifest∣ly to bee discerned the incertainty of the accidents; yea, and in some sort of the humane senses also: for who would not wonder, that Demophon one of the Squires that was Caruer to Alexander the Great, how that con∣trarie to the nature of all other men, hee would grow hot and warm in the shadow, and would shake & quiuer for cold in the sun? And Andron the Argiue would trauel tho∣rowout the most dry, & barren sandy places of the desarts of Lybia and Afrike, without enduring of any thirstinesse.
Others there haue beene, who onely by seeing, yea, and by smelling of Coleworts, onions or garlicke, haue fallen into a swoune, and some againe by the onely fume and smell of Tabacco. And Matthiolus that learned Phy∣sician in his Commentaries vpon Dioscorides, doth assure vs, that he himselfe knew a man in whom this was natural. And albeit it be most certaine, that the hemlock be a most strong poison, and that the noble Socrates was poyso∣ned therewith in the citie of Athens; yot doth Galen as∣sure vs (in the third booke-De Simpl. med. fac.) that there was an old woman in that same towne which did feed, & liue vpon the same hearbe. And I my selfe know many country-people that wil not stick to giue the posset-drink thereof without any curious respect of quantitie to any their friends that are vexed with hot or burning feuers. What flower is more pleasant and odoriferous, than the Rose? and yet Auratus Lusitanus telleth vs, how he knew a man, who by the onely sight of a Rose, would fall into a swoune: and of this nature also, as I am credibly infor∣med by men of no small reputation and grauitie, was the late Lady Henneage: yea, her skinne (as some say) would blister, if any part of her body had been lightly touched with a Rose, either damaske, red, or white. Some there be that doe not loue flesh, others cannot away with fish, and another whom I was well acquain∣ted with, dwelling at Ashdon in Essex, could neuer a∣bide the taste either of fish or flesh. Some doe abhorre cheese; and there bee some men, to whom fruit is so hatefull, that if they doe but see any to eat thereof, they will bee enforced to fall a vomiting. Some againe haue an excellent quicke and sharpe sight in the night, and in the darke, as had Tiberius Caesar, and Ieronimus Cardanus,
and they can see but very little and badly in the day. O∣thers bee that will swallow glasse, mettall, wooll, bricks, and other such like things, and (which is almost incredi∣ble) by the heat of their stomacke, will bee able to digest them. There be three things generally which do make meats, and nourishments, which of their owne nature are hurt∣full, to be more pleasant, and lesse offensiue: that is to say, vse and custome, the pleasure and delight that one is pos∣sessed with, and a strong and firme stomacke: forgood and holesome meats, if the stomacke cannot away with them, doe subuert, and cause a loathing, and abhorring in it: and againe, if the stomacke bee verie weake, it easily refuseth and reiecteth meats of quicke and easie digesti∣on. In like maner concerning odours and smels, with all men, nor yet with the most, the sauour of Tabacco cannot be vnpleasant, nor produce such strange and feare∣full effects. A Cerote against wormes. Rec. Myrrhae, Aloes, ana ʒj. Pul. fol. sanae sanctae Indorum, Sem. abrotani, ana ℈ss. Cerae, resinae, an q. s. Fiat ceratum. A liniment against the wormes in children. Rec. Succi foliorum sanae sanctae Indorum, ʒiij. Pulueris scordij,
Aloes, ana ℈ij. Olei communis, ℥j. Cerae parum. Misce & fiat linimentum. Now follow such other medicines as are made of Ta∣bacco, & first concerning the Sciatica. For it is found by experience of the learned, that it mitigateth the pain of the gout, if the leaues be rosted in the hot embers, and apply∣ed to the agrieued part. For paines likewise of the ioynts the tender leaues of Tabbacco, or Nicotiana, being brui∣sed and applied to the place, vntill it beginne to looke red, are singular. In like sort a Cataplasme performeth the same effect, and is more effectuall then the former, being thus made. Rec. Radicum Althaeae, Rad. liliorum, Iridis, ana ℥j. Foliorum sanae sanctae Indorum, m j. Florum chamaemeli, Meliloti, Summitatum anethi, ana p. j. Seminum lini, Foenugraeci, ana ℥ss. Cymini, Baccarum lauri, ana ʒiij. Croci, ʒss. Axungiae anserina. Medullae vituli, Bntyri, Olei liliorum quantū sufficit. Fiat Cataplasma.
This Cataplasme is emollient, and softneth tumours, it digesteth and asswageth paine, and resolueth and discus∣seth winde. These Cataplasmes are seldome administred but where the body is first purged. A Fomentation that addeth strength to the weakned parts. Rec. Foliorum sanae sanctae Indorum, m. j. Foliorum rosmarini, Staechados, Chamaepiteos, Hyssopi, Nasturtij, ana m. ss. Coquantur ex vino austero, & cum spongijs fiat Fotus. For paine in the ioynts or hippe-bone, an excellent Cataplasme. Rec. Lact is, l. j. Micas duas panis albi. Coquantur, et adde Pulueris tabaci, m. ss. Croci, ℈j: Vitellos duos ouorum, Olei rosarum, Olei Chamaemeli, ana ʒvj. Fiat Cataplasma: et bis die applicetur calidè.
A Suffumigation to be taken when the ioynts are much loosened, or relaxed with too much moisture. Rec. Foliorum sanae sanctae Indorum, m. ij. Foliorum lauri, Fol. Saluiae, ana m. j. ss. Hyssopi, Betonicae. Verbasci, ana m. j. Coquantur ex vino: lapides igniti hoc consper∣gantur. Manè & vesperi admittat hunc vaporem loco calido. After hee hath receiued the fume or vapour of these hearbes a good while, so soone as the Patient is ready to come forth, let him straight waies goe to his warme bed, and take one dram of excellent treacle in hot posset-ale: so being couered very warme with clothes, let him sweat one houre, two or three after it, as his strength will en∣dure. Experience by some persons a fewe yeares since hath brought to light, that Tabacco resisteth and breaketh the force of poysons, and especially that most dangerous ve∣nome, wherewith the Cannibals doe anoint their darts, and arrowes: for before the vertue of this was knowne, they were wont to cast the powder of Sublimatum on their wounds. Now the Spaniards knew well, that it would ouer-master and infringe the power of poyson, and that by these meanes: It fortuned that certaine Can∣nibals sayled in their canowes to S. Iohn de Porto Rico, of purpose to kill those Indians and Spaniards they found
there, with their in uenomed shifts. So arriuing at the place appointed, they forthwith slew the Indians, and some Spaniards, wounding many other: and wanting sub∣limate to cure their wounds, a certain Indian taught them to wring and presse out the iuyce of this Tabacco, and to apply it to their wounds, and after they had done this, to take the leaues being braised, & so to lay vpō the wounded place: which being done, straight waies the paines abated, and all those symptomes, accidents, passions or effects which doe vsually accompany such inuenomed wounds, the poyson and venome thereof (I say) was by this ouer∣come and vtterly vanquished, and the wounds perfectly cured. So from that time forwards, men began to put in pra∣ctise the leaues of this plant against strong & deadly poy∣sons. And the Catholicke King himselfe (I speak as a Ro∣mist) hauing a desire to trie the vertues of this hearbe, cau∣sed a dog to be wounded in the throat, & with the poison that hunters vse, the place to be rubbed and anointed, and within a while after, good store of the iuyce of Tabacco to be dropped into the sore, & the leaues also being beatē or bruised to be layed ouer, and bound close to the wounded place, and by this meanes the poore dogge escaped the danger, not without the amazement, and wondrous admi∣ration of all that saw or knew it. In like maner, it being applied to venomous and pestilent carbuncles, botches, or sores, it bringeth a hard crust vpon the place, and so ab∣solutely cureth them. And against the bitings or sting∣ings of poysonous beasts, or any venomous liuing crea∣ture they are a present remedie. They affirme and holde for certaine moreouer, that a man in France (hauing a sore vlcer orapostume, caused by
the euill of Naples or Spaine, (chuse which you will, all is but one, for the best of them is but Hydra malorum, as Au∣ger Ferner saith) that wee in plaine good English call, the great Pockes, or, the French something, by the applicati∣of the leaues of this plant, was immediatly cured thereof. This is Morbus contagiosus, though not Pestilentialis: & I must confes, that I am somwhat backward in belieuing of this, and therfore I will leaue euery man to his owne liber∣ty of beleeuing or refusing this. But for the former exam∣ple, I dare boldly say: for besides a Kings testimonie, you shall haue the attestation of sundry good merchants of this Citie of London to confirme as much. And I can see no reason why, but that the decoction of our owne coun∣trey Tabacco should as well, and to as good successe be v∣sed in the plague, & other poisonous sicknesses, as tormen∣till, burnet, the wilde Angelica, and that of the garden, di∣ctamnus, marigolds, butter burre, Carduus benedictus, S. Iohns wort, Morsus diaboli, Scabiose, gentian eye bright, water germander, vinca peruinca, Iuniper, and bay-beries, with a hundred the like. And a medicine in the plague thus prepared, I should iudge to be verie effectuall. Rec. Pulueris radiois Angelicae Hortensis vel syluestris, ʒj. Theriacae optimae, ʒj ℈ss. Aquae stillatitiae, sanae sanctae Indorum, ℥iiij. Aceti optimi, ℥ss. Misce. This is to be taken warme at one time, and presently to go to bed and to mooue sweat: let the sweat be continued gently and easily foure or fiue houres, or more if strength will endure, and keep warme after for two daies. If a sore doe appeare, then make a pultes with wheaten bread, two handfuls, sweet butter ℥ij. of the leaues of Ta∣bacco, and the hearbe called Diuels bit, of either halfe a
handfull, with sufficient water make a pultes. After it is made, put to the pultes vj. onions roasted vnder the em∣bers, and mingle them. Lay of this hot to the place, and shift it twise or thrise in a day. An Vnguent for a pestilent Carbuncle. Rec. Foliorum sanae sanctae Indorum, m. j. Contundantur addendo vitel. Oui vnius Cum salis, zss. Vnguent. Basilisco. zij. Misce. Fiat instar vnguent. & applicetur super Car∣banculos. Aqua Theriacalis ad Pestem. Rec. Liquoris stillatitij sanae sanctae Indorum, l. viij. Antidoti Mithridatici Damocratis, ℥vj. Cardui benedicti, Scordij, Galegae, ana m. ij. Macerentur simul per noctem, posteá destillen∣tur, s. a. Cap. ℥iiij. pro vice. But heere a great doubt and controuersie may arise, whether as sometimes we see one poyson to be the expel∣ler of another poyson; so in like sort, whether one stin∣king sauour, and graueolent or ill odour, and vapour of some pestilent breath or ayre, may bee the proper amu∣let or preseruatiue against any such poyson, to bee hanged about the necke: for at this time let it bee granted (to
please some) that Tabacco is of no good smell or sent and that it is a little poysonous. For wee see some daily in the time of any generall or grieuous infection of the plague, for auoidance thereof and for preseruation sake, will smell vnto the stinking sauour of some loathsome Priuie, or fil∣thy Camerine and sinke; and this they make reckoning is one of the best counter-poysons, that may bee deuised against any pestiferous infection: for their nature being inured to these, they will afterwards not seeme to passe for any pestilent malignitie of the ayre, and dare boldly aduenture without any preiudice, or impeachment to their health, into any place or companie whatsoeuer. And to perswade vs the more easily to this, they obiect to vs for example sake, those women that spend their daies con∣tinually in hospitals for Pilgrims, & for poore trauellers, who are accustomed to euery abhominable sauour of the sicke; whereof we shall neuer see or very seldome, any of them either to be taken, or die with any pestiferous infe∣ction, though neuer so dangerous. In like maner, there be some that in time of the greatest heat and rage of the Pestilence, doe kill dogges, cats, and other like creatures, suffering them to be cast, and lie rotting and stinking in corners of streets, crosse pathes, and where many waies meete, thinking that by these meanes, the rotten, stinking and euill vapour that from them is carryed vpwards, fil∣leth the ambient ayre, and so either drinketh vp, consu∣meth, or else quite altereth the pestilent infection there∣of. After which sort we read, that in times past a certain Physician freed Scythia, now called Tartaria, from the mischiefe of a most dangerous pestilence. I am not ignorant, how that sometimes one poyson is the preseruatiue against another poyson, and the flesh of
vipers (which entreth into the famous composition of Mithridatum) to resist and quell, not onely his owne, but euen the venenositie of other Serpents. There is not a pre∣senter remedie for one that is dangerously strooke of a ve∣nomous Scorpion, than the oyle of Scorpions it selfe. There be many liuing creatures that haue certain hid pro∣perties against diuers euils: and so we see that experience hath giuen the knowledge of many medicines, of the which none can giue any certaine reason. Wherefore I would that some would experiment those of our owne countrey, and compound some Theriaca or Alexiphar∣macall medicine of our own plants, which the euerlasting God hath giuen to our owne vse: the which to my iudge∣ment would proue more excellent, farre better, and more sure than vipers (though neuer so wel corrected) of whose flesh partly, is made and composed the famous electuary, called Theriaca magna; knowing that it is not sure to vse vi∣pers, because of their deadly poison that they beare, what∣soeuer others say. But to returne from whence I haue a little digressed, I will not deny, but that such persons as haue been acquain∣ted and accustomed to a bad and vnholsome stinking aire, or any pestilent malignity, but that they will smell vnto, & easily endure any thing that may be imagined worse then any stinke it selfe or carion-like smel, without either dan∣ger, trouble, or any displeasure at all, and doe recke so little of the plague when it rageth most, as I haue seen some, & known moe, euen fasting and without fencing their heart or spirits with any antidote, to haue buried moe than two hundred, whom the plague had bereft of life. And yet this I say, that Tabacco is not so perillous as som would make the world beleeue, but that amongst the proper curations
and alexiteries against any pestilent infection, this obtai∣neth not the last place. Galen in his third book De Alimentorum facultatibus, plainely sheweth, that in his daies there were Egyptians that fed as sauourly on Serpents, as othersom did of Eeles. The new-found world nourisheth great store of Serpents and Lyzards of a maruellous greatnesse, the which are easily taken of those countrey people without danger: yea the Neigers eat these Lyzards, so doe the Indians of Ame∣rica, both these and also the lesser ones which are of the bignesse of a mans legge. And who hath not read (though from long iourneys large lies are afforded) what Peter Martyr of Angleria in his Decades hath written? And Laurētius Ioubertus, de Cutis capitis affectibus, wil resolue vs, that the Americans, and their neighbours doe the same. About three degrees and a halfe from the equinoctiall, there is found a riuer that cometh from the mountaines of the country named Camia, and another more lesse na∣med Rhegium, the which beare and bring forth verie good fish, also Crocodiles very dangerous: as the riuers of Ni∣lus and Senega, and they eate them as wee doe venison, as Iohn Leo in his description of Africa saith: And Andrew Theuet in his description of the new-found world, agree∣eth with him saying, that the Americans food for the most part, is roasted after their maner, as rats of diuers kindes, and great ones, a certaine kinde of toades greater than ours, Crocodiles, and others that they rost al-whole, with the skinne and the bowels, and this they vse with∣out any difficultie: yea these Crocodiles, and great Ly∣zards bee as great as a pigge of a moneth old, the which is a fine meate (as they say that haue eaten thereof:)
These Lizards of America are so priuie, that they will come neere vnto you, & take their repaste, if that you wil take it without all feare or difficultie. Their flesh is like a chickens flesh, and they kil them with shooting at them with their arrowes. And if tabacco were halfe so bad as any of these, I trow the dispraisers thereof might then with full mouthes, and full cheekes except against it. It cannot be denied, but that Tabacco hath some ma∣lignitie, yea, some naughtie and venemous qualitie in it, in respect that it produceth such a strange swimming, ver∣tiginie or giddinesse like drunkennesse in the braine, with foaming at the mouth and swouning, yea, lying as it were dead, or in a traunce for a certaine time, when any almost hath first taken it, and yet at length after their bodies haue been acquainted and inured to it, there hath no such passi∣on or effect followed, though it hath been taken by them in a verie large quantitie. Whereupon doubtlesse, wee must conclude, that e∣uen of strong poysons, some men may very well be nou∣rished, and conueniently fedde, especially if they bee assumed moderately, and by degrees a little at once: as Lewes Vertoman writeth of the King of Calecut, whose father so inured him to take poyson, that hee was fed and nourished therwith, and with nothing else all his life time: so that when he intended to put any of his noblemen to death, he would but cheaw, and bite in his mouth a cer∣taine fruit there growing, called Chofoles; which being done, hee would spit them in the face of him with whom hee was offended: who presently after being poysoned with this stinking breath, would goe home and die. This King (as the forenamed author saith) had foure thousand wiues, but he neuer lay with any of them but one night:
for the next day day shee was found dead, onely with the poisonous breath of the King. So that hereby, by these examples we may learne, that poysons and strong medi∣cines may by degrees bee ouercome by the vertue and strength of nature, & be cōuerted into a profitable norish∣ment of the whole bodie, as al Physicians alleage; sithence there is nothing that nourisheth, but that which is first concocted, & digested, by the power & benefit of nature. Custome is of great force in our meats: and that many haue been fed onely with poysons, Iohn Bruyerni, de re cibaria, lib. 1. cap. 22. plainely sheweth. So in times past the people called Psylli, and the Marsi would without danger, both handle, and eat Serpents. Hollerius reporteth of a Spaniard that would eate halfe an ounce of Opium at one time: we in England must not exceed twelue graines, and in Poland two graines onely will kill a strong man, so that he shal neuer arise, till the trumpe of the Archangell awake him. Iohannes Heurnius saith, that hee hath seene diuers slaues at Naples in Italy, which would deuoure a verie great deale of Meconium: and others againe would as fast eate poppie without any sensible hurt thereby. And as I haue partly touched before, wee read of one Tharsias an Apothecary, and many shepheards in Greece, who would take into their stomacks whole handfuls of Helleborus al∣bus, or Neesewort, without any danger at all, digesting thē very well. Eudemus of the Iland of Chios, would do the same, without any purging downwards, as Theophrastus assureth vs: & yet with others we know, that it procureth vomiting mightily, & that with extream danger, & hazard of life, if it be not well corrected, & giuen to strong com∣plexions, and robustious constitutions, and not to nice and delicate persons.
Wee reade in histories of a maide of excellent beautie, that was onely fed and brought vp with the deadly poy∣son of Napellus, who was presented to Alexander the great by the king of India, to the intent he should bee en∣snared in the inextricable labyrinth of her beautious physnomie: whome when Aristotle his master had throughly veiwed and beheld, hee forewarned the king of the danger, and the bait that was laid to insnare him. Neither was he therein deceiued in his iudgement, for though the king refused her companie, manie other sprightfull laddes and lustie-bloudes being allured and bewitched with her companie, they all died by that abo∣minable poysonous and destroying vapour or hurtfull breath which came from her body, as Iohannes Langius in his Medicinall epistles hath also remembred. This maide did well enough with this hearbe Napellus: and yet the force and facultie thereof is so deadly both to man, and also to all kindes of beastes, that if any doe eate there∣of, their lippes and rounges swell forth-with, their eyes hang out, their thighes are stiffe and their wittes are ta∣ken from them, as Auicenua writeth in his fourth book. Yea the force of this poyson is such, that if the pointes of speares, dartes, or arrowes bee touched or annointed with the same, they bring deadly hurt to those that are wounded therewith. So that if strong poysons through custome may bee turned into the profitable nourish∣ment of our bodies; howe much more, such Simples, that bee but as it were a little hurtfull as Tabacco is. The like may bee said of meates and medicines: some men will eate and continue with feeding on Cassia, as fa∣miliarly as if all their life time they had neuer taken de∣light in any otherthing: and yet with others againe it is
accounted verie loathsome, and bringeth gripings, wring∣ing, and much torment to the whole bodie. In some per∣sons, Manna turneth wholly in choler: and it gently loo∣seneth the belly in others. Some will very easily digest beefe, or any meats of harder digestion, whose stomacks againe doe abhorre the flesh of hens, rabbets, and the like: & if they chance to eat of them, they turne into sower bel∣chings, and are quickly corrupted in their stomacks, lying there stinking, as in a filthy puddle. Therefore whatso∣euer is familiar to any particular mans nature; and where∣withall he is most delighted, neuer bee afraide to giue the sicke, although in others it may not be tollerated. But to returne againe into my path from whence I haue a little digressed. Although all men, and all countreys are not alike sub∣iect to, and hurt by the pestilence (for China which is the greatest part of the habitable world, in which there are (as some Histories report) seuenty millions of people, be∣ing scarse so many in all Europe, wherein (as I suppose) God hath included the greatest gulfe of mankinde, is not subiect to this dangerous disease, nor yet many parts of Africa, as Iohn Leo a Moore borne in the Kingdome of Granada saith) yet we know and feele, that all those coun∣treys that lie open to the sea, or bee situated right against the South, or lie much open to that point, are more dan∣gerously infected than others that haue not the same site of place for their dwelling. And likewise those that dwell in hot and moist places, poysoned with filthy or mistie exhalations, are more vexed and plagued, than more open and champain countreys, or those that be more mediter∣rane. And againe, amongst men they are more cruelly handled, which being of a hot and moist temperature,
and such as be full of grosse and corrupt humours, hauing such bodies as be ready to run ouer with plenty thereof, are more subiect to putrefied agues, than colde and drie complexions, and such as haue but small store of humors, and the same very fine and pure. For ouermuch loose∣nesse and largenesse of body, euen as too much adstriction maketh a way for the pestilence. But it will be necessary, and to our purpose in hand, and worthy the labour and paines taking, more deepely to en∣ter into, and to make a larger rehearsal into this discourse, and leasurely by peece-meales, as it were to cut and minse the same. Although therefore the pestilent poison with∣out exception, no lesse violently setteth vpon, as well the richer as the poorer sort, and assoone dispatcheth those of sturdy and able bodies, as meacocks, milk-sops, and weak∣lings, and such as be great, strong, quarrie, bigge, well set, handsome timbred, and such as we call well proportioned and of a iust temperature and making (neither too slender nor too grosse) as well as those that are sickly, queasie, and abounding with cacochymicall humours, and vpon men as women, old and young, hot complexions as cold, moist as dry (for to all alike it proclaimeth open war:) yet neuerthelesse it often commeth to passe, that vpon some it sooner layeth holde, and killeth more speedily, than it doth vpon others. For first in respect of ages, wee finde by common experience, that Infants are more endan∣gered thereby, and take it sooner than children, and these sooner than young men, and younger more than those of riper yeares, and women are more of∣ten subiect to this griefe than men, and chiefely those that bee with childe, and such as are not monethly ex∣purged.
Of complexions likewise, that temperament which is hot and moist, or cold and moist, is oftener and easilyer o∣uerthrowne, than either the hot and drie, or the cold and drie complexions. And for the same reason, the san∣guine, and the phlegmatique constitution are most in danger, and are more subiect vnto this griefe, than either cholericke, or melancholike persons, and doe sooner die withall. The cause of this varietie is the superabun∣dant, corrupt, or filthy humours subiect to putrefacti∣on, or corrupt and filthy bloud, which is easily infected with the contagion of the ayre receiuing pestilence. And this is the cause, that those who are much sub∣iect to sicknesse (although that some will falsly main∣taine, that either the French Pockes, or the quartanea∣gue, is a Supersedeas to the plague) and cacochymicall bodies, doe sooner feele the hurt thereof, and are put into further hazard than such as bee exquisitly sound, and in perfect health: and those that vse nourish∣ments which breede euill iuyces and humours in the bodie, than the contrarie, or such as bee of easie con∣coction; and such as surfet, pamper, or cocker themselues too much, more than those that behaue themselues temperately, and vse a moderation in their expences and manner of liuing, as some say they doe at Florence in Italy. To shut vp all in a word, those that keepe good rule li∣uing continently, are freer from this plaguy infection, then such as liue after their owne pleasure, wilfully, and luxuriously: and they that keepe home, lesse than such as gad abroad, being accounted good fellowes, louing to frequent much company, do lesse feele this poisonous dis∣ease. Now although by this that I haue said, one may easily
gather, why Tabacco should be good in some constituti∣ons, (I meane in hot and moist, and colde and moist) and why not in othersome so holesome: yet for all that, this must be taken warily, namely, that wee vse not Tabacco (for purgation sake especially) nor yet any purging medi∣cine in the beginning of the plague, or yet if they be taken with any fluxe or loosenesse of the belly; for of these thus affected, there is scarse the hundreth person that escapeth with life. I know well what Fracastorius, Palmarius, and many others haue written, and enforced themselues som∣times too farre concerning these points, & as they imagin they haue attained the truth. As for me, it is not my pur∣pose at this time to censure others in this iudging world, but only I thought good to speak thus much by the way, seeing it is not quite besides my intended scope, as touch∣ing our Tabacco. The iuyce of Tabacco boyled in sugar to the forme of a syrupe, and inwardly taken, driueth forth worms of the belly, if withall a leafe bee layed to the nauell. It cureth also the Piles, and the Dropsie. An Vnguent for a Dropsie. Rec. Succorum sanae sanctae Indorum, ℥viij. Cortic. med. Sambuci, Chamomillae, Tithymali, ana ℥ij. Succi violarum, Radicum Cucumeris agrestis, Mercurialis macis, Laureolae, Colchici Anglici,
Fellis tauri, Aloes hepaticae, ana ℥iij. Diagredij, vnc. jss. Cum olei oliuar. lib. iij. & Cerae albae. lib. j. Fiat vnguentums. artem. An Emplaster for the same. Rec. Stercoris vaccini, Sterco. Caprini, ana ℥viij. Macerentur per hor as vj. in acet vini albi & siccantor. Tum Rec. aluminis rochae, Salis nig. torrefac. Sulphuris flaui, ana ℥ij. Succi tabaci, ℥vj. Foliorum Soldanellae, vnc. jss. Seminum Anisi, Foeniculi, Carui, ana vnc. j. Farinae lupinorum, Orobi, ana vnc. j. Terebinthinae, vnc. ij. Picis naualis, vnc. xij. Axungiae porcinae, vnc. iiij. Fiat Emplastrums. artem. Syrupus optimus ad Hydropicos. Rec. Foliorum sanae sanctae Indorum. m. vj. Hyssopi sicci, Pulegij regaelis, Ceterach (seu asplenij) anam. j. ss. Calamenti minoris, p. ij.
Seminum Anisi, Seminum vrtica, Sem. Anethi, ana ʒiij. Galangae, Hellebori albi, ana ʒiiijss. Asari, Agarici, ana ʒij. Rad. Angelicae hortensis, Rad. iridis, Costi, Amomi, Polipodij quercini, ana ℥j. Let all these be beaten to powder, and infused in six pintes of the sharpest wine vineger for three daies space in the o∣pen sunne, in a glasse vessell. Afterwards boyle them in a double vessell with a gentle fire to the consumption of the halfe, then straine them, and adde to them of Mel ro∣sarum l. j. Sacchari l. ss. Boyle them againe to the consumption of the vineger, and aromatize it with saffron, ginger, and mace, ana ℈ij. Fiat Syrupus secundum artem. A conuenient purge in a Dropsie. Rec. Seminum sanae sanctae Indorum, ʒj. Rhabarb. ʒss. Diagridij, gr. ij. Syrupi ros. sol. cum agarico ℥j. cum aqua destil∣lati tabaci, quantum sufficit. Fiat potio. Detur post digestionem conueni∣entem.
An excellent Sacculus to discusse winde, to remooue the colicke, and is very effectuall in a tympanie. Rec. Foliorum san. sanct. Indorum, p. iiij. Florum Chamaemelorum, Summitatum anethi, ana p. j. Cymini, Cari, ana ℥ss. Baccarum Lauri, ʒiij. Make two bagges of all these being quilted or interbasted, so that they may couer the most part of the belly. Tabacco is a present remedy for the fits of the mother, it mitigateth the paine of the gout, if the leaues bee roa∣sted in hot embers, and applyed to the agreeued part, and likewise a Cataplasme made onely of the leaues of Tabacco being boyled in milke with a little comin-seede with the yolkes of two egges and saffron, ℈j. An Vnguent to take away all paines of the Gout. Rec. Succi foliorum san. sanct. Indorum, ℥viij. Axung. porcimasculi, Axung. caponis, ana vnc. ij. Misce. Put all these into a glasse, stopping and luting it close with paste, and set it in the ouen for eight or nine houres, make an Vn∣guent. This also helpeth such as bee trou∣bled with crampes and conuulsions.
A Cataplasme also or Pultes made of the roots of marsh mallowes, Tabacco leaues, some line-seede, and crums of bread is much commended in the gout: and if a little oile of wormes be added to it, nothing can bee deuised better. Some doe also greatly praise a medicine thus prepared, for the gout. Rec. Olei cannabini l. ss. Vini albi, l. j. Foliorum sanae sanctae Indorum, m. ij. Bulliant ad consumptionem mediaepartis. The leaues of Tabac. in the low coūtreys are vsed against scabs, & filthnesse of the skin, & for the cure of wounds: but some hold opinion, that they are to be vsed onely but for the cure of wounds, and to hot and strong bodies: for they say, that the vse of Tabacco is not safe in weake and old folke: and for this cause (as it seemeth) the wo∣men in America, as Theuetus saith, abstaine from the hearbe Petum or Tabacco, and can in no wise endure it. Against rednesse of the face. Rec. Lithagyri argentei, ℥j. Cerusae albissimae, ʒiij. Caphurae, ℈ij. Aquae stillatitiae san. sanct. Indorum, ℥ix. Aceti albi, ℥ij. Let them settle sixe houres together at least, then filter them, and euery day twise or thrise wette the face withall.
Another against cancerous vlcers, and red∣nesse of the face. Rec. Plantaginis, Circaeae Lutetianae, Sanae sanctae Indorum, Albumin. ouorum no. xij, Aluminis, l. ss. Mixe them together, and let them bee destil∣led: but it is best, first to infuse them toge∣ther for twelue houres space. There is an oyle to bee taken out of the leaues of Ta∣bacco, that healeth merrie galles, kibed heeles, and such like. Tabacco doth likewise scoure and cleanse olde and rotten vlcers, and bringeth them to perfect digestion, as Nicolaus Monardis saith. The oyle or iuyce dropped into the eares is good a∣gainst deafnesse: a cloth dipped in the same, and layed vp∣on the face, taketh away the lentils, rednesse, and spots thereof, as thus: Rec. Olei sanae sanctae Indorum, ℥j. Sulphuris in pollinem redacti, ℈ij. Misce sine foco. Ad guttam rosaceam, or a sawce fleagme face. Rec. Cerusam q. v. & ponatur cum aqua stillatitia tabaci ad solem, vel cum succo eiusdem herbae: quae sicca adijciatur alia, dum fiat albissima &
fiant pilulae. Soluatur vna ex aqua tabaci, et illinatur facies. For an olde or inueterate sawce-fleagme face. Rec. Caphurae, ʒij. Boracis, ʒij. Pulueris subtilissimi foliorum sn. sanct. Indo∣rum, vnc. ss. Misce cum succo limonum et melle despumato. Sowse it as an ointment daily. It is vsed against poyson, and taketh away the malig∣nitie thereof, if the iuyce bee giuen to drinke, with some Theriaca or Mithridatum, or the wounds of venemous beasts be washed therewith. Tabacco preuaileth against all apostumes, tumors, in∣ueteratevlcers, botches, and such like, being made into an vnguent or salue, as followeth. Take of the greene leaues of Tabacco l. iij. ss. Stampe them very small in a stone mortar. Olei oliuarum l. ij. Set them to boyle in a brasse panne, or such like vpon a gentle fire, continually stirring it, vntill the hearbes seeme blacke, and will not bubble, nor boyle any more: then shal you haue an excellent greene oyle: which being strained from the dreggie refuse or feces, put the cleare and strai∣ned oyle to the fire againe, adding thereto of Waxe, l. ss. Rosin, ℥iiij. Turpentine, ℥ij. Melt them together, and keepe it in pots for yourvse
to cure inveterate vlcers, apostumes, burnings, greene wounds and all cuts, and hurts in the head. Tabacco is also good in burnings and scaldings with fire, water, oyle, lightning, or such like, being boyled with hogges grease in forme of an Vnguent, which I haue of∣ten prooued and found most true, adding a little of the iuyce of Pomum spinosum, or thorne apple leaues, sprea∣ding the same vpon a cloth, and so applying it. Ronsseus, in his ninth Chapter, hath stoutly striued to shew al the Indications verie exactly, for the curation of al vlcers in the legges, and other parts that happen to those persons, which are troubled with the scuruy, or rather scorbute. And although that these vlcers are happily re∣medied with sudoriferous medicines, especially with wine extracted from the flowers of Antimonie, and with Sanguis Antimonij, with Turbith Minerall, and other spagiricall liquors (for by these, that redundant humour which feedeth, and causeth the vlcer, is not onely dried vp, but also perfectly conglutinated and souldered) yet the businesse would more happily proceede, and the cure besooner perfected, if there were in my iudgement cer∣taine vulnerarie hearbes added to them, such as bee Sanae sanctae Indorum, Pyrola, Alchimilla, Consolida Sarraseni∣ca, cochlearia, sanicula, Nummularia, and others of the same vertue. And thus would I make a Balsamum, for the curation of filthie vlcers comming by meanes of the scor∣bute. Rec. Foliorum Nicotianae siue Peti Brasilianorum, Consolidae Regalis, Betonicae Pauli, Ophioglossi, ana m. iiij.
Nummulariae, Persicariae maculosase, Chelidoniae maioris, ana m. j. Florum fug. daemonum, m. j. ss. Centaurij minoris, Flo: Chamaemeli, ana m. j. Radicum consolid. maioris & Rad. althaeae recentium, ana ℥viij. Lumbricorum terrestrium vino maluatico lo∣torum, vnc. x. Incisa et contusa circulentur, Pellicano Hermeticè fer∣ruminato inclusa, in libris duabus olei vetustissimi, et l. j. terebinthinae abietin. per tempus trimestre. After these three moneths space, destill them in a Retort with a milde and gentle fire. In the destilling adde vnto it, Tegu∣larum, ℥xx. Rec. Huius destillati, l. j. ss. Vernicis, vnc. vj. Axung. human. vnc. viij. Mumm. communis contrit. vn. vj. Mastiches, Myrrh. Aloes, Thuris, Styracis liquidi, ana vnc. vj. Destillentur adhuc semel, cum laterum in pul∣uerum redactorum l. j. Postea adde Oleorum petrolei, Olei è terebinthina, Olei è granis Iuniperi, ana ʒiij.
Puluer. aeruginis, vnc. j. Fiat Balsamus artificialis viridis. And of the same vertue is this that followeth. Rec. Terebinth. vnc. ij. Thuris vnc. ij. Aloes, Mastiches, Caryophyllorum, Galang. Cinnamomi, Croci, Nucis mosch. Cubebarum, ana vnc. j. Aquae. stillattit. san. sanct. Indorum, et Aquae Hordei, ana l. j. Destillentur. An excellent Iniection to deterge and cleanse vl∣cers, especially those that happen in the scorbute. Rec. San. sanct. Indorum, m. ij. Ligni sancti subtilissimè puluerisati, et Corticis eiusdem, ana vnc. ij. Aristoloch. long. Centaurij minoris, Absinthij, Equiseti, Eupatorij, Saniculae. Foliorum myrti,
Pimpinellae, et Consolidaemed. vulnerariorum, ana, m. j. Corticum thuris, Myrrhae, Sarcocollae, ana ℥v. Vinirubriodoriferi, l. iij. Mellis despumati, ℥iiij. Boyle all these together, and when it is strained, make an iniection into the vlcer, adding to it of the best Aqua vitae ℥j. for euery time that you vse the iniection. Or else, if to the former decoction, you adde of aqua vitael. ij. & destill them all together in a glasse limbecke in Palneo Ma∣riae, you shall haue an excellent water, to deterge, cleanse and conglutinate filthy, hollow, stinking, or sordidous vlcers. This ointment also following, will performe the same effect. Rec. Succi san. sanct. Indorum, lib. 5. Mellis electi, ℥iiij. Farinae hordei, vnc. ij. Myrrhae elect. ʒij. Terebinth. vnc. j. ss. Boile all these together, and make an Vnguent to dippe, or arme your tents withall, that shall be put into the cauities of any vlcers. Paracelsus the fuliginous Alchimist, in his first booke, Chirurgiae Mag. tract. 2. cap. 9. plainly describeth the same vertues to bee in that oyle which hee there calleth, Oleum
antimonij rubicundum. In like sort Oleum aeris, Oleum Sa∣turni but chiefly Sal Saturni album brought into powder, destilled in a retort with a very cleare fire, vntill all the spi∣rits be vanished, and the water after that separated from the oyle per Balneum: for within a few dayes it perfectly cureth those vlcers, which of som are esteemed for incura∣ble, especially those that follow any scorbuticall sicknesse. Master Iohn Gerard the most learned Herbarist of this age, in his great Historie of plants, describeth an excellent balsame, surpassing in my conceit all the fore-recited: which here in this place I purpose to set downe, in regard of the many and notable vertues that are in it. I doe make (saith he) of Tabacco an excellent balsame to cure deepe wounds, and punctures, made by some narrow, sharpe, and sharpe pointed weapon: which balsame doth bring vp the flesh from the bottome very speedily, and also heale simple cuts in the flesh according to the first intention, that is to say, to glew or soulder the lippes of the wound together, not procuring matter or corruption vnto it, as is commonly seen in the healing of wounds. The Receit is this: Rec. Oleirosarum, Olei Hypericonis, ana l. j. Foliorum tabaci in mortarin contusorum, l. ij. Boyle them together to the consumption of the iuyce, then straine it, and put it to the fireagaine, adding thereto of Venice Turpentine ℥ij. Olibani, Masticis, and ℥ss. in most fine & subtile powder, the which you may at al times make into an Vng or salue by putting thereto wax and rosin to make it a stiffe body, which worketh exceeding wel in malign & virulēt vlcers,
as in wounds & punctures. I send this Iewell to you wo∣men of all sorts, especially to such as cure and helpe the poore and impotent of your countrey without reward. But vnto the beggerly rabble of witches, charmers, im∣posters, and such like cozeners that regard more to get monie, than to helpe for charitie, I wish these few medi∣cines farre from their vnderstanding, and from those de∣ceiuers, whom I wish to be ignorant herein. But courte∣ous Gentlewomen, I may not for the malice that I doe beare vnto such, hide any thing from you, of such im∣portance: and therefore take one more that followeth, wherewith I haue done verie many and good cures, al∣though of small cost, but regard it not the lesse for that. And thus it is: Rec. Foliorum tabaci, l. ij. Axungiae porcinae, l. j. Stampe the hearbe small in a stone mortar, putting thereto a small cup-full of redde or claret wine, stirre them well together, couer the mortar from filth, and so let it rest vntill morning, then put it to the fire againe, and let it boyle gently, continually stirring it vnto the con∣sumption of the wine, then straine it, and set it to the fire againe, put thereto of the iuyce of the hearbe l. j. Terebinthinae venetae, ℥iiij. Boyle them together to the consumption of the iuyce, then adde thereto of the roots of Aristolochia rotunda, or birth-wort in most fine powder, ℥ij. Sufficient waxe to giue it a bodie, the which keep for thy wounded poore noighbour. This also helpeth & healeth the old and fil∣thy vlcers of the legges and other parts. Tabacco is vsed of many men in outward medicines,
either the hearbe boyled with oyle, waxe, rosin, and tur∣pentine, as before I haue sette downe; or the extraction thereof, with salt, oyle, balsame, the destilled water, and such like, against tumors, apostumes, olde vlcers of hard curation, botches, scabbes, stinging with netles, carbun∣cles, poysoned arrowes, and wounds made with gunne, or any other weapon. Thus haue you heard what the learned & skilfull Chi∣rurgion, and Herbarist Master Iohn Gerard, a man of vn∣reprooueable authoritie, saith of Tabacco, and yet I think he will not say, that it fitteth all persons alike: for I sup∣pose, that it is nought for Alchymists, Brewers, Bakers, Smithes, cookes, furnace-men, more than for fisher-men, and such waterish people. All things haue their sea∣son. Imponit finem sapiens & rebus honestis.Iuuenal Sa∣tyr. 6. A wise man may vse moderation, Euen in things of commendation. And I may say my Pater noster out of season: Diuersos diuersaiuuant, non omnibus annis —omnia conueniunt. Cat. eleg. 1. Diuers delights to diuers men: Nor to all, Doe all things at all yeares conuenient fall. The leaues of Tabac. being applied vpon green wounds, staieth the flux of bloud, & soldereth & glutinateth them: and if the wounds be verie great, they must first bee wa∣shed with white wine, and so the lippes of the wound bee ioyned together, the inyce of the leaues must be sprinkled or caston, and the drie leaues being bruised belayed all
ouer vpon the wounded place. And the next day fol∣lowing, and from day to day, this order must bee strictly obserued, vntill it be perfectly brought to cure, obseruing withall a true regiment in our diet and order of liuing. Doubtlesse, this is a rare miracle of Nature, and a won∣derful vertue, that is in this cotemptible little plant, or ra∣ther esteemed to be so vilde, base, and contemptible. For if any one be newly and dangerously wounded, and that the miserable partie feeleth a bleeding vnto death, what is a more noble medicine, or more readie at hand, then Ta∣bacco, to binde hard vpon the wound, to stay the inordi∣nate effusion of bloud? Questionlesse, if wee were as di∣ligent and greedie to search out the true properties and vertues of our owne domesticall remedies, which we buy of others so dearely, wee would not enforce our selues with such eager pursute after those of forraine countreys, as though things farre fetcht off, were better than our owne neere at hand; or as though nothing were good and holesome, vnlesse it came from Egypt, Arabia, China, or India. Surely, vnlesse there were some wilde wo me in our braines, or that we we were bewitched, and possessed with some furie, we would not so farre be in loue with forraine wares, or be so much besotted, as to seeke for greedy new Physicke, and physicall meanes, considering that one poor plant, tabacco, wil (being rightly vsed) do more good for the stanching of bloud, the curation of wounds and vl∣cers, the hindring of sanies, slime or slough to grow in any sore, to abate and quench swellings and paines, to con∣glutinate, and consolidate wounds, more than a cart-load of Bole fetched out of Armenia, Sarcocolla, Sandaracha, or that earth which is so much nobilitated by the impresse of a seale, and therefore called Terra Sigillata, the clay of
Samos, the durt of Germanie, or the loame of Lemnos. For Tabacco hath a moderat adstriction, it soldereth, ioy∣neth and closeth vp wounds, nor suffering any rotten or filthy matter to remaine long in them. And in regard of these excellent vertues and qualities, it quickly cureth bleeding at the nose, the Haemorrhoides and other bloudie fluxes, whether of the opening of the mouthes of the veines, their apertions, breakings, or any other bloody euacuation that too much aboundeth, being either giuen by it selfe, alone in some wine either inward∣ly, or outwardly, or commixed with the bloud-stone, Cro∣cus Martis, and other the like remedies fit for the same in∣tentions. Laurentius Ioubertus describeth an Vnguent, which is of singular force, made of Tabacco, for the curation of wounds, scabbes, and the disease called Scrophules, or the Kings euill: yea, for that same knottie scourge of rich men, and the scorne of Physicians, I meane the gowt, which as som learned men hold opinion, can by no means be remedied, yet feeleth mitigation and diminution of paine, and curation also onely by this admirable me∣dicine, whose description in this place, I will rightly set downe, and thus it is. Rec. Foliorum san. sanct. Indorum, l. ij. Axungiae porcinae recentis diligenter lotae, l. j. The hearbe being stamped or brused, let it be infused a whole night in red wine, in the morning boyle it with a gentle fire with the axunge to the consumption of the wino. Then straine it very hardly: and that being done, adde to it of the iuyce of Sanae sanctae Indorum, l. ss.
Resinae abiegnae. vnc. iiij. Boyle them againe to the consumption of the iuyce, and toward the end of the boyling, adde to it of The roots of Aristolochia rotunda in powder, vn. ij. New wax so much as is sufficient. So make it vp into the forme of an vnguent. If you would haue this Vnguent in the forme of a Ce∣rote, then encrease the weight of the waxe, and you haue your desire. Truth the daughter of Time hath brought to light, that Tabacco strangely cureth olde vlcers or sores, and mortifications or gangrenes, if the iuyce of the leaues bee dropped vpon the places, and the leaues first bruised, and applyed thereon, without any other curious application or anxious mixture; the bodie being first purged, and the redundant peccant humours, being first duly euacuated, by the aduise of some learned Physician, and a veine ope∣ned, if so be it be thought needfull, with keeping of a strict and orderly kinde of diet: for Nullum est tam potens me∣dicamentum, quod praestare eam quam pollicetur opem po∣test, si ratione victus aut perturbetur aut non adiuuetur. There is no medicine so effectuall or of such sufficient vertue onely by it selfe, to cure any disease, and to expell sicknesse, and restore to health, if by the order of diet, & regiment of life, it bee either hindred, or not somewhat helped. Furthermore, it is found by long practise, that it is very auaileable and effectuall, not onely for the cure of vlcers in men, but also in brute beasts: for throughout all India strange and many sores doe plague their oxen, and other cattell, which by reason of the exceeding and super-abun∣dant
moisture of the countrey, doe putrefie and swarme with wormes: on which poore beasts they were wont heretofore to insperge sublimatum, being destitute of bet∣ter remedies: and because the price of this was at a verie hie rate in those places, it oftentimes so fell out, that the medicine cost more, than the silly beast which was to bee cured was adiudged to be worth. Wherefore hauing ex∣perimented the faculties and properties of Tabacco in men, they transferred the vse thereof to the curation of rotten, stinking, and such corrupt soares of beastes as were full of crawling wormes, and they quickly found that the iuyce of the hearb being dropped into the place, did not onely kill worms, but also clense and mundifie the vlcers, and afterwards bring them to perfect cicatrization: and for the same cause the Americans euer carrie about them some of the powder of it. I know a certain man that had an vlcer in his nose, out of which there issued forth a virulent or filthy matter or sanies, not without great suspicion of some contagion, or infectious sicknesse: who by mine aduise dropped in som of the iuyce of the leaues of Tabacco, and when hee had done so twise together, a great many wormes first came forth, and after that fewer, and lastly after a fewe dayes the sore was absolutely cured, and no wormes neuer after that issued forth: yet the parts that were consumed, and eaten away could neuer againe by any art bee throughly restored. This plant being hot and drie in the second degree, as some would haue it, doth by meanes thereof vndoubted∣ly purge and cleanse: and so it may heale either vlcera pu∣trida aceorrosiua in naribus, and Noli me tangere, so named because it resembleth (as some imagine) a curst shrew that
must not be touched when she is angrie, for then she will be, Calcata immitior hydrâ: therefore I suppose it is not good to wake an angrie dog; and when a mischiefe is well quieted and brought asleep, it is good to goe your waies, and say neuer a word. The new-found Alchymists of our time take vpon them to make quialibet ex quolibet, weauing and vnwea∣uing daily the lucklesse webbe of Penelope: without ei∣ther reason for their misterie, or great reward for their la∣bour: and yet Iohannes Liebaultius writeth that there are which destill water of the greene leaues of Tabacco in alymbecke of glasse, which water is no lesse singular in all effects, and passions, then the verie iuyce, helping all wounds, soares, and bruses, euen restoring to men which by some aduenture, or by some poysonous malignitie and vapour, haue lost their nailes, new ones by washing that part with the water destilled, and after wrapping them vp in fine linnen clothes dipt in the water. So that it is no maruaile if the people of the new-found world, which we commonly call the West Indies, doe make such hie rec∣koning of this hearb: for there are found diuers populous nations in farre differing clymates, that liued for the most part vpon filthy and loathsome poysonous Spiders as al∣so of grashoppers, pissemires, lyzards, and night-bats; and an ougly toade was solde for sixe crownes in a time that al such meats were scarse amongst them, which they boyle, roste, bake and dresse with diuers kinds of sawces. Alber∣tus Magnus mentioneth a maid, who accustomed her sto∣macke to liue onely vpon spiders. I should iudge that Ta∣bacco were good for these kinde of people. But yet this seemeth more strange, that some of these people haue been found among these nations, to whome our vsuall
flesh, and other meats were mortall and venemous. Great is the force of custome: Hunts-men will watch all night in the snow, and endure to be scortched on the hils: Fen∣cers brused with sand-bagges or cudgels, and doe not so much as groane. Aristotle speaketh of one Andron the Argine, that he would trauel all ouer the scorching sands of Lybia without drinking, which is impossible for any o∣ther to doe. In like maner may we say of our Tabacco: for as vse is the most effectuall master of all things; so we see that Ta∣bacco breedeth such passions in some, as though they had receiued some strong poyson, & yet others that are poiso∣ned, do find it to be a good preseruatiue against poison In som it causeth fainting & swouning; with another, vtter de∣iection of the strength: with others againe it worketh a contrarie effect. I may say, it is like wine. For many other ouer-shoot thēselues with fuming wines, & yet the liquor may be all one, and yet not worke the same effect in all: for some sigh, others smile, some are dum and silent; others attentiue, and full of words: some embrace, others fight: some sleep, others sing, according to the diuers humors of their bodies, and instincts of nature. So the fuming vapor of tabacco will cause some to be drunke, & to haue a ree∣ling giddinesse in their heads: others again on the contra∣ry, say, that it expelleth drunkennesse, & all swimmings in the brain. In some, tabacco causeth vomiting; in others a∣gain that I haue known, it performeth the contrary effect by strengthening the stomacke, staying vomiting, & cau∣sing a good appetite. Some, if they take Tabacco much, are transported with rage and choler, so that you shall see & heare, inflammation & fiery rednes of the face, vnwon∣ted othes, chasing, vnquietnesse, and rash precipitation.
Ora tument ira, nigrescunt sangainevena, Lumina Gorgonco aeuiùs igne micant. In English thus: The face through anger swels, the veines grow blacke with blood, The eyes more fiercely shine than Gorgons fierie mood. Yea, in some great Tabacconists, you shall see them staringly wilde, their face troubled, their voyce frightfull and distempered. They foame at the mouth, they star∣tle and quake, rage and ruffle, and wordes escape them, that they afterwards repent. But in others againe it cau∣seth a pleasant humour, and cleane contrarie vsages, hu∣mours, and passions. Tabacconists and Tabacco-com∣panie keepers haue in my opinion, but slightly harpt vp∣on this string, no more than they haue vpon others of the like or greater consequence: so that by their varietie of conceits, and instabilitie of their humours, and opinions, they do (as it were) lead vs closely by the hand to this reso∣lution of their irresolution. Some there are also, who (to speak like a Chymist) doe destill oyle of Tabacco, per descensum, which oyle these authors (agreeing with the Paracelsians) preferre before all other applications, eithers of leaues, ioyce or powder, because the quintessences (quintessence is no other thing but a qualitie, wherof we cannot with our reason find out the cause) and extractions drawne out of the simples, are the subtile spirit, and haue the purest vertue, and facultie of the substance from the which they are drawne. This oyle is much commended against the tooth-ache,
the coughs, and the rawnesse or coldnesse of the stomack, and the disease called the Mare. Many of the Africans are tormented with the tooth-ache, which as some thinke) they are the more subiect vn∣to, because immediatly after hot pottage, they drinke colde water: as Iohn Leo in his first booke saith. In Africa likewise, those which are of a sanguine com∣plexion, are greatly troubled with the cough, because that in the Spring time, they sit too much vpon the ground. And vpon Fridaies I had no small sport, and recreation (saith the same Iohannes Leo) to goe and see them. For vpon this day the people flocke to Church in great num∣bers to heare their Mahumetan sermons. Now, if any one in the sermon fals a coughing, or a neezing, all the whole multitude will doe the same for companie, and so they make such a noise, that they neuer leaue, till the sermon be quite done: so that a man shall reape but little know∣edge at any of their sermons. I should thinke it good that these kinde of people would take either the fume, powder or destilled oyle of Tabacco for their vntimely and vnreasonable coughing, and neezing: and since they are so much subiect to the tooth-ache (as I saide before) there is no man but will deeme it farre better for them than for vs who are vexed with none of these maladies, and yet take it excessiuely. The powder of Tabacco is an excellent dentifrice, or cleanser of fowle and rustie teeth, making them to looke verie white, by scowring away all that sordes, clammie, & stinking matter that sticketh vnto them. There be nations who indeuour to make their teeth as blacke as jeate, and scorne to haue them white, and in other places they die them redde, and these sorts of people neede not any Ta∣bacco
for this intent. For stinking and rotten gums in the disease called the scorbie, and in sore mouthes, there is nothing better than Nicotiana, being taken in a gargarisme, which is published by Iulius Palmarius, and it is also set forth not many years since by Maister Banister in a booke, which he calleth his Antidotarie Chirurgicall. Rec. Hordei integri, p. ij. Sanae sanctae Indorum, Morsus gallinae, Eupatorij, Plantaginis, Rosarum rubrarum, ana m. j. Boyle all these together in aquae lib. iiij. till the one part be consumed, then adde thereto Mellis rosacei, Serapij rosarum siccarum, ana ℥iij. Aluminis vsti, Calchanti vsti, ana ℥ss. Boyle all these with a walme or two, and so let it coole, and then keepe it to your vse. Because I haue made mention of a strange disease, cal∣led in English the Mare, of the Grecians Ephialtes, and of the Latines Incubus, which (as I said) the extracted oyle of Tabacco cureth: I will declare briefely what is meant thereby. Ephialtes then, or the Mare, so called of Physicians, is
a disease of the stomack, concerning which read Paulus Aegineta. lib. 3. cap. 16. Many, which are taken with this disease, imagine that a man of monstrous stature sitteth on them, which with his hand violently stoppeth their mouth, that they can by no meanes crie out, and they striue with their arms and hands to driue him away, but all in vaine. Some ledde with vaine fantasie, thinke him who oppresseth them, to creepe vp by little and little on the bed, as it were to deceiue them, and anone to runne downe againe. They seeme also to them∣selues to heare him. This disease of the night-Mare, is also called by another name, Puigalion, or Puigamon. It commeth by meanes of certaine grosse and thicke va∣pours, which doe partly intercept, and hinder the free passage of the spirits animall: by which meane, difficul∣tie of speaking and breathing, doe proceede, with a per∣turbation of the sense and motion of the whole bodie. Now this dreadfull griefe (which some being much de∣ceiued, thinking that it must onely proceede of witch∣craft) is chiefely remedied with the extracted oile of Ta∣bacco, a fewe drops taken in sacke or maluesie, after the stomacke bee first accordingly, by the rules of art, expurged from those superfluous humours, which are the true cause of the disease. The oyle of Tabacco for a colde and moist stomacke, is farre better than oyle of pepper, oyle of Anniseeds, the extracted oyles of Fennell, Commin, Masticke, Cloaues, or Calamint: and if an Electuarie were made for this disease called the Mare, I suppose this to be-excellent.
An Electuarie for an ouer-cold and moist stomacke. Rec. Pulueris aromat. rs. maioris ex descriptione Gabrielis, ʒij. Puluer is electuar. diacalaminthes, ʒj. Diatrion piperij, ℈ij. Conseruae anthos & rosarum Damascenarum, ana ℥ss. Sacchari optimi, vnc. j. ss. Serapij de mentha quod sufficit, vt fiat elect. liquidum. Adde Olei tabaci chymici gutt as aliquot. Dosis vnc. ss. per horam vnam aut alteram ante pastum. I haue discoursed sufficiently (as I iudge) of the vertues of Tabacco for inward diseases of mans bodie: now will I proceede to his effects in curing those that happen out∣wardly: and first there is prescribed vnto vs this Vn∣guent. Rec. Of the choysest, and most substantiall leaues of Tabacco, lib. j. Beat them in a mortar of marble, and after that take of Axungia porcina, lib. ss. Let it be refined and clarified, and without falt: so this being melted, adde to it the Tabacco, and set it ouer a soft fire to seeth deliberately, and leasurely, vntill such time as you finde the waterish humiditie of the Tabacco to be vapoured away, and that the mingled substances re∣taine
the force of a perfect Vnguent. Reserue this for a singular and medic inable good Vnguent for sores, vlcers, carbuncles, tetters, and likewise to dissolue tumours. There is also another in vse, which is this that followeth. Rec. Terebinthinae, Resinae, Ceraenouae, ana vnc. iij. Melt them together, and then adde to them of Tabac∣co prepared as before, lib. j. mixe them together, and after with a slow fire set them to incorporat, seething together fiue or sixe houres, vntill the waterish humour of the Ta∣bacco be cleane euapourated. After this is done, straine it through a coorselinnen cloth, that may be very strong. After all this, take of Venice Turpentine l. ss. infusing it into these things before said, without any more boyling of it, but yet stirring it cōtinually til it be cold, afterwards preserue and keepe these as precious Vnguents. This sur∣passeth the former in all colde griefes, to amend and ease the swelling paines and aches of the gowt, Sciatica, and the like, helping and comforting weake and resolued si∣newes, and cicatrizeth. Master William Clowes, a skilfull Chirurgeon of Lon∣don in his booke of obseruations for curing gun-shot, de∣scribeth an excellent Vnguent of Nicotiana verie like vnto the former, which he learned, as hee affirmeth, of a verie learned man both in Physicke and Chirurgerie, which he said had wrought wonders aboue beliefe, but I (saith Ma∣ster Clowes) found not that excellencie in it, which he pro∣mised, and I looked for: neuerthelesse, I acknowledge it a medicine not to be disallowed: and this is the order of
making of it, as the Physician appointed. Rec. Foliorum Nicotianae, l. j. Let the leaues be well stamped, and after strained out as strongly as possible may bee, then adde thereto Ceraenouae, Resinae, Olei communis, ana ℥iij. Let all these boyle together vnto the consumption of the iuyce, then adde thereunto terebinthinaevenetae, ℥iij. boyle all a little together, and reserue it to your vse. But this Vnguent sinceit was first knowne, is greatly bettered, chiefely by Iosephus Quercetanus, and others also. Moreouer with the foresaid descriptions, there is also another in vse, and more necessarie for wounds made with gunshot: and I haue approoued it in many other cures: and thus it is truely prescribed, and published. Rec. Succi de Peto, lib. vj. Adip is ouini, lib. ij. Olei communis, lib. xij. Terebinthinae venetae, ℥xij. Resinae pini, lib. j. Masticis, ℥ij. Colophoniae, lib. ij. Cerae, lib. j. Vini albi, l. j. Misce & fiat Vnguentum secundum artem. Let not the Succus of Petum be put in, before all the rest be well relented together, and then strained into a cleane panne: and being molten, put in the iuyces to the rest and boyle it till the iuyces bee all consumed. Then straine it
againe, and reserue it to your vse. This Vnguent doth notably incarne and mundifie. You shall here, in the closing vp of this my discourse, haue prescribed two singular oyntments of my owne in∣uention, wherewith I haue performed many great cures, and thereby haue wonne both crownes and credit. Rec. Herbarum, sanae sanctae Indorum, m. iij. Vnguen∣tum Sa∣nans no∣strum. Quinqueneruiae, Saniculae, ana m. ss. Consolidae mediae vulnerariorum, Bagulae, Solidaginis Saracenicae, ana m. j. Beat and temper them all with barrowes grease, l. j. and of the best oyle oliue, l. ss. and adde to them Vini albi. l. jss. to be boyled the space of one houre. Afterwards straine them, and adde to them of waxe, l. ss. Resinae, Terebinthinae, ana ℥iiij. Misce & fiat Ceratum. This doth notably heale. This other that followeth is both sanatiue and mundi∣ficatiue, and this is the true description of it. Rec. Terebinthinae, ℥ss. Vnguenti aurei, Vnguen∣tum no∣strum Sa∣nans & mundifi∣cans. Vnguenti tabaci priùs descripti, ana ℥ss. Myrrhae, Mastiches,
Sarcocollae, ana ʒij. Succi Tabaci, ℥jss. Cerae, Resinae, ana ʒiij. Mel is, ʒij. Olei Hyperici q. sufficit. Cum vitell. ouorum no. ij. Fiat Vnguentum. Thus much as touching Tabacco, though not so much as others perhaps might, and I could haue done; but yet so much as I thought worthy to be noted and written, for to satisfie and content the gentle good will of the louing and curteous readers, if that it please them to take as great pleasure, and patience to read it, as I haue taken paines af∣ter my long endurance in prison of the kings Bench, to set it forth. Which thought neuer to haue done, had it not been for the earnest sollicitations and importunities of my best and deerest friends. I am sure that some will finde this my discourse too long, others too short and tri∣fling, and peraduenture vpbraide and cast in my dish the saying of the famous Poet Terentius in his Comedie en∣tituled Heautont. Act. 4. sce. 1. Naeiste magno conatu magnas nugas dixerit. This fellow sure with much adoo, Hath told great tales and trifles too. But if there be any such fault-finders, quarrell-pickers, corner-creepers, or spider catchers, I will leaue both them and their figuratiue flowts, wherewith they are accusto∣med to hit men ouer the shinnes, and end this my dis∣course
with the Poet Martialis, lib. 13. Epigram. 21. against all such detractours. Nasutus sis vsque licèt, sis denique nasus, Quantum noluerit ferre rogatus Atlas: Et possis ipsum tu deridere Latinum, Non potes in nugas dicere plura meas, Ipse ego quàm dixi: quid dentem dente juuabit Rodere? carne opus est, si satur esse velis. Ne perdas operam, quise mirantur, in illos Virus habe, nos haec nouimus esse nihil. In English thus: Suppose you were long nos'd, suppose such nose you weare, As Atlas, if you should entreat him, would not beare: That you in flowting olde Latinus can be fine, Yet can you say no more against these toyes of mine, Than I haue said: what boot is't, tooth with tooth to whet? You must haue flesh, if you to glut your selfe be set. Loose not your paines, gainst them who on themselues are doating: Keepe you your sting? we know these things of ours are nothing. FINIS.
