1659 S101119 99836943 1241
THE THEATRE of Gods Iudgements: Or, A COLLECTION OF HISTO∣ries out of Sacred, Ecclesiasticall, and pro∣phane Authours, concerning the admirable Iudge∣ments of God vpon the transgressours of his commandements. TRANSLATED OVT OF FRENCH, AND AVGMEN∣ted by more than three hundred Examples, by Th. Beard. IL VOSTRO MALIGNARE NON GIOVA NVLLA. LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip. 1597.
To the right Worshipfull, Sir Edward Wingfield, Knight. IT is a principle in natural philosophy (right Worship∣full) that in euerie naturall bodie, as well the Elephant as the gnat, there is some propertie or other to be admired and wondred at: and not only in philosophie, but also in Diuinitie; for euen the diuine Singer of Israel anoucheth the same, when hee saith, That the workes of God are wonderfull, and his iudge∣ments past finding out: and not with∣out great reason; for if we turne ouer euery leafe of Gods creatures from the tenth sphere to the centre of the earth, we shall find, that euery leafe and letter of this great volume, is ad∣mirable and wonderfull: and such as
doth not onely demonstrate a diuine power to sit at the stern of the world, but also our owne weaknes, which is not able to comprehend the least part thereof. This wonderfull workman∣ship as it doth set forth the power of God as he is the creator, and his wis∣dome as he is the gouernor of it; so es∣pecially his mercie & iustice appeare therein, as he is a father in preseruing his children, and a iudge in punishing sinners, and those that rebell against him: and these two are fitly called the armes of the Almighty, of which one is not longer & larger than the other; but he is so far mercifull that he is iust withall, and so far iust, that his mercie doth also shew it selfe in the middest therof: the right consideratiō wherof if it were ingrafted in the hearts of men, they would learne both to ad∣mire
and reuerence his mercie in cre∣ating and preseruing the frame of the world, and stand in awe of his iudge∣ments in correcting sinne: but so it is, that the greatest part of men go clean contrary, they dreame vpon mercie, mercy, & neuer thinke vpō iustice & iudgement; and that is the cause why more perish by presumption than de∣spaire: for this cause it seemed to me most necessary to call into mens me∣mories the wonderfull iudgements of God, & to set before their eies a view of his iustice manifested in the world vpon sinners & reprobats, to the end that the drousie consciences of Gods children might be awakened, and the desperat hearts of the wicked cōfoun∣ded, when they shall see how venge∣ance pursueth malefactours to their shame and confusiō in this life, and to
their destructiō in the world to come. This I haue performed (according to the measure of my skil) in this present volume, which hauing partly transla∣ted out of the French, and partly col∣lected by mine owne industrie out of many Authors: I dedicate and conse∣crate vnto you as a monument of my dutifull loue which I owe & am euer bound to owe vnto your selfe, your vertuous Lady, and all your genera∣tion; desiring of you a fauourable ac∣ceptance of my simple offering, and for you a protection from all such iudgements as are contained in this, and a perpetuall continuance of all happie and heauenly felicitie. Your Worships in all dutie to command, Th. Beard.
The Preface. IF to auoid and eschew vice, (ac∣cording to the saying of the Poet) be a chiefe vertue, and as it were, the first degree of wisdome; then it is a necessarie point to know what vice and vertue is, and to discerne the euill and good which either of them bring forth, to the end to beware least wee dash our selues vna∣wares against vice in stead of vertue, and be caught with the deceitfull baites thereof. For this cause the great and famous Philosopher about to lay open the nature of morall vertues (according to that know∣ledge and light which nature afforded him) conten∣ted not himselfe with a simple narration of the pro∣perties, essence, and obiect of them, but opposed to euery vertue on each side the contrarie and repug∣nant vice; to the end that at the sight of them, being so out of square, so hurtfull and pernicious, vertue it selfe might be more amiable and in greater esteeme. And for this cause also God himselfe our soueraigne and perfect lawgiuer, that hee might fashion and fit vs to the mould of true and solide vertue, vseth ofte∣ner negatiue prohibitions than affirmatiue comman∣dements in his law: to the end aboue all things to distract and turne vs from euill, whereunto we are of
our selues too too much inclined. And as by this meane sinne is discouered and made known vnto vs, so is the punishment also of sinne set before our eyes by those threatnings and curses which are there de∣nounced: to the end, that whome the promises of life and saluation could not allure and persuade to do well, them the feare of punishment (which fol∣loweth sinne as a shadow doth the body) might bri∣dle and restraine from giuing them ouer to impietie. Now then if the very threatnings ought to serue for such good vse, shall not the execution and perfour∣mance of them serue much more? to wit, when the tempest of Gods wrath is not only denounced, but also throwne downe effectually vpon the heads of the mightie ones of the world when they are disobe∣dient and rebellious against God. And hereupon the Prophet saith, That when Gods iudgements are vpon earth, then the inhabitants learne iustice. And doubtlesse it is most true, that euery one ought to reape profit to himselfe by such examples, as well them which are presented daily to their view by experience, as them which haue beene done in times past, and are by be∣nefit of history preserued from obliuion. And in this regard historie is accounted a very necessary and pro∣fitable thing, for that in recalling to mind the truth of things past, which otherwise would be buried in si∣lence, it setteth before vs such effects (as warnings & admonitions touching good and euill) and laieth vertue and vice so naked before our eyes, with the punishments or rewards inflicted or bestowed vpon the followers of each of them, that it may rightly be called, an easie and profitable apprentiship or schoole
for euery man to learne to get wisedome at another mans cost. Hence it is, that Historie is tearmed of the ancient Philosophers, The record and register of Time, the light of Truth, and the mistresse and looking glasse of mans life. Insomuch as vnder the person of another man it teacheth and instructeth all those that apply their minds vnto it, to gouerne and carry themselues vertuously and honestly in this life. Wherefore they deserue great praise and commendation that haue taken paines to enroll and put in writing the memo∣rable actes and occurrents of their times to commu∣nicate the same to their posteritie: for there the high and wonderfull workes of God do most clearely, and as it were to the view, present themselues; as his iu∣stice and prouidence: whereby albeit he guideth and directeth especially his owne, to wit, those that in a speciall and singular maner worship and trust in him, (as by the sacred histories touching the state and go∣uernment of the auncient and primitiue Church it may appeare) yet he ceaseth not for all that to stretch the arme of his power ouer all, and to handle and rule the prophane and vnbeleeuing ones at his plea∣sure: for he hath a soueraigne empire and predomi∣nance ouer all the world. And vnto him belongeth the direction and principall conduct of humane mat∣ters, in such sort, that nothing in the world commeth to passe by chance or aduenture, but onely & alwaies by the prescription of his wil; according to the which he ordereth & disposeth by a straight and direct mo∣tion, as well the generall as the particular, and that after a strange and admirable order. And this a man may perceiue if he would but marke and consider the
whole body, but especially the end & issue of things: wherein the great and marueilous vertues of God, as his bountie, iustice, and power, doe most clearely shine; when hee exalteth and fauoureth some, and debaseth and frowneth vpon others, blesseth and prospereth whome hee please, and on the contra∣ry, curseth and destroieth whome he please, and that deserue it. It is hee also which erecteth principalities, and which maintaineth commonwealths, kingdoms, and empires, vntill by the summe and weight of their iniquities, they sinke themselues into ruine and de∣struction. And herein is hee glorified by the execu∣tion of his most iust and righteous iudgements, when the wicked after the long abuse of his lenitie, benignitie, and patience, doe receiue the wages and reward of their iniquities. In this (I say once againe) shineth out the wonderfull and incomprehensible wisedome of God, when by the due ordering of things so different and so many, hee commeth still to one and the same marke which hee once prescri∣bed, to wit, the punishment of the world according to their demerits. And this same is most manifest and apparant euen in the histories of prophane writers, albeit in their purpose it was neuer intended nor thought vpon, nor yet regarded almost of any that read the same; men contenting themselues for the most part with the simple recitall of the storie, there∣in to take pleasure and passe away time, without re∣specting any further matter: Notwithstanding the true and principall vse of their writings ought to be, diligently to marke the effects of Gods prouidence and of his iustice: thereby to learne to containe our
selues within the bonds of modestie and the feare of God, seeing that they which haue carried them∣selues any thing vprightly in equitie, temperance, and other naturall vertues, haue beene in some sort spared: and the rest (bearing the punishment of their iniquities) haue fallen into ruine and destruction. This consideration ought to persuade euerie man to turne from euill and to follow that which is good; seeing that the Lord sheweth himselfe so incensed a∣gainst all them which lead a wicked, damnable, and peruerse life. And this is the cause why I hauing no∣ted the great and horrible punishments wherewith the Lord in his most righteous iudgement hath scourged the world for sin, according to that which is contained as well in sacred as prophane histories: hauing gathered them togither and sorted them one after another in their seuerall roomes, according to the diuersitie of the offences, and order and course of time, which as neare as I could I endeauoured to follow: To the end, to lay downe as it were in one table and vnder one aspect, the great and fearefull iudgements of God vpon them that haue rebelled or repugned his holy will. And this I doe not with purpose to comprehend them all, (for that were not onely difficult but impossible:) but to lay open the most notable and markeable ones that came to my knowledge: to the end, that the most wicked, disso∣lute, and disordered sinners, that with loose raines runne fiercely after their lust, if the manifest tokens of Gods seueritie presented before their eyes, doe not touch them, yet the cloud and multitude of ex∣amples, through the sight of the ineuitable anger &
vengeance of God vpon euill liuers, might terrifie and somewhat curbe them. Periurers, idolatours, blasphemers, and other such wicked and prophane wretches; with murderers, whoremongers, adulte∣rers, rauishers, and tyrants, shall here see by the mis∣chiefe that hath fallen vpon their likes, that which hangeth before their eies, and is ready to lay hold of them also. For albeit for a time they sleepe in their sinnes and blindnesse, delighting in their pleasures, and taking sport in cruelties and euill deeds, yet they draw after them the line, wherewith (being more en∣snared than they are aware) they are taken and drawn to their finall destruction. And this may teach and aduertise both those that are not yet obstinate in their sinnes, to bring them∣selues to some amendment; and those that feare God already, to strengthen and incourage them in the pur∣sure and continuance in their good course. For if God shew himselfe so seuere a reuenger of their sins that take pleasure in displeasing him: there is no doubt, but on the contrary, hee will shew himselfe bountifull, gracious and liberall in rewarding al them according to his promise which striue to please him, and conforme their liues vnto his will. Great and small, yong and old, men and women, and all other of what degree and condition soeuer, may here learn at other mens charges, how to gouerne themselues in duty towards God and betwixt themselues, by a ho∣ly and vnblameable life in mutuall peace and vnity: and by shunning and eschewing sinne, against the which, God (a most iust iudge) poureth forth his ven∣geance, euen vpon the heads of them that are guiltie
thereof. Beside here is ample matter and argument to stoppe the monthes of all Epicures and Atheists of our age, and to leaue them confounded in their errours, seeing that such and so many occurrents and punishments are manifest proofes, that there is a God aboue that guideth the sterne of the world, and that taketh care of humane matters, and that is iust in punishing the vniust and malicious. Againe, whereas so much euill and so many sinnes haue raigned and swaied so long time, and doe yet raigne and sway vp∣on the earth, we may behold the huge corruption & peruersitie of mankind, and the rotten fruits of that wormeaten roote originall sinne; when wee are not directed nor guided by the holy spirit of God, but left vnto our owne nature. And hereby true faithfull Christians may take occasion so much the more to acknowledge the great mercy and singular fauour of God towards them, in that they being receiued to mercie, are renewed to a better conuersation of life than others. In briefe, a man may heare learne, (if he be not altogither void of iudgement and vnder∣standing) to haue sinne in hatred and detestation, considering the wages and reward thereof: and how the iustice of God pursueth it continually, euen to the extreamest execution, which is both sharpe and rigorous. Touching the word Iudgement, I haue imitated the language of holy Scripture, wherein as the ordi∣nances and commaundements of God are called Iudgements, because in them is contained nothing but that which is iust, right, and equall: so likewise the punishments inflicted by God vpon the despisers
of his commandements are called by the same name, as in Exod. 6.6. 2. Chron. 20.12. & 22.8. Ezech. 5.8. & 11.9. and elsewhere, because they also are as iust as the former, proceeding from none other fountaine saue the most righteous iudgement of God, whereof none can complaine but vniustly.
The names of the Authours from whom the most part of the Examples contai∣ned in this Booke are collected. MOses, and other sa∣cred writers. Tertullian. Cyprian. Eusebius. Socrates. Theodoret. Sozomenes. Nicephor. Ruffinus. Suidas. Chrysostome. Luther. Jllyricus. Herodotus. Thucydides. Dion. Halycarnasseus. Diodorus Siculus. Polybeus. Plutarch. Herodian. Dion. Procopius. Iornandes. Agathius. Aelianus. Tit. Liuius. Salustius. Suetonius. Corn. Tacitus. Amni. Marcellinus. Iustinus. Eutropius. Lampridius. Spartianus. Flauius Ʋopiscus. Cuspinianus. Orosius. Aimoinus. Gregor. Turonensis. Anton. Ʋolscus. Paulus Diaconus. Luitprandus. Olaus magnus Gothus. Sabellicus. Anton. Panormitanus. Aeneas Siluius. Rauisius. Hieronymus Marius. Alexander ab Alexandro
Pet. Praemonstratensis. Mich. Ritius Neapoli∣tanus. Fulgosius. Fran. Picus Mirandula. Bembus. Antonius Bomfinius. Munsterus. Iohan. Wierus. Platina. Nauclerus. Vincentius. Hugo Cluniacensis. Benno. Baleus. Gagninus. Paulus Aemilius. Discipulus de tempore. Acts and Monuments. Carion. Chronicon. Beza. Iosephus. Manly Collectanea. Stow Chronica. Froyssard. Enguerran de Monstre∣let. Philip le Comines. Nicholas Gilles. Guicciardine. Paulus Iouius. Benzoin Milanois. Iob. Fincelius. Centuriae Magdeburg. Abbas Vrispurgensis. Philippus Melancthon. Sleidanus. Lanquet. Chronica.
THE FIRST BOOKE, OF THE WORTHIE AND MEMO∣rable Histories of the great and marueilous Iudgements of God sent vpon the World, for their misdeeds against the Commandements of the first and second Table. CHAP. I. ❧ As touching the Corruption and Peruersitie of this World, how great it is. EVen as one that ta∣keth pleasure to behold a pleasant and delight∣some place, a peece of ground couered and painted with all man∣ner of fine flowers, a garden decked, and as it were clothed with ex∣quisite plants and fruit∣full trees, is much grie∣ued so soone as he per∣ceiueth all this beautie and pleasure suddenly to be withered and scortched by the violence of some outragious tempest: or if he be constrained to cast his eies from them vpon some other place by, all craggie and parched, full of briars and
brambles. In like sort, a man can not choose, but be sore grieued and discontent when he beholdeth on the one side the wholsome light of the sunne, whereby the heauens do many waies distill their fauours vpon this world, gloriously to aduance it selfe: on the other side, he perceiueth such an army of thick clouds and palpa∣ble darknesse, from whence such a number of disorders and hurli∣burlies doe arise that most strangely disfigure the face of the whole world: when that he which ought to be gentle & peaceable, is be∣come mischieuous and quarellous: and in stead of being true & sin∣gle hearted, disloiall and deceitfull: instead of being modest, vvell gouerned, and courteous; is proud, cruell, and dissolute: in steed of seruing of God, serueth his owne humours and affections: vvhich kind of behauiour is but too common and vsuall: for there is not a∣ny kind of wickednesse which is not found in this rancke. Vngodli∣nesse vomiteth vp his furie together with iniustice, in those men of whom it is said: There is none that vnderstandeth or seeketh after God, their throte is an open sepulchre, they vse deceit in their tongues, the poysen of aspes is vnder their lippes,Psal. 14. they haue nothing in their mouthes but cursing and bitternesse, their feet are swift to shead blood: destructi∣on and miserie is in their waies: and they haue not knowne the way of peace; In summe, the feare of God is not before their eies. From whēce it commeth, that being not restrained by any bridle, like vntamed colts broke loose, they giue the full swindge to their bold and vio∣lent affections, running fiercely to all filthinesse and mischiefe: and being thus enraged, some of them with horrible blasphemies (most villainously) speake and doe in despite of God, and denie him that created them and sent them into the world: others are not asha∣med to be open forswearers of themselues, violating and breaking e∣uerie promise without regard of faith or honestie. Others as they are of cruell and bloudie natures, so they doe not cease to exercise these their natures by outragious practises: to some of them whore∣domes and adulteries are no more esteemed then as sports and pa∣stimes, whereof they boast and vaunt themselues: to another sort, cousenings, extortions, and robberies are ordinarie exercises, where∣of they make their best occupations. All which euils are so com∣mon and so vsual at this time amongst men, that the world seemeth truly to be nothing else but an Ocean full of hideous monsters: or a
thicke forrest full of theeues and robbers: or some horrible wilder∣nesse wherein the inhabitants of the earth, being sauage and vnna∣turall, void of sence and reason, are transformed into bruite beasts; some like tygres or lyons, others like wolues or foxes, others like dogs and swine: Oh sinfull nation (would the man of God say if he li∣ued at this houre) a people laden with iniquitie, a seed of the wicked,Isay. 1.4. corrupt children, they haue forsaken the Lord, they haue prouoked the holy one of Israell to anger. The noble and high minded are prowd to disdaine the lower, and readie alwaies to smite them; making their countenance pale with vices and othes: the magistrate partial and full of bribes, ouerthroweth equity: the marchant couetous and desirous of gaine, remembreth not his integrity: nor the labourer his simplicitie. And so vertue in most men lieth buried, pietie banished, iustice oppressed, and honestie troden vnder foot: in such sort that all things being as it were ouerthrowne and turned vpside downe, men speake euill of good, and good of euill, accounting darkenesse light, and light darkenesse: sower sweet, and sweet sower. And by such disorder it commeth to passe, that the most vertuous are des∣pised, whilest naughty packs and vicious fellowes are esteemed and made much of. CHAP. II. What the cause is of the great ouerflow of Vice in this age. IF wee would consider from whence it is that this great disorder and corruption of man∣ners doth arise, wee should find especially that it is because the world euery day grow∣eth worse & worse according to the saying of our Sauiour and redeemer (Christ Iesus the sonne of God) That in the latter daies (which are these wherein we liue) Iniquitie shall be encreased.Mat. 24.12. And herein we shall perceiue euen the iust venge∣ence of God to light vpon the malice and vnthankfulnesse of men, to whom when he would draw neare, to doe good vnto by offering them the cleare light of his fauour, the more they striue to alienate and keepe them selues aloofe from him, and are so farre from being
bettered thereby, that they shew themselues a great deale more malitious and obstinate then euer they did before: not vnlike to those who by nature being bleare eied & tender sighted, are rather dazeled and dimmed by the sunne beames, then any waies enlight∣ned: so men in stead of growing better, grow worse, and euery day ad some increase to their wickednesse: to whome also many great men giue elbow-roome and permission to sinne, whilst iustice slum∣bereth; and the not punishing of misdeedes, giueth them libertie and boldnesse to commit their wickednesse: so that some of these mightie ones shew themselues but little better then the other. A mischiefe to be lamented aboue the rest, drawing after it an horrible ouerflow of all euils, and like a violent streame spoiling euery where as it goeth: when as they that ought to gouerne the sterne of the Commonwealth let all goe at randome, suffering themselues to bee rocked a sleepe with the false and deceitfull lullabie of effeminate pleasures and delights of the flesh; or at least letting themselues be carried headlong by the tempest of their owne strong and furious passions, into emminent danger of shipwrackes: when as their care∣full watchfulnesse and modestie accompanied with the traine of other good and commendable vertues, ought to serue them for fails cables, ankers, masts and skutles, whereby to gouerne and direct the vessel vvhose stearsmen they are appointed, and those that are their charge, to whom they ought to giue a good example of life, and be vnto them as it vvere a glasse of vertue: for they are set aloft as it vvere vpon a stage to be gazed at of euerie commer. Their faults and vices are like foule spots and scarres in the face, which cannot by anie meanes be hid. And therefore they ought to be carefull to lead an honest and vertuous life, that thereby they might persuade and moue the meaner sort of people to doe the like: for it is a true saying of the Philosopher, Like Prince, like people: in so much, that euerie one desireth to frame himselfe according to the humour of his superiour, whose will and manners serue simplie for a law to doe euill: to the which men vse by taking any occasion too hastelie to giue themselues ouer with too much libertie: whervpon followeth an vnrecouerable ruin, no lesse then the fall of a great house, which for want of pillers and supporters that should vphold it, suddenly falleth to the ground; so this ship being depriued of her gouernour,
is set loose and laid open to the mercie of the waues, violence of winds, and rage of tempests, without anie direction or gouernment, and so the bodie of man not hauing anie more the light of his own eies, abideth in darknesse all blinded, not able to doe any thing that is right and good, but ready euery minute to fall into some pit. And this is the peruersitie and corruption of this world. CHAP. III. That great men which will not abide to bee admonished of their faults cannot escape punishment by the hand of God. IN this poore and miserable estate euery man rocketh himselfe asleepe, and flattereth his owne humour, e∣uerie man pursueth his accustomed course of life, with an obstinat mind to do euill: yea many of those that haue power & authoritie ouer others, according as they are endued and persuaded with a foolish conceit of them∣selues, make themselues beleeue that for them euerie thing is law∣full, and that they may do whatsoeuer they please, neuer imagining that they shall giue vp an account of their actions to receiue anie chastisement or correction for them, euen as though there were no God at al that did behold them: & being thus abused by this vaine and fickle securitie, they swimme in their sinnes, and plunge them∣selues ouer head and eares in all kind of sensualitie: giuing heartie welcome and entertainment to all that approoue and applaud their manners, and that studie to feed and please their humour. As con∣trariwise none lesse welcome vnto them, then they that tell them of their faults, and contradict them neuer so little: for they cannot abide in anie case to be reprooued whatsoeuer they doe. And now a daies euerie base companion will forsooth storme and fume as soon, if he be reproued of a fault, as if he had receiued the greatest wrong in the world: so much is euerie man pleased with himselfe, and puf∣fed vp with his owne vices and foolish vanities. And what should a man doe in this case? It is as hard to redresse these great mischiefs as if we should goe about to stop and hinder the course of a migh∣tie streame, there where the bancke or causey is broken downe: if it
be not by applying extreme & desperate medicines, as to desperate diseases, which are as it were giuen ouer by the Phisition, and to the which a light purgation will do no good. For as for admonitions and warnings, they are not a whit regarded: but they that giue them are derided or laughed to scorne or reuiled for their labors. What must we therefore do? It is necessarie that we assay by all means to bring these men (if it be possible) to some modestie & fear of God, which if it cannot be done by willing and gentle means, force and violence must be vsed, to plucke them out of the fire of Gods wrath, to the end they be not consumed: if not all yet at least those that are not growne to that height of stubbornes, and of whome thers yet left some hope of amendment. For euen as when a captaine hath not preuailed by summoning a citie to yeeld vp it selfe, he by and by pla∣ceth his canon against their wals, to put them in feare; In like sort must wee bring foorth against the prowd and high minded men of this world, an armie of Gods terrible iudgements throwne downe by his mighty and puissant hand vpon the wicked, more terrible and fearefull, then all the roaring canons or double canons in the world, vvhereby the most prowd are destroied and consumed euen in this life, all their pride and power how great soeuer it bee being not able to turne backe the vengeance of God from lighting vpon their heads to their vtter destruction and confusion. As it is manifest by infinit examples. Now because that the nature of men is fleshly and giuen to be touched with things that are presented before their fa∣ces, or hath beene done before time, it is a more forcible motiue to stirre them vp, then that which as yet cannot be made manifest, but is to come. Therefore I purpose here to set downe the great & fear∣full iudgements, wherewith God hath alreadie plagued manie in this world, especially them of high degree: whose example will serue for a glasse, both for these that liue now, or shall liue hereafter. And to the end that the iustice of God may more clearely appear and shew it selfe in such strange euents, before wee goe any further we will run ouer certaine necessarie points concerning this matter.
CHAP. IIII. How the iustice of God is more euidently declared vpon the mighty ones of this world, then vpon any other and the cause why. SEeing then that these men are more guiltie and culpable of sinne then any other, they deserue so much a more grieuous punishment, by how much their misdeedes are more grieuous:Psal. 58 11. for doubtlesse, There is a God that iudgeth the earth, (as the Psalmist saith) who as he is benigne and mercifull towards those that fear and obey him, so he will not suffer iniquitie to goe vnpunished: This is he (saith the Prophet) that executeth iustice mercie and iudgement vpon the earth: for if it be the dutie of an earthly prince to exercise not onely cle∣mencie and gentlenesse, but also sharpenesse and seueritie, thereby by punishing and chastising malefactors to suppresse all disorders in the Commonwealth; then it is verie necessarie that the iustice of our great God to whom all soueraine rule and authority belongeth, and who is the Iudge of the whole world, should either manifest it selfe in this world, or in the world to come: and chiefly towardes them which are in the highest places of account, who being more hardned and bold to sinne, doe as boldly exempt themselues from all corrections and punishments due vnto them, being altogether vnwilling to bee subiect to any order of iustice or law whatsoeuer: and therefore by how much the more they cannot bee punished by man, and that humane lawes can lay no hold vpon them, so much the rather God himselfe becommeth executioner of his owne iustice vpon their pates: and in such sort, that euery man may perceiue his hand to be vpon them. Let anie aduersitie or affliction light vpon a man of low degree, or vvhich is poore and desolate, no man considereth of it rightly, but talking thereof, men cease not to impute the cause of this poore soules miserie either to pouertie or want of succour, or some other such like cause. Therefore if anie
such be in griefe, or by chance fallen into some pit, and drowned, or robbed & killed in the way by theeues: straight way this is the say∣ing of the vvorld, That it commeth thus to passe either because hee vvas alone without companie, or destitute of helpe, or not well loo∣ked to and regarded: and thus they passe ouer the matter. But as concerning great men, vvhen they are anie vvay afflicted, no such pretences or excuses can be alleaged: seeing they want neither ser∣uants to attend vpon them, nor any other means of help to succour them: therefore when these men are ouertaken and surprised vvith anie great euill, which by no meanes they can eschew, & whē their bold and wicked enterprises, are pursued & concluded with strange and lamentable euents, in this wee must acknowledge an especiall hand of God, who can entangle and pull downe the prowdest and arrogantest he that liues, & those whom the world feareth to med∣dle vvith all: these prowd gallants are they against whom God dis∣plaieth his banner of power more openly then against meaner and baser persons: because these poore soules find oftentimes to their paines that they are punished vvithout cause, and tormented and vexed by those Tyrants, not hauing committed any offence at all, to deserue it: whereas (as Philip Comine saith) vvho dare be so bold as to controll or reprehend a King and his fauorites, or to make in∣quirie of his misdeedes: or hauing made inquisition of them, who dare presume to enforme the Iudge thereof? Who dare stand vp to accuse them? Who dare sit downe to iudge them? Nay vvho dare take knowledge of them? And lastly, vvho dare assay to pu∣nish them? Seeing then in this case that our vvorldly iustice hath her handes bound behind her from executing that which is right: it must needs bee that the soueraine Monarch of heauen and earth should mount vp into his throne of iudgement, and from thence giue his definitiue vnchaungeable sentence to deliuer vp the most guilty and hainous sinners, to those paines and torments which they haue deserued; and that after a strange and extraordinarie manner which may serue for an example to all others.
CHAP. V. How all men both by the law of God and Nature, are inexcusable in their sinners. NOw to the end that no man should pretend igno∣rance for an excuse, God hath bestowed vpon e∣uery one a certaine knowledge and iudgement of good and euill, which being naturally engraued in the tables of mans heart, is commonly called The law of nature: whereby euery mans owne conscience giueth sufficient testimony vnto it selfe, when in his most secret thoughts it either accuseth or excuseth him: for there is not a man liuing, which doth not know in his owne heart, that he doth an euill deed when he wrongeth another, although he had neuer bene instructed elsewhere in that point. So although that in Tar∣quinius Superbus time (Cicero saith) there was no written law esta∣blished in Rome forbidding the rauishing and deflouring of wiues and virgines: yet the wicked sonne of this Tarquine was not there∣fore lesse guilty of an hainous crime, when contrary to the law of nature, hee violently robbed Lucrece of her chastity: for no man can be ignorant that it is a most grieuous crime to lay siege to the chastitie of a maried woman, with such outrage: and so the whole people of Rome did esteeme of it as a crime most wicked, strange, and intollerable, and worthy of grieuous punishment. Euery man knoweth thus much, that he ought not to do that to another, which he would not another should do to him: which sentence the Em∣perour Seuerus made alwaies to be spoken aloud and declared by the sound of the trumpet, in the way of aduertisement, as often as punishment was taken vpon any offender, as if it were a generall law pertaining to all men. This is that equity & iustice, which ought to be ingrafted in our hearts, & wherof nature herself is the school∣mistresse: from this fountaine all humane and ciuill lawes are deri∣ued: if we had not rather say that they are deriued from that true spring of equity, which is in the law of God, which law he hath gi∣uen for a plaine and familiar manifestation of his will, concerning iust, holy, and reasonable things, touching the seruice, honour, and
glorie which is due vnto himselfe, and the mutuall dutie friendship and good will, which men owe one to another: whereunto he ex∣horteth and entiseth euery one by faire and gratious promises, and forbiddeth the contrarie, by great and terrible threatnings, (so gen∣tle & mercifull is he towards vs and desirous of our good.) This is that law which was published before the face of more then six hun∣dred thousand persons, with the mighty & resoūding noise of trum∣pet, with earthquake, fire, and smoke, & with thunders & lightnings to make men more attentiue to heare & more prepared to receiue it with all humility, feare, & reuerence, & also to put them in mind, that if they were disobedient & rebellious, he wanted no power and ability to punish them, for he hath lightning, thunder, & fire, prepa∣red instruments to execute his iust vengeance, which no creature vnder heauen is able to auoid, when by the obstinat transgression of wicked men, he is prouoked to anger and indignation against them. This is that holy law which hath ben set forth by the Prophets: by the rule whereof all their warnings, exhortings, and reprouings, haue ben squared: to this law the onely begotten sonne of God our saui∣our and redeemer Iesus Christ conformed his most holy doctrine; bringing men to the true vse and obseruation thereof, from which they had declined, and whereof he is the end, the scope, and perfect accomplishment: so that so far it is that a Christian man may be ig∣norant of it, and haue it in contempt, that none can be counted and reputed a true Christian, if he frame not his life by the rule thereof, if not fully, yet at least as farforth as he is able: otherwise, vvhat a shame and reproch is this for men to call themselues by the name of Gods children, Christians, and Catholicks, and yet to do euery thing clean contrarie to the will of God, to make no reckoning of his law, to lead a dissolute and disordered life, and to bee as euill (if not worse) then the vilest miscreants and infidels in the world? God wil∣leth and requireth that he alone should bee worshipped and praied vnto; and yet the greater part of the world are idolaters, and full of superstition, worship Images, stickes and stones, and pray to crea∣tures instead of the creator. God forbiddeth vs to sweare by his name in vaine: and yet what is more rife then that? so that a man can heare nothing else but othes and blasphemies. Manie for the
least trifle in the world stick not to sweare & forsweare themselues. God forbiddeth theft, murther, adulterie, and false witnesse bea∣ring, and yet nothing so common as backbitings, slanders, forgeries, false reports, whoredomes, cousenings, robberies, extortions, and all manner of enuies and enmities. God hath commanded that we loue our neighbours as our selues: but we in stead of loue; hate, despise, and seeke to procure the hurt and damage of one another, not re∣garding anie thing but our owne peculiar profit and aduantage. Is not this a manifest and profest disobedience, and intollerable rebel∣lion against our maker? What child is there that is not bound to honour and reuerence his father? What seruant that is not bound to obey his maister, and to doe all that hee shall will him? What subiect that is not tied in subiection to his Prince and Soueraigne? Yet there is not one which will not confesse, yea and sweare too with his mouth, that God is his Lord and father; Which if it bee true, what is then the cause, that instead of seruing and pleasing him, they doe nothing else but displease and offend his Maiestie? Is not this the way to prouoke his wrath, and stirre vp his indignation a∣gainst them? Is it any maruaile if he be incensed with anger, if he be armed with reuenge, and send abroad his cruell scourges vpon the earth to strike and whip it with all? Is it any wonder if he pile vp the wicked ones on heapes, and shoot out his reuengefull arrows against them, and make them drunken with their owne blood, and make his sword of iustice as sharpe as a rasor,Deut. 32.35. to punish those rebels that haue rebelled against him? For vengeance is mine (saith he) and belongeth onely vnto me, whosoeuer therefore he be that followeth the desires and concupiscence of his owne flesh, and this wicked world, & shall lead a life contrarie to the instruction and ordinance of the law of God, yea although he neuer heard thereof, yet is he guiltie thereof & worthie to be accursed; for so much as his owne conscience ought to serue for a law vnto himselfe, by the which hee is condemned in those euill actions which he committeth (euen as Paul saith) all that haue sinned without the law shall likewise perish without the law.Rom. 2.12.
CHAP. VI. How the greatest Monarchs in the world ought to be subiect to the law of God, and consequently the lawes of man and of nature. EVerie man confesseth this to be true, That by how much the more benefits and dignitie hee hath receiued from a∣nother, by so much is he the more bounden and beholden to him: now it is so that Kings and Princes are those vp∣on whom God hath bestowed more plentifully his gifts and gra∣ces, then vpon any other, whom hee hath made as it were his Lieu∣tenants in this world: for he hath extolled and placed them aboue others, and bedecked them with honour, giuing them power & au∣thoritie to rule and raigne, by putting people in subiection to them: and therefore so much the more are they bound to reacknowledge him againe, to the end to doe him all honour and homage which is required at their hands.Psal. 2.11. Therefore Dauid exhorteth them to serue the Lord euen with reuerence. This then their high and superinten∣dent estate, is no priuiledge to exempt them from the subiection and obedience which they owe vnto God, whom they ought to re∣uerence aboue all things.Psal. 29.1. Ye Princes and high Lords (saith the Pro∣phet) giue you vnto the Lord eternall glorie and strength: giue vnto him glorie due vnto his name: and cast your selues before him to doe him reue∣rence. If they owe so much honour vnto God as to their soueraine, then surely it must follow, that they ought to obey his voice, and feare to offend him; and so much the rather, because hee is a great deale more strong, and terrible then they, able to cause his horrible thunderbolts to tumble vpon their heads, they being not able once to withstand his puissance, but constrained very often to tremble thereat. In al that prescription and ordinance ordained & set downe by God concerning the office of Kings,Deut. 17.15. there is no mention made of any libertie that he giueth them to liue after their owne lusts, and to do euery thing that seemeth good in their owne eies: but he en∣ioineth them expressely to haue alwaies with them the booke of his
law, delighteth to read and meditate therein, and thereby to learne to feare and reuerence his name, by obseruing all the precepts that are contained in that booke. As for ciuill and naturall lawes in so much as they are founded vpon equitie and right, (for otherwise they were no lawes) therein they are agreeable to, and as it were dependents on the law of God, as is well declared by Cicero in the first and second booke of his lawes: for euen they also condemne theeues, adulterers, murderers, parricides, and such like. If then prin∣ces be subiect to the law of God, as I am about to shew: there is no doubt, but that they are likewise subiect to those ciuill lawes, by reason of the equitie and iustice which therein is commended vnto vs. And if (as Plato saith) the lawes ought to be aboue the prince, not the prince aboue the lawes:Dial. 4. ote legibus. it is then most manifest that the prince is tyed vnto the lawes, euen in such sort, that without the same, the gouernment which he swaieth can neuer be lawfull and commendable. And if it be true, that the Magistrate is or ought to be a Speaking law, (as it is said) and ought to maintaine the autho∣ritie and credit thereof, by the due and vpright administration of Iustice: for if he did not this, he were a dumb law and without life: How is it possible that he should make it of authority & sorce with others, if he despiseth and transgresseth it himselfe? Dauid did ne∣uer assume so much to himselfe, as to desire to haue liberty to do what he listed in his kingdom, but willingly submitted himselfe to that whic his office and duty required:2. Sam. 5. making (euen then when he was installed and established king ouer the whole land) a coue∣nant of peace with the princes and deputies of the people: and wee know, that in euery couenant and bargaine both parties are bound to ech other by a mutuall bond to perfourme the conditions which they are agreed vpon: the like is vsed at the coronation of Christi∣an Kings, where as the people is bound and sworne to do their alle∣giance to their Kings: so the kings are also solemnly sworne to main∣taine and defend true religion, the estate of iustice, the peace and tranquilitie of their subiects, and the right and priuiledges (which are nothing but the lawes) of the Realme: whereas Dauid was by the Prophet Nathan reprooued for the adultery and murder which he had committed, he neither vsed any excuse, nor alledged any priuiledge whereby he was exempted from the rigour of the law
to iustifie his fact: but freely confessed without any cloake, that he had sinned. Whereby it appeareth of how small strength and authority their opinion and words be, which thinke or affirme that a prince may dispence with the lawes at his pleasure: by this opinion was the mother in law of Antonius Caracalla seduced; who hauing by her lasciuious and filthy allurements, enticed her sonne in law to lust, and loue her, and to desire her for his wife, per∣swaded him that he might bring his purpose to passe, and that it was lawfull enough for him if he would, though for other it was vnlawfull, seeing that he was Emperour, and that it belongeth not to him to receiue, but to giue lawes: by which perswasion, that braue marriage was concluded and made vp, contrary to the law of nature and nations, and to all honestie and vertue. So it was reported how Cambyses tooke his owne sister to wife,Herod. lib 3. whome not∣withstanding a litle after he put to death: which thing being not vsuall then among the Persians, not daring to enterprise it (al∣though he was a most wicked man) without the aduise of the ma∣gistrates and counsellers of his realme: hee called them togither, and demaunded whether it was lawfull for him to make such a marriage or no: to whome they answered freely, that there was no prescript law which did allow of it: yet (that they might sooth him vp, fearing to incurre his displeasure) they said further, that though there was no law to command it, yet such a mighty king as hee, might doe what he pleased. In like manner that trencher Philosopher Anaxarchus after that he had told Alexander the Great,Plutarch. with a loud voice, that he ought not to feare the penaltie of any law, nor the reproch nor blame of any man, because it be∣longed onely to his office to create lawes for all other to liue by, and to prescribe the limits of lawfull and lawlesse things; and that it became him beeing a conquerour, to rule like a lord and a ma∣ster, and not to obey any vaine conceit of law whatsoeuer; and that what thing soeuer the king did, the same was sacred, iust, and lawfull vvithout exception: And by this meanes made his proceedings farre more dissolute and outragious in many things then euer they were before. Dion in the epitome of Xiphiline, reporteth how the Emperours were wont to vsurpe this priui∣ledge to be exempted from all lawe, that they might not be
tied to any necessity of doing or leauing vndone any thing, and how in no case they would endure to be subiect to any written ordinances: the which thing is manifest euen in the behaui∣our of the chiefest of them, aswell in regard of their life and manners, as of the gouernment that they vsed in their Com∣monwealths. For first of all Augustus Caesar hauing kept in his owne hand the office of the Triumuir ten yeeres (as Suetonius testifieth) hee also vsurped the Tribunes office and authori∣ty, and that til his dying day: and likewise tooke vpon him the Censureship, namely the office of correcting and gouerning man∣ners and lawes, if need required: whose successours (a man may truly say for the most part) trampled vnder their feete all sincere and sacred lawes, by their notorious intemperance, dissolutenesse, and cruelties. And yet for all this there wanted not a parasiti∣call lawyer, vvho to please the Emperour his lord and master the better, and to vnderprop, and as it vvere seele ouer vvith a faire shevv that tyrannicall gouernment vsed by other Empe∣rours, foisted in this as a lavv amongst the rest, Princeps legi∣bus solutus est, That the prince was exempted from all law. As for that which they alledge out of Aristotles Politiques, maketh nothing to set a colour vpon this counterfait: for (saith Aristotle) if there be any man that excelleth so in vertue aboue all others, that none is able to compare with him, that man is to be accoun∣ted as a God amongst men, to whome no law may be prescribed, because he is a law vnto himselfe: all which, I graunt to be true, if that which was presupposed could take place: for where no transgression is found, there no law is necessary: according as Saint Paul said, The law was not giuen for the iust, but for the vn∣iust and offenders: but where is it possible to find such a Prince so excellent and so vertuous, that standeth not in need of some law to be ruled by? Of the like force and strength is that which is written in the first booke of Institutions tit. 2. the wordes are these, The Princes pleasure serueth for a law, because the whole bodie of the people hath translated all their authoritie, power, and iurisdiction vnto him: this is spoken of the Romane Emperours, but vpon
the ground of so slender & silly reason, that vpon so weake a foun∣dation it can neuer stand: for if it be demanded, whether this action of the people of giuing ouer their right and prerogatiue to their Prince, be vvilling or constrained, vvhat answere vvill they make? If it be by constraint and feare (as it is indeed) vvho will not iudge this vsurping of their libertie vtterly vniust and tyrannicall: when one man shall arrogate that to himselfe vvhich pertaineth to manie, yea to the vvhole bodie of the people? And admit that this reason vvas effectual: yet the glose vpon the place saith very notably, That the princes pleasure may be held for a law so far forth as that which pleaseth him, be iust and honest: giuing vs to know thus much ther∣by, that euerie vvill and pleasure of a Prince, may not indifferentlie be allowed for a law if it be in an vniust and dishonest action, & con∣trarie to the rule of good maners. Moreouer it appeareth by the cu∣stomes of many ancient people, and realmes, that Princes had neuer this license giuen them to doe vvhat they listed: for let them be ne∣uer so mightie, yea as mighty as Darius, vnder vvhose raign, the Per∣sian monarchie was abolished: yet he must bee content (according to the law of the Medes and Persians) not to bee able to infringe that law vvhich vvas by the aduise of his Peeres and priuie counsell enacted, and by his owne consent and authoritie established: no though for Daniels deliuerance sake vvhom he loued,Dan. 6.8. he greatly de∣sired and tooke paines either to disannull or at least to giue a fauou∣rable interpretation of it. Such in old time was the custome of the Kings of Aegypt not to follow their owne affections in any actions they vvent about,Diod. lib. 2. cap. 2. but to be directed by the aduise of their laws; for they had not so much authoritie as to iudge betwixt man and man, or to leuie subsidies and such like by their owne powers: neither to punish any man through choler, or any ouerweening conceit, but were alwaies tied to obserue iustice and equitie in all causes: neither did it grieue them so to doe, being persuaded that whilest they obeied their lawes, no∣thing could better betide them but good.Thucyd. lib 1. The Lacedemonian Kings were in such bondage to the lawes of their countrie, that the Ephori which were set vp to none other end, but to be a bridle to hold them backe from doing vvhat they listed, had absolure au∣thority to correct them vvhen they had committed any fault:
which subiection nothing displeased king Theopompus, as it is ap∣parent by the answere he made his wife, that reproued him once in anger, saying by his cowardlinesse he would leaue a lesse king∣dome to his children, then he had receiued of his ancestors: nay saith he, a greater, for so much as more durable and parmanent. Plutarch praising the vprightnesse of King Alcamenes, who for feare to breake the law refused diuerse presents that were sent him, bursteth into this speech, O heart worthie of a King, that hath preferred the authoritie of the law before his owne profite. Where are those fellowes now that crie, Kings pleasures ought to be obserued for lawes, and that a Prince may make a law, but is not subiect to it himselfe: and this is that which Plutarch saith as concerning that matter, who liued vnder Traian the Em∣perour. Cornelius Tacitus discouering the beginning and originall of the Romane ciuill law,Lib. 3. Annal. saith that Seruius the third King of Rome after Romulus and Numa, was the only man that most established those lawes wherevnto kings themselues ought to yeeld and be obedient. And admit that the Emperors swaied with great power and authoritie almost all the world, yet for all their fiercenesse and haughtinesse of mind, Pliny durst tell Traian verie roundlie,In Paneger. that an Emperour ought to vse to carrie himselfe with such good gouernment in his Empire, as if he were sure to giue vp an account of all his actions: thou must not (saith he) desire more libertie to follow thine owne lust, then any one of vs doe, a Prince is not set ouer the law, but the law placed in authority aboue the Prince, this was the admonition of that Heathen man. Likewise Antoni∣us and Seuerus two mighty Emperours, although by reason of an opinion of their owne greatnesse and haultinesse wherwith they flattered themselues, bragged that they were not subiect to anie law: yet they added this clause withall, That notwithstanding they would liue according to the direction of the law.Lib. 4. tit. 17. This (saith Theodosius and Valentinian, two no lesse mighty Emperours) is a voice becomming the roial Maiestie and greatnesse of a king, To confesse himselfe to liue vnder a law: and in truth it is a thing of greater importance, then the imperiall dignity it selfe,Lib. 1. od. to put so∣ueraignty
vnder the authority of law. Amongst many other good lessons and exhortations which Lewis that good King gaue vnto his son on his death bed,Nicol. Gil, vol. 1. Chronicl. franc. this was one worthy the re∣membring, how he commanded him to loue and feare God with all his strength, and to take heed of doing any thing that should be contrarie to his law, whatsoeuer should befall him; and to pro∣uide that the good lawes and statutes of his kingdome might bee obserued, and the priuiledges of his subiects maintained: to forbid iudges to fauour him more then others, when any cause of his owne came in triall. Thereby giuing vs thus much to vnder∣stand, that euery good King ought to submit himselfe in obedi∣ence vnder the hand of God, and vnder the rule of iustice and equitie. Wherefore there is neither king nor Keisar that can or ought to exempt himselfe from the obseruance of sacred and vpright lawes, which if they resist or disanull, doubtlesse they are culpable of a most hainous crime, and especially of rebellion a∣gainst the king of kings. CHAP. VII. Of the punishment that seased vpon Pharoa king of Aegypt for resisting God, and transgressing the sixt commandement of the law. WE haue sufficiently declared in the premisses, that the mightiest potentates of this world are bound to range themselues vnder the obedi∣ence of Gods law: it remaineth now that wee produce examples of those punishments that haue fallen vpon the heads of the transgressors of the same, according to the manner of their transgression, of what sort soeuer: which that wee may the better describe, it be∣houeth vs to follow the order of the Commandements, as the examples we bring may be fitly referred to any of them. And first we are to vnderstand that when God said, Thou shalt haue none other Gods before me, he condemneth vnder these words the vanitie of men that haue forged to themselues a multitude of
gods: he forbiddeth all false religiō, & declareth that he wold be acknowledged to be the sole & true God; & that we shold serue, worship, loue, fear, & obey him in and aboue al things. And who∣seuer it bee that doth otherwise either by hindering his worship, or afflicting those that worship him, the same man prouoketh his heauie wrath to be throwne vpon him to his vtter ruine and de∣struction. This is the indignation that lighted vpon Pharoa king of Aegypt, as we read in the booke of God:Exod. 3. who being one of the most puissant Kings of the earth in his age, God chose him for an obiect to shew his wonderfull power on, by the meanes of horrible plagues and scourges which hee cast vpon him, and by destroying him with all his armies at the length, as his rebellion well deserued: for he like a cruell tyrant continuing to oppresse the children of Israel, without giuing them any release or brea∣thing time from their miserie, or libertie to serue God, although by Moses in the name & authoritie of God, who made himselfe well enough knowne vnto him, without the helpe of any written law, he was many times instantly vrged and requested therunto: so many iudgements and punishments assailed him one in the necke of the other in such sort, that at length hee was ouertaken and ensnared therewith. First of all the verie waters of Aegypt being conuerted into blood, proclaimed warre against him: then the frogges which couered the face of the earth, climed vp e∣uen to his chamber and bed, and filling euery corner of his land, sounded him an alarum: next a muster of lice and gnats, and such other troublesome and stincking creatures summoned him to combate: an handfull of embers scattered in the aire by Moses, vvere vnto him as the strokes of a stone or a shaft, which did vvoonderfully disfigure their bodies vvith boiles and most noisome scabs: afterward the grashoppers vvere put in battaile aray against him, together with the pesti∣lence, hailestones, horrible thunders, and lightnings, wasting and spoiling, and running vp and downe greeuously though his whole land. After al these bitter blows the tyrant being cut short, and being so besieged on euery side with hideous and palpable
darkenesse that he could not tell which waies to turne himselfe: yet would he not be brought to any reason, but continued obsti∣nate & hardned against God, though all the elements with hea∣uen and earth had taken armour together and conspired his de∣struction. Therefore while hee remained in this wretched state, Gods angell punished him in the person of his eldest son, which died sodainly in one night, together with all the first borne of Ae∣gypt, wherewithall both he and all his people being greatly mo∣ued and grieued, at length gaue the Israelites not only leaue, but also hasted thm to depart: but anone as he saw them going, like a man bestraught, he ran after them again, and pursued them with a mightie armie, vntill God in the meane while opening a pas∣sage to his children ouerthwart the deepe red sea, attended him in the midway: where he surprised and ensnared him, ouerthrew and violently ouerturned the wheeles of his chariots, and put his whole armie to a hurliburly, and that hee might vtterly de∣stroy him, caused the sea from each side to returne to his chan∣nell, which drowned and deuoured him and all his armie. And this is one of the notablest and fearefullest iudgements of God, that can bee mentioned: and therefore is very often recounted inmanie places of the scripture, as a thing most memorable a∣boue others. Neither ought we to meruaile, if so notable an hy∣storie as this, is not set down among the writings of prophane au∣thors: for besides that their histories doe not ordinarily stretch so farre, as to record such ancient acts: there is also no doubt but the successors of that Tyrant, and all the Aegyptians sought all meanes possible to cancell and blot out the memorie of their so great and horrible ruine. And if by chance any historiographer make mention of the departure of the Israelits out of Aegypt, it is done in such sort, that the truth is not only disguised, but whol∣ly peruerted by them, and in place thereof nothing but lies and falshood foisted in.
CHAP. VIII. Of the destruction of many other Kings for the like sinne. LIke as Pharaoh by his vniust and outragious persecuting the children of God, made him selfe so guiltie of Gods wrath, that hee de∣serued to be vtterly destroied with the greatest part of his people: so also after thr miraculous deliuerance, whosoeuer laboured either to hurt, hinder, or resist them, did no lesse incurre Gods displeasure and fierce wrath a∣gainst them, wherewith they were consumed: Whereof, the ouerthrow and discomsiture of Amalech is a plaine example: who admit, all the great wonders which God had done for the Israelites in Aegypt, and in the red sea;Exod. 17. whereof the bruite be∣ing blowen into all corners of the earth, he could not be igno∣rant of; yet was he so malitious and foolish hardy, as to take vp armour against them, and to meete them to bid them battaile: but he and his wicked complices were by Ioshua and his poore people (though vnwarlike and vnacquainted with such actions, lately crept out of bondage, wherein they had bene onely exer∣cised to make mortar and bricke, and not to handle weapons) discomfited and ouerthrowen: for the Lord of hosts (who is the deuider of victories to whome he pleaseth) at the feruent prai∣ers of his seruant Moses fought for them, to the confusion of A∣malech and all his traine: And therefore he commanded Moses to put this deed of his in writing, as a thing worthy to be remem∣bred: who also erected an altar in the same place, for a perpe∣tuall monument of so noble a victory. As Amalech, and for the like sinne,Num. 2.1. were Arad a king of the Canaanites, Sehon king of Amorites, and Og king of Basan with their people & cities destroied and rased downe; So the Madi∣anites enterprising to withstand the foresaid Israelites, by the
wicked and pernicious counsell of Balaam, were subdued & put to the sword,Num 31. euen fiue kings of them togither, not one escaping saue the yong virgines, which had neuer committed fornication with man. CHAP. IX. More Examples like vnto the former. AFter that the children of Israel had continued a season peaceably in the land of Canaan which the Lord had bestowed vpon them,Indg. 3. then did Eglon king of Moab rise vp & subdued them by warre, & tyrannized ouer them eighteene yeres. And although it was Gods will that they should be thus chastised, because of their corruption & iniqui∣ties neuertheles this Moabite (his rod) he caused (in regard of his loue to his people) to be slaine by Ahud an Israelite, as he was taking his ease in his chamber. In like maner was his wrath stirred vp against Iabin king of Asor, who had oppressed Israel twenty yeres; whose army though it was great and well appoin∣ted, was notwithstanding by Baracs handfull of men, vnder the conduct & rule of Deborah the Prophetesse, wonderously dis∣comfited; in such sort, that of all the multitude, there remained not one that felt not the edge of the sword, except Sisera their captaine: who escaping from the battell by taking him to his heeles, turned in by chance into the house of a woman called Iahel, who hating him, as he slept with a hammer fastned a naile into his temples: and thus escaping from those whom he feared, he was murdered by her whome he trusted. And so this valiant warriour as he was ouercome in battell by the conduct of a wo∣man so was he put to death by the hand of a woman. That which hapned to the Madianites in the time of Gede∣on,Iudg. 7. is admirable and very strange; who, being furnished with a mighty army of soldiers with the Amalekites & other their al∣lies, to destroy Israel, were so scarred & scattered at the sound of the trumpets & brightnes of torches, of three huudred men at the most that were with Gedeon, that through the marueilous astonishment they were in, they turned their blades into their owne bosomes, & murdred one another till the greatest part of
them were destroied; and the residue being put to flight and pursued by the men of Ephraim, two of their kings Oreb & Zeb were taken and slaine. A while after it came to passe that the princes of the Phili∣stims,Iudg. 16. who had oppressed the people of God by the space of 40 yeres, being assembled togither with all their people in the tem∣ple of Dagon their god, euen then whē after their sacrifices they thought to make themselues most sport & pastime with poore Samson, whose eies in mockery & contemp they had put out, were altogither massacred by the fall of the house which Samsō by his strength pulled vpon their heads: which was the greatest ouerthrow that beforetimes by his means they had receiued. In the reigne of Saul king of Israel,1. Sam. 15. Agag king of Amalech the posterity or those that laid wait for Israel in the desart as they came out of Aegypt, were by Saul (following the commandemēt of the Lord) set vpon, who running vpon him & his people made a great slaughter & butchery of them, not sparing man, woman, nor child, except the king only, whom he tooke to mercy & led captiue; which he ought not to haue done. This captaine being thus spared by one that was but little better then himselfe, could not so escape, for the Prophet Samuel became the executioner of Gods vengeance vpon him, since Saul refused it: & with his own hand slue him, euen then when he thought he should liue. A litle while after, Golia a gyant of the Philistims, who as well through the hugenes of his stature & strength of body,1. Sam. 17. as tho∣rough the horrible cruelty which appeared in him, seemed in mans eies inuincible, proudly & presumptuously defied the army of the liuing God, offring & daring any one mā of Israel to enter combat with him: this proud fellow, was notwithstanding all his brags, by yong & vnarmed Dauid, saue a litle stick & a few stones which he had in his hands, vanquished & trode vnder foot: for he gaue this great beast such a knocke with one of his stones on the forhead, that at the first blow he tumbled him groueling on the earth, & quickly leaping vpon him, caught hold of his huge sword, & therwithall cut off his monstrous head: which the Phi∣listims perceiuing, turned thair backs and fled, and were pursued and slaine by the Israelites.
CHAP. X. More examples like vnto the former. IN the time of Achah, Benhadad king of Syria ac∣companied with two and thirty kings,1. King 20. came very proudly against Israel, as it were in despight of God to bid him battaile: but it turned to his owne shame and confusion, being first dishonourably put to flight by two hundred & thirty seruants of the Princes of Israel: (a small handfull to encounter so mighty an army:) And secondly, re∣turning to seeke reuenge, found the losse of an hundred thou∣sand footmen at one clap, besides seuen and twenty thousand which escaping by flight, were crushed in peeces by the ruine of a wall in the city Aphec. And so this braue gallant that earst bragged that the gold and siluer of Israel, yea their wiues and children were his, was now glad to flie for his life among the rest, and in his returne to hide himselfe all dismaid in a little chamber; and from thence (being aduised thereto by his ser∣uants) to send to intreat Achab for his owne life, which a little before thought him sure of the liues of all Israel. Yet for all this ere long he enterprised a new practise against the Prophet Elizaeus,2. King. 6. 2. King. 7. and besieged also the city of Samaria so long, that cer∣taine women (constrained by extreme famine) deuoured their children: but in the end hee was compelled (through fearfull terrour which God sent into his army by the noise of infinite chariots and horses which sounded in their eares, as if some pu∣issant host of men of warre had bene marching towards them) to forsake the siege and flie with all his forces, leauing behind them their tents, horses, cariages, vitailes, and munitions, to be a prey for them that pursued them not. And lastly falling sicke, Hazael one of his own seruants that succeeded him in the king∣dome,2. King 8. to the end he might dispatch him quickly and without tumult, early in the morning tooke a thicke cloth dipt in water, and spreading it ouer his face, stifled him to death. 2. Chron. 20.When the Moabites and Ammonites rose vp in arms against Iehosaphat king of Iuda, assoone as this good king humbled him
selfe togither with all his people before the face of God by fa∣sting and praier, forthwith God sent such a giddinesse of spirit amongst his enemies, that they killed one another: and the men of Iuda without being troubled with fighting, gathered the spoile which they had scattered, and enriched themselues with their reliques. Aman,Ester. 7. & 9. promoted in honour and credit aboue all the Princes of the court of king Assuerus, conceiued so deadly an hatred a∣gainst the poore dispersed Iewes (being at that time the onely Church of God) that malitiously he conspired in one day to de∣stroy and put to death the whole nation, to the very women & infants: and in accomplishing this his purpose, he mightily abu∣sed the authoritie of the king, whome he falsly enformed that this nation would not be subiect to his ordinances and lawes, which his other people were subiect vnto: and that therefore he ought not to permit & suffer them any longer. But God that carieth alwaies a watchfull eie ouer his Church, and knoweth how to breake & dash all the enterprises of his enemies, brought all this wretches purposes to nought, by preseruing miraculously those whome he would haue destroied, & making him doe re∣uerence to Mardocheus whom he especially sought to bring to infamy, and for whome he had of purpose prouided a gibbet to hang him on, but was hanged thereon himselfe, with ten of his sonnes: beside, all those which had conspired with him against the Iewes, were vpon the same day which they had set downe for their massacre, by the kings commandement slaine, by the hands of them whom they had appointed to the slaughter. Balthasar king of Babylon as he was feasting among his prin∣ces,Dan. 5. commanded amidst his cups the golden and siluer vessels which Nabuchadnezzar had taken out of the temple of Ierusalē to be brought, that both he, his princes, and his wiues and con∣cubines might drinke therein, exalting himselfe thus against the Lord of heauen, & boasting in his Idols of earth: therfore, God being stirred vp to wrath against him, appointed his destruction euen whilst he thus dranke and made merry in the midst of his iolity, and caused a strange and fearfull signe to appeare before
his eies: a bodilesse handwriting vpon the wall ouer against the candlestick: The words of which writing portended the destru∣ction of his kingdom, which presently ensued, for the very same night he was murdred, and the scepter seased vpon by Darius king of Media. CHAP. XI. Of the kings which in hatred to the law and religion of God, afflicted the Iewes in the time of the Machabees. 1. Mach. 2. & 6.ANtiochus by sirname Epiphanes or excellent (though by truer report of people contemptuously intitu∣led the furious) king of Asia, being venimously enraged against the Iewes, began at the first mar∣ueilously to oppresse them, to rob and spoile their temple, and to slaughter the people. About ten yeeres after deceiuing the poore people with faire and smooth words, co∣uers of most vile and wretched treason, whilst they imagined no mischiefe, he set vpon them in such cruell sort, that the losse & desolation which they endured at that time was inestimable: for besides the destruction of Ierusalem their city, the slaugh∣ter of infinite multitudes of their people, and the captiuitie of women and infants; as if all these were not enough, there was yet another misery to make vp the full sum, worse then all the rest, which was this: The cursed tyrant seeing his purpose not to take the full effect, commaunded euery where that all his sub∣iects (I meane the Iewes) should forsake and abiure the law of God, & be vnited into one religion with the infidels. By meanes of which edict, the religion of God was defaced, the bookes of his law rent and burned; and those with whome any such books were found, rigorously put to death: Which fearfull crueltie when the Iewes perceiued, it caused many of them to wax faint hearted, & to giue themselues ouer to wallow in the durty fashi∣ons of the vncircūcised idolaters: & in their madnes to subscribe to the vniust lawes of the vile monster. Now after he had com∣mitted all these outrages, he was repulsed with dishonour frō the city Elymais in Persia which he went about to spoile & rob, and
forced to fly to Babylon, where after tidings of the ouerthrow of his two armies in Iudea, with grief & despite he ended his daies. Antiochus the sonne of this wretched father,1. Mach. 6. succeeding him as in his kingdom, so in wickednes, periury, & disloialty, when, to the end to consult about his own affaires, he cōcluded a peace with the Iewes, & by solemne oath as well of himselfe as his princes, confirmed the free exercise of their religiō; behold suddenly he falsified his plighted & sworn faith, & vndid all that euer he had done: but it was not long ere he also was ouertaken by the army of Demetrius, & togither with Lysias his gouernor put to death. A while after reigned Alexander his brother,1. Mach. 11. who whilst hee was encumbred with the troubles of Cilicia that reuolted from him, the king of Aegypt his father in law came traiterously to forestall him of his kingdome, tooke his wife, & gaue her to his deadliest enemy, and afterward gaue him battell, discomfited his forces, and droue him to flie into Arabia for safety: where, in stead of help he found an hatchet to chop off his head, which was sent for a present to gratifie the king of Aegypt withall. Not long after, Antiochus his son recouered,1. Mach. 13. the scepter of his father: but alas his reign endured but a small space, for being yet but a yong child, he was slaine by Triphon, in the way as he led him to war against the Iews: and thus perished the cursed race of Antiochus, which felt Gods wrath vpon it, euen to the third ge∣neration. Antiochus the son of Demetrius, (of whom mention was made but a litle before) after he had chased Triphon from the king∣dome of Asia, which he vsurped,2. Mach. 5. and broken the league which he had made with the Iewes, gaue himselfe wholly to worke them misceiefe. Therfore comming against Ierusalem, he tooke it by force, commanding his souldiers to put all to death that were within the same: So that within three daies there was such a massacre of young and old, men, women, and children, that the number of the slaine arose to fourescore thousand carcasses. After this, hauing executed many more villanies against this people, in so much as to make them renounce the lavv of God, putting them cruelly to death that did not obey his
commandement, It came to passe that this cruell tyrant was first of all pur to flight by the inhabitants of Persepolis, a city of Persia, for going about to rob their temple of their treasures: next endamaged by an ouerthrow of his armie in Iudea: which he no sooner vnderstood, but he tooke counsell in his fury, how to be reuenged on Ierusalem, and belched forth bitter threats against it. But in the meane while the Lord stroke him with a sudden & incurable plague, & surprised him with a horrible tor∣ment of his entrails. Howbeit for all this, he ceased not his mali∣tious enterprisse, but hasted forward his iourny towards the Iews, with such egernesse, that in the way he fell out of his charriot, & bruised so his body, that it became putrified & so full of cor∣ruption, that very vermine scrawled out therof, and the rotten flesh dropped peecemeale away; no man, no nor himselfe being able to endure the stinch therof. Then was he constrained in the midst of his torments to confesse, that it was meet that he should submit himselfe vnto God, that he which is mortall ought not to exalt himselfe so high, as to compare with the immortall God: and in this estate this reprobate ended his wicked daies by a strange and most miserable kind of death. CHAP. XII. Of those that persecuted the sonne of God, and his Church. IF they who in the law iniured and persecuted the Church of God, were punished according to their deserts, as we haue already heard; is it any maruell then, if the enemies & persecuters of our Lord & Sauiour Christ Iesus, which labour by all meanes to discountenance and frustrate his religion, and to oppresse his Church, do feele the heauy & fearfull vengeance of God vpon them for their wickednes & vnbeliefe? No verily: for he that ho∣noreth not the sonne, honoureth not the father which sent him, and is guilty therfore before God of impiety & prophanesse. From this hamous crime king Herod in no wise can be exempted, that caused all the infants of Bethlehem of two yeres old & vnder to be cruelly murdred,Mat. 2. in hope therby to put the true Messias and
sauiour of the world to death. For which deed accompanied with many other strange cruelties:This example belongeth also (in regard of cruelty) to the sixt comman∣dement. Lib. 2. cap. 11.17. Booke of the Iewish an∣tiquitie. chap. 8 as by killing the ordinary iud∣ges of the house of Dauid, and his owne wife and children, this caitife was tormented with sundrie intollerable griefes: and at last deuoured by an horrible and most fearfull death. For (as Io∣sephus reporteth) his body was boiled, and his bowels gnawne in two by a soft and slow fire fretting inwardly without any out∣ward appearance of heat: besides the rauenous & insatiable de∣sire of eating, which so possessed him, that without chewing, his meat in whole lumpes descended into his bodie, deuouring it so fast as it could bee throwne into his mouth, and neuer ceasing to farse his greedie throat with continual sustenance: moreouer, his feet were so swolne and puft vp with such a flegme, that a man might see through them: his priuie parts so rotten and ful of ver∣mine, and his breath so stinking, that few or none durst approch neere vnto him: yea his owne seruants forsooke him. Now lying in this wretched plight, when this wicked man saw no remedie could bee found to assuage his griefe, he went about to kill him∣selfe, and being not able to performe it, he was constrained to en∣dure all the panges of a most horrible, lingring, and languishing death, and at last mad and miserable bestraught of sence and rea∣son to end his daies. As for Herod the Tetrarch,Luke. 9, 7. sirnamed Antipas (who to please Herodias had caused Iohn Baptist to be beheaded) when he had likewise prepared snares for our Sauiours feet, and being sent to him by Pilate to quit himselfe and gratifie him withall, had iea∣sted and mocked at him his belly full,This example in regard of diuorce be∣longeth to the seueth com∣mandement. Lib. 2. cap. 29. Ioseph of the Iewish antiqui∣tie, booke, 8. chap. 9. behold his reproches and mockes (was he neuer so subtile) turned into his own bosome: For first after that his armie had beene discomfited by the souldiors of king Aretas, whose daughter (in regard of Herodias his brother Philips wife) he had repudiated: a further shame and dishonour befell him, euen to be depriued of his roiall dignitie: and not on∣ly to be brought into a low and base estate, but also being robbed of his goods, to be banished into a far countrie, & there to make an end of the rest of his life.
As touching Pilate the gouernour of Iudea hee did so excell in wickednesse and iniustice,Euseb. that notwithstanding the restraint of his owne conscience, the law of ciuill equity, and the aduer∣tisement of his owne wife; yet hee condemned Christ Iesus the iust and innocent to the death of the crosse: albeit he could not but know the power of his miracles, the renowne whereof was spread into all places. But ere long hauing beene constrained to erect the image of the Emperour Caligula in the Temple of Ie∣rusalem to be worshipped, hee was sent for to make personall ap∣pearance at Rome, to answere to certaine accusations of crueltie which were by the Iewes obiected against him: And in his iour∣ney being afflicted in conscience,Euseb. Eutrop. lib. 7. with the number and weight of his misdeeds, like a desperate man to preuent the punishment which he feared, willingly offered violence to his owne life and killed himselfe. The first Emperour that tooke in hand to perse∣cute the Christians, was Nero the tyrant: picking a quarrell a∣gainst them for setting the city on fire,Tertul. Nicephor. 8. Comman∣dement. calumniation. Lib. 2. cap. 44. which being himself guil∣tie of, he charged them withall as desirous to find out any occa∣sion to doe them hurt: wherefore vnder pretence of the same crime, discharinging his own guilt vpon their backs, he exposed thē to the furie of the people, that tormented them very sore, as if they had ben commō burners & destroiers of cities, & the dead∣liest enemies of mankind:Tacit. Annal. Lib. 5. Herevpon the poor innocents were ap∣prehended, & some of them clad with skins of wild beasts, were torne in pieces by dogs; others crucified, or made bonefires of on such heaps, that the flame arising frō their bodies, serued in stead of torches for the night. To cōclude, such horrible cruelty was v∣sed towards thē, that many of their verie enemies did pitty their miseries. But at last this wretch the causer of all, seeing himselfe in danger to be murthered by one appointed for that purpose, (a iust reward for his horrible & vniust dealing) hastened his death by killing himselfe,Suet. Refer this also to the 24 chap. of this booke. Suet. Eutrop. as it shalbe shewed more at large in the 2. booke. The authour of the second persecution against the Christians was Domitian, who was so puft vp and swolne with pride, that he would needs ascribe vnto himselfe the name of God. Against this man rose vp his houshold seruants, who by his wiues consent
slew him with daggers, in his priuy chamber: his body was buried without honor, his memory cursed to posterity, & his ensignes & trophees thrown down & defaced. Traian, who albeit in al things els, & in the gouernmēt of the Empire also, shewed himselfe a good & sage Prince; yet did he dash & bruise himself against this stone with the rest, & was reckoned the third persecutor of the church of Christ: for which cause he vnderwent also the cruel vengeance of God, & felt his heauy hand vpō him: for first he fel into a palsie,Dion. & when he had lost the vse of his sences, (persuading himself that he was poysoned) got a dropsie also, and so died in great anguish. Hadrian in the 9 year of his Empire caused ten thousand Chri∣stians to be crucified in Armenia at one time; & after that ceased not to stir vp a very whot persecution against thē in all places:Mandat. 7. Liq. 2. cap. 12. Spart. But God persecuted him & that to his destructiō: first with an issue of blood wherwith he was so weakened & disquieted, that oftētimes he would faine haue made away himself: next with the consump∣tion of the lunges & lights which he spate out of his mouth conti∣naully: and thirdly with an insatiable dropsie: so that seeing him∣self in this horrible tormēt, he desired poisō to hastē his death, or a knife to make quick riddance: but when all those means were kept back, he was inforced to indure still, & at last to die in great misery. Whilst Marcus Antonius surnamed Verus, swaied the Empire, there were exceeding cruelties set abroach against the poore Christians euery where, but especially at Lions and Vienna in Daulphine (as Eusebius in his Ecclesiasticall historie recordeth:Euseb. Spart.) Wherfore he wanted not his punishment, for he died of an apo∣plexie after he had lien speechlesse three daies. After that Seuerus had proclaimed himselfe a profest enemie to Gods church, his affaires began to decline, and he found him∣selfe pestered vvith diuerse extremities, and set vpon with ma∣ny warres: and at length assaulted with such an extreame paine throughout his vvhole body, that languishing and consuming, he desired oft to poyson himselfe: and at last died in great distresse. Vitellius Saturninus, one of his Leiutenants in those exploits, be∣came blind:Tert. as Scap. another called Claudius Herminianus gouernour of Capadocia, who in hatred of his owne wife that was a Christian, had extreamely afflicted many of the faithfull: was afterward
himselfe afflicted with the pestilence, persecuted with ver∣mine bred in his owne bowels, and deuoured of them aliue in most miserable sort. Now lying in this miserie, hee desired not to bee knowne or spoken of by any, least the Christians that were left vnmurthered, should reioice at his destruction, confessing also that those plagues did iustly betide him for his cruelties sake. Decius in hatred of Philip his predecessor that had made some profession of Christianity, wrought tooth and naile to destroy the church of Christ, vsing all the cruelties and torments which his wit could deuise, against all those which before time had of∣fered themselues to be persecuted for that cause. But his diuelish practises were cut short by means of the warre which he waged against the Scythians:Euseb. booke 7. chap. 1. Ecclesi. hist. wherein when hee had raigned not full two yeares, his armie was discomfited, and he with his sonne cru∣elly killed. Valerian albeit in the beginning of his Empire, hee shewed himselfe somewhat mild and gentle towards the professors of re∣ligion, yet afterwards he became their deadly enemie: but when he had terribly persecuted them in his dominions, it was not long ere he was taken prisoner in the Persian warres, being threescore and ten yeares old, and made a slaue to his conquerour al the rest of his life:In the sermon of the congre∣gatiō of saints. Euseb. histor. ec∣clesiast. booke 7. chap. 30. And whose condition was so miserable, that Sapor king of Persia, vsed his backe as a blocke or stirrop to mount vpon his horse. Yea hee dealt so cruelly with the poore old man (as Euse∣bius testifieth) that to make vp the full number of his miseries, he caused him to be flaine aliue. Aurelian being vpon point to trouble the quiet of the church, which it a while enioied vnder the Emperour Galien; euen whilst he was deuising new practises against it, a thunderbolt fell from heauen at his feet, which so amased him, that his malicious and bloodthirstie mind was somewhat rebated and repressed from doing that which he pretended: vntill that returning to his old bent, and perseuering to pursue his purpose, when Gods thunder could not terrifie him,Vepis. Eutrop. Nicephor. hee stirred vp his owne seruants to cut his throat.
Dioclesian went another way to worke, for hee did not set a∣broach all his practises at one push, but first assaied by subtle means to make those that were in his armie to renounce their faith, then by open proclamation commanded that their churches should be rased and beaten downe,Ruffin. their bibles bur∣ned and torne in peeces: that they that were Magistrats, or bore any publike office in the Commonwealth, if they were Christians should bee deposed: and that all bondmen that would forsake their profession should be enfranchised. Whē hee had thus left no deuise vnpractised that might further to abolish and destroy the religion of Christ, and perceiuing that notwithstanding all his malice and cruell rage, it euery day (through the wonderfull constancie of Martyrs) encrea∣sed and grew euen against the haire, with very spight and an∣ger he gaue vp the Empire. And lastly when hee had beene tormented with diuerse and strange diseases, and that his house had beene set on fire with lightning, and burned vvith fire from heauen, and hee himselfe so scarred with thunder, that he knew not where to hide him, hee sell mad and killed himselfe. There was ioined to this man in the gouernment of the Empire, one Maximian, whose crueltie and tyranny a∣gainst the Christians was so outragious also,Mandat. 7. Lib. 2. cap. 12. that vpon a so∣lemne feastiuall day, when infinite numbers of them vvere assembled together at Nicomedia in a temple to serue God, he sent a band of Atheists to inclose them & burne the tem∣ple and them together, as they indeed did: for there vvere consumed at that bondfire (as Nicephorus writeth) twentie thousand persons.Euseb. histor. ec∣clesiast. 7. & 8. chap. 16. Nicephor. lib. 7. chap 6. In like sort dealt he with a whole citie in Phrigia, which after he had long besieged, hee caused to bee burnt to cinders with all the inhabitants therein, But the end of this wretch was like his life, euen miserable: for lying a while sicke of a greeuous disease, the very vermine and such horrible stinke came forth of his body, that for shame and griefe he hung himselfe. Maximinus that raigned Emperour in the East,Nicephor. 7.22. was con∣strained to interrupt and make cease his persecution which
he had begun by means of a dangerfull and greeuous sick∣nesse, and to confirme a generall peace to all Christians in his dominions by publike edicts. But (alasse) it was so brittle that it lasted but sixe months: for euen then he sought all meanes possible againe to trouble and disquiet their rest, & sent forth a new edict quite contrary to the former, importing their vt∣ter destruction. And thus being nothing amended, but rather made worse by his sicknesse it assailed him afresh in such sort, that euery day growing in extremity, as he grew in crueltie: it at last brought him to his death: his carcasse being all rot∣ten and full of corruption and wormes.Against the Gentiles. S. Chrisostome writeth of him that the apple of his eie fell out before he died. Macentius and Licinius the one Emperour of Italy, the other of the East, perceiuing how the Emperour Constantine that raigned in the West, was had in great reputation, for maintaining the cause of the Christians, began also to do the like: but by and by their malice and hipocrisie discouered it selfe when they vndertooke to trouble & afflict those whom before they seemed to fauour, for which cause Constantine ta∣king armes against them, destroied them both one after ano∣ther, for Maxentius thinking to saue himselfe vpon a bridge on Tiber, was deceiued by the breaking of the bridge, and so drenched and drowned in the water. Licinius was taken and put to death. And thus two tyrants ended their daies for per∣secuting the church of Christ. Lanques chron.In the tenth year of the persecution of Dioclesian, Galerius his chiefe minister and instrument in that practise, fell into a greeuous sicknesse, hauing a sore risen in the nether part of his belly which consumed his priuie members, frō whence swar∣med great plentie of wormes, engendred by the putrifaction. This disease could not bee holpen by any chirurgery or phi∣sicke: wherefore hee confessed that it iustly happened vnto him for his monstrous cruelty towards the Christians, & cal∣led in his proclamations which he had published against thē. Howbeit notwithstanding he died miserably, and as some write slue himselfe.
CHAP. XIII. More examples of persecutors. SAint Bartholmew one of the twelue Apo∣stles after hee had preached Christ Iesus vnto the Indians, and deliuered them the Gospell written by Matthew, and had conuerted many vnto the faith: albeit the miracles which he wrought were strange and supernaturall, (for hee restored many diseased persons to their health,Hieron. in cata∣logo. and clensed king Polemius his daughter from an vncleane spirit wherewith he was pos∣sessed) yet in regard that hee destroied their idoll Astaroth and bewraied the subtilties of Sathan, he was by Astiages, Po∣lemius yoonger brother, at the instigation of the idolatrous priests first cruelly beaten with clubs, after flaied, and last of al beheaded. But within 30 daies after both the wicked king, and the sacrilegious priests were possessed with Deuils and brought to a wretched and miserable death.Theodoret. lib. 4. chap. 26. Aphraates that heauenly Philosopher, going out of his cloister towards the Temple to feed the flocke of Christ with some vvholesome food of sound doctrine, and being perceiued by the Empe∣rour Valens and demanded whether he went; hee answered to pray for him and his kingdome.Tripartit hist. lib. 8. chap, 4. Nicephor. lib. 11. chap. 25. I but said the Emperour it were more cōuenient for thee that professest thy self a Monk to remaine at home in contemplation, then to stray abroad: true answered this holy man, if Christs sheepe enioied peace: but as it becommeth an honest matrone to sit still vvithin dores, neuertheles if her house were on fire, & the flame en∣uironed her, should shee not stir to helpe to quench it? And should I lie still and see my country set on fire by thy perse∣cution? Wherat the Emperour being netled, threatned him with death: and one of his chamberlaines taunting bim for his boldnes, vsed him most currishly. But presently as he went to the bathes to make them ready for the Emperour, the hand of God stroke him with an apoplexie, that he fel down dead into the waters.
Vnder the Empire of Iulian the Apostate, all they that either conspired or practised the death of Cyrillus a Deacon of Heliopolis scituate neere to Libanus,Theodor. lib. 3. chap. 7. came to a miserable end: for after that Constantine was deceased, by whose autho∣ritie the holy Martyr had broken downe many of their I∣mages and Idols, the abhominable idolators did not onely murther him, but also deuoured his liuer with bread, as if it had been the sweetest morsell of meat in the world. But the alseeing eie of God, saw their villany, and his reuengefull rod brused them in peeces: for their teeth wherwith they chew∣ed that vnnaturall food, fell all out of their heads; and their tongues wherwith they tasted it, rotted and consumed to no∣thing: and lastly their eies which beheld it, failed them, and they became blind. And thus were they all serued not one excepted, bearing iustly the markes of Gods wrath for so in∣humane and vnnaturall a deed. Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 7.At Tire a city of Paenicia vnder the raigne of Dioclesian, many Christians that stoutly professed and maintained the faith and teligion of Christ Iesus, vvere after many tortures and distractions exposed to wild beastes to bee deuoured, as beares, libards, vvild bores, and bulles: but the sauage beasts though made fierce and furious by fires and swords, yet (I know not by what secret instinct) refused once to touch them or to come neere them, but turned their teene vpon the infidels that were without, and came to set them on vpon the saints, and tore many of them in peeces in their steads. Howbeit although they escaped the chawes of vvild beastes, yet they escaped not the swordes of them that vvere more sauage then any beastes: and though the bowelles of beares refused to entombe them, yet were they emtombed in the floods: and crowned vvith the crowne of sacred martyrdome. Processus and Martianus, keepers of the prison wherein the Apostles Peter and Paul were inclosed at Rome, seeing the miracles which were vvrought by their hands, beleeued in Christ, and together with seuen and fourtie other prisoners
were baptised: which when Paulinus the Iudge perceiued, he enioined them to lay aside their conscience, and offer sa∣crifice to idols: But they readier to obey God then man,Vincentius lib. 10. cap. 56. Petrus de nata∣libus. could neither by threats nor violence bee brought to it, but chose rather to be beaten with clubs or consumed with fire, or scourged with scorpions as they were, then to yeeld to de∣nie their maker by doing worship to diuelish and monstrous idols. But that Iudge the procurer of their martyrdomes, shortly after became himself an obiect of Gods wrath: when his eie sight failed him, and an euill spirit so possessed him and tormented him, that in the extremitie of terrors and griefe he breathed out ere long his last and miserable breath. Nicephorus reporteth how the Emperour Traian hauing caused fiue holy Virgines to bee burned for standing in the profession of the truth,Lib. 3. cap. 23. commanded certaine vessels to bee made of their ashes mingled with brasse, and dedicated them to the seruice of a publike bath: but the bath that before time instilled a wholesome and heathfull vapour into mens bodies, now became pernicious and fatall to them: for all that washed themselues therein, felt presently such a giddinesse in their brains, and such a dimnesse of sight, that they fell down dead forthwith: The cause of which mischiefe being percei∣ued by Traian, hee melted againe the Virgine moulded ves∣sels, and erected fiue statues to the honour of them, so choa∣king as it were one superstition with another, to his own eter∣nall infamie and disgrace. As Agrippus a yoong man of fifteene yeares of age,Bergomiensis lib. 8. be∣ing apprehended by the inhabitants of Preneste, and grie∣uously tormented for refusing to offer sacrifice to their idols: and when all would not serue to shake the foundation of his faith, which was builded vpon a rocke, he was condemned and executed to death. Behold the Iudge that pronounced the sentence fell down dead from his throne, before the face of the world, euen whilest the yoong man was in the middest of his torments, and by his example made knowne to all men how odious such cruell persecutors are in the sight of
him that iudgeth the earth, and entrolleth the mighty Prin∣ces and potentates of the same. In the Empire of Iulian the Apostate, the Lord sent such horrible earthquakes vpon the vvorld, that vvhat for the fall of houses and ruptures of fields, neither city nor coun∣trie vvas safe to abide in; besides, such an extreame drought dried vp the moisture of the earth, that victuals vvere very geason and deare. These plagues Theodoret a∣uoucheth to haue fallen vpon the world for the impietie of Iulian and the miserable persecution of Christians.Lib. 4. cap. 4. Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 21. & 22.The Emperour Gallus had good successe in his affaires whilest hee abstained from sheading the blood of Christi∣ans, but assoone as hee gaue himselfe ouer vnto that villa∣nie, his prosperitie, kingdome, and life diminished and de∣creased at once: for within two yeares hee and his sonne V∣lusianus in the war against Aemilian vvere both slain, through the defection of his souldiors, vvho in the point of necessitie forsooke him. Beside the Lord in his time sent vpon the pro∣uinces of Rome a generall and contagious pestilence, which lasted vvhole tenne yeares without intermission, to make sa∣tisfaction for the much innocent blood vvhich was spilled a∣mongst them. Phil. Melanct. chron. lib. 4. Sebast franc. chron. Polon.Arnolphus the fourescorth Emperour raged like a Ty∣ger against all men, but especially against those that profes∣sed the religion and name of Christ Iesus, for which cause the Lord stirred vp a woman the wife of Guido to minister vn∣to him the dregs of his wrath in a poysoned cup, by meanes whereof such a rottennesse possessed all his members, that lice and wormes issuing out continually, hee died most mise∣rably in Oringe, a city of Bauarie, the twelfth yeare of his raigne. Philip Melan. chron. lib. 5.Baiaset the Turke, to what a miserable and ludibrious end came hee to, for his outragious hatred against all Chri∣stendome, but especially against Constantinople, which hee had brought to so low an eb, that they could scarce haue re∣sisted him any longer, had not Tamerlane the Tartarian re∣uoked
him from the siege and bidden him leaue to assaile o∣thers and looke vnto his owne?Campofulus lib. 9. cap. 5. And indeed hee welcom∣med him so kindly, that hee soone tooke him prisoner, and binding him with chaines of gold, caried him vp and downe in a cage for aspectacle, vsing his backe for a footstoole to get vpon his horse by. And thus God plaugeth one Tyrant by a∣nother, and all for the comfort of his chosen. Gensericus king of the Vandals,Phil. Melan. chron. lib. 3. exercised cruell tyrannie against the professors of the truth. So did Honoricus the se∣cond also: but both of them reaped their iust deserts; for Gen∣sericus died being possessed with a spirit: And Honoricus be∣ing so rotten and putrified that one member dropped off after another.Greg. Taron. lib. 2. cap. 3. Some say that hee gnew off his owne flesh with his teeth. Autharis the twelfth King of Lumbardie,Paulus Diaco∣nus. lib. 3. cap. 18. de gestis Lrgo bard. forbad chil∣dren to bee baptised or instructed in the Christian faith; see∣king by that meanes to abolish and plucke downe the king∣dome of Christ; but he raigned not long, for ere sixe yeares vvere complet, hee died with poison at Pauia: And so hee that thought to vndermine Christ Iesus, vvas vndermi∣ned himselfe most deseruedlie in the yeare of our Lord. 592. When Arcadius the Emperour through the persuasion of certaine enuious fellowes and his wife Endoxia,Euagriur. lib. 5. cap. 34. had bani∣shed Iohn Chrisostome bishop of Constantinople into Bosphorus; the next night there arose such a ter∣rible earthquake, that the Empresse and the whole Cittie vvas sore affrighted therewith, so that the next morrow messengers after messengers vvere sent vvith∣out ceasing till they had brought him backe againe out of exile,Mandat. 9. Ca∣lumniation. lib. 2. cap. 44. and his accusers vvere all punished for their vvrongfull accusation. Thus it pleased God to testifie the innocencie of his seruant euen by terrifying his enemies. Smaragdus an exarch of Italie, vvas transported by a
Deuill for tyrannising ouer Christians in the first yeare of the Empire of Mauritius.Paul. Diacon. lib 3. cap. 12. de gestis Longab. Cent. 6. cap. 3. Anton. lib. 15. cap. 15. Mamucha a Sarasen being equall to Pharao in persecuting the church of God, God made him equall to him also in the manner of his destruction: for as he returned from the spoile of the monasterie of Cassime and Messana and the slaughter of many Christians, the Lord caused the sea to swallow vp his whole armie euen an hun∣dred ships,Paul. Diacon. lib. 21. so that few or none escaped. Another time euen in the yeare 719 they vvere miraculously consumed vvith famine, sword, pestilence, water, and captiuity, and al for their infestious ranckor and tyranny towards Christians, for whom the famine spared, the sword deuoured, vvhome both these touched not, the pestilence eate vp: and they that esca∣ped all three, yet perished in the vvaters: and tenne ships that escaped the vvaters vvere taken by the Romans and the Syrians: surely an egregious signe of Gods heauy wrath and displeasure. To conclude, there was neuer any that set them∣selues against the church of God, but God set himself against them by some notable iudgement: so that some vvere mur∣thered by their subiects, as Bluso king of the Vandals: others by their enemies, as Vdo Prince of Sclauonia: some by their wiues,Helmold. cap. 24. Sclauon. & cap. 34. as Cruco another Sclauonian Prince: others discomfi∣ted in war, as Abbas the king of Hungaria: some destroied by their owne horses,Bonfinus. as Lucius the Emperor; who had first put his owne daughter because she was a Christian, amongst the same horses. And generally few persecutors escaped without some euident and markable destruction. CHAP. XIIII. Of the Iews that persecuted Christ. BY how much the offence of the Iews was more hainous not onely in despising and reiecting the Lord of glory, whom God had sent amongst them for their saluation, but also in being so vvicked as
to put him to death: by so much the more hath God shed his fearfull indignation vpon them: as at many other times, so especially, by that great calamitie and desolation which they abode at their last destruction, begun by Vespasian, and perfected by Titus: which was so great and lamentable, as the like was neuer heard of vntill this day: for if the sacking and ouerthrow of Ierusalem, then when Ieremie the Pro∣phet made his booke of Lamentations ouer it, was reputed more grieuous then the subuersion of Sodome which peri∣shed suddenly: How much more then is this last destruction without all comparison, by reason of those horrible & strange miseries, which were there both suddenly and in continu∣ance of time committed? Neither truly is there any history which containeth a description of so many miseries as this doth: as it may appeare by Iosephus record of it. For after that they had bene afflicted in diuers countries, and tossed vp and downe by the deputies a long while, there were slaine at Caesarea in one day, twenty thousand: at Alexandria an∣other time, fifty thousand: at Zabulon and Ioppe, eight thousand and foure hundred, besides the burning of the two townes: at Damascus ten thousand that had their throates cut. As for Ierusalem, when it had a long time endured the brunt of the warre both within and without, it was pinched with so sore a famine,Ioseph. of the warres of the Iewes, lib. 2. cap. 19, 21, 22, 23. Lib. 6. cap. 16. Lib. 7. cap. 7.8. Lib. 6. c. 16. that the dung of oxen serued some for meate: others fedde vpon the leather of old shooes and buckles: and diuers women were driuen to the extremitie to boile and eate their owne children: Many thinking to saue their liues by flying to the enemy, were taken and slit in pie∣ces, in hope to find gold and siluer in their guts: in one night two thousand were thus piteously dealt withall: and at last the whole city was by force taken, and the holy Temple consumed by fire. And this in generall was the miserable issue of that lamentable warre: during which, fourescore and seuenteene thousand Iewes were taken pri∣soners, and eleuen hundred thousand slaine: for within the city were inclosed from the beginning to the ending all
those that were assembled togither from all quarters of the earth, to keepe the Passeouer as their custome was. As touching the prisoners, some were carried to Rome in tri∣umph: others were here and there massacred at their con∣querours wils: somes lot it was to be torne in peeces and de∣uoured of wild beasts: others were constrained to march in troopes against their fellows, and kill one another as if they had beene enemies. All which euils came vpon them for the despite and fury which they vsed towards the Sonne of God and our Sauiour: and that was the cause why he fore∣seeing this desolation, wept ouer Ierusalem and said, That it should be besieged on euery side, and rased to the ground, and that not one stone should be left vpon another, because it knew not the time of her visitation. Likewise said he to the women that bewailed him as he was led to the crosse, That they should not weepe for him, but for themselues and their children, because of the daies of sorrow which were to come, wherein the barren and those that had no children, & the dugs that neuer suckled should be counted happy. So horrible and pitifull was the destruction of this people, that God would not suf∣fer any of his owne children to be wrapped in their miseries, nor to perish with this peruerse and vnbeleeuing nation: for (as Eusebius reporteth) they were a little before the arriuall of these mischiefes aduertised from heauen by the especiall prouidence of God to forsake the city, and retire into some farre countrey where none of these euils might come neere them.This example belongeth al∣so to the con∣tempt of the word, Lib. 1. cap. 34. The relikes of this wretched people that remained af∣ter this mighty tempest of Gods wrath, were dispersed and scattered throughout all nations vnder heauen, being subiect to them with whome they soiourned, without king, prince, Iudge, or magistrate to lead and guide them, or to redresse their wrongs; but were altogither at the discretion and com∣mandement of the lords of those countries wherein they made their abode: so that their condition and kind of life is at this day so vile and contemptible (as experience sheweth) that no nation in the world is halfe so miserable, which is a
manifest badge of Gods vengeance yet abiding vpon them. And yet for all this, these dispersed reliques ceased not to vomit out the fome of their malice against Christ, it being so deepe rooted an euill, and so inueterate, that time nor reason could reuoke them from it. And no maruell, seeing that God vseth to punish the greatest sinnes with other sinnes as with the greatest punishment: so they hauing shut their eies to the light when it shined among them, are now giuen ouer to a re∣probate and hardened sense: otherwise it were not possible they should remaine so obstinate. And albeit (God be than∣ked) wee haue many conuerts of them, yet I dare say for the most part they remaine in malitious blindnes, barking against & despiting both our sauiour himselfe & all that professe his name, although their punishments haue bin still according to their deserts: as by these examples following shall appeare. The Iewes of Inmester a towne lying betwixt Calchis & Antioch, being vpon a time celebrating their accustomed plaies and feasts, in the midst of their iollity, as their vse is, they contumeliously reuiled not onely Christians, but euen Christ himselfe: for they got a Christian child and hung him vpon a crosse, and after many mocks & taunts, making them∣selues merry at him, they whipt him to death. What grea∣ter villany could there be then this? or wherein could these deuils incarnate, shew forth their malice more apparantly, then thus, not content once to haue crucified Christ the Sa∣uiour of the world, but by imitation to performe it againe, and as it were to make known, that if it were vndone, they would do it? So also handled they a boy called Simeon, of two yeeres and an halfe old in the yeere of our Lord 1476,Iob Fincel. lib. 3 & another in Fretulium fiue yeres after that. But aboue all, they massacred a poore carpenters son in Hungary in hatred of Christ, whom they falsly supposed to be a carpenters son: for they cut in two all his veines, & suckt out his blood with quils. And being ap∣prehended and tortured, they confessed that they had done the like at Thirna, 4 yeeres before; & that they could not be without Christian blood, for therwithall they anointed their priests. But at all these times they suffered iust punishmēt, for
being still taken, they were either hanged, burned, murdred, or put to some other cruell death, at the discretion of the magistrates. Moreouer, they would at diuers times buy the holy host of some popish priest, and thrust it through with their kniues, and vse it most despitefully: this did one Eleazarus in the yere of our Lord 1492, the 22 of October, but was burnt for his labour: And eight and thirty at another time for the same villany, by the Marquesse Ioachinus: for the caitiues would suffer themselues to bee baptized for none other end, but more securely to exercise their vil∣lanies. Casp. Hedius lib. 3. cap. 6.Another Iewe is recorded in the yeere of our Lord 147 to haue stollen the picture of Christ out of a Church, and to haue thrust it through many times with his sword, where∣out when blood miraculously issued, he amazed, would haue burned it, but being taken in the manner, the Christians sto∣ned him to death. The truth of which story, though I will not stand to auow, yet I doubt not but it might be true, con∣sidering that either the deuill might by his cunning so fo∣ster and confirme their superstition: or rather that seeing Christ is the subiect of their religion as well as of ours, though after a corrupt and sacrilegious forme, and that the Iewe did not so much aime at their religion, as at Christ the subiect of it, the Lord might shew a miracle, not to establish their er∣rour, but to confound the Iewes impiety, especially in those young yeeres of the Church. But that their impiety may be yet more discouered, I will here set downe the confession of one of their owne na∣tion, a Iewe of Ratisbone, conuerted to the faith, one very skilfull in the Hebrew tongue: This man being as∣ked many questions about their superstition and ceremo∣nies, answered verie fittely: and beeing demaunded why they thirsted so after Christian mens blood, he said it was a mystery onely knowen to the Rabbines and highest per∣sons: but that this was their custome he knew, when any of them was ready to die, a Rabbine annointed him with this
blood, vsing these or such like words: If he that was promised in the law and prophets hath truly appeared, and if this Iesus crucified be the very Messias: then let the blood of this innocent man that died in his faith clense thee from thy sinnes, and helpe thee to eternall life: Nay Epiphanius affirmeth, that the Iews of Tiberias did more confidently affirme it then thus: for they vvould vvhisper into a dying mans eare, Beleeue in Ie∣sus of Nazareth whom our princes crucified, for hee shall come to iudge thee in the latter day: all which declareth how impious they are to goe against their owne conscience, and vpon how fickle ground all their religion standeth. CHAP. XV. Of those that in our age haue persecuted the Gospell in the person of the faithfull. AS the religion of Christ hath beene hitherto cruelly crossed and besieged by the mightiest captaines of this world (as hath been partly declared) so it hath not beene any better en∣tertained by the potentates of this age, that ceased not to disturbe the quiet and pursue to death the liues of Gods children for their professions sake, and to bring them vtterly to ruine: to addresse all the engines and subtleties of their malicious and wicked counsels, without leauing any one deuise vnthought of that their wit could imagine, or their power affoord: they ioined craft with force, and vile treason with horrible cruelty, therby to suppresse the truth & quench that fair & cleare light, which God after long time of blind∣nesse and ignorance had caused of his infinit mercy to shine vpō vs. Their fires were kindled euery where with the bones of Martyrs, whilst for the space of fottie years or thereabouts
they neuer ceased to burne those that were followers of that way. Now when they saw that all their butcheries and bur∣nings were not able to consume this holy seed, but that the more they went about to choke it, the more it grew vp and encreased: they tooke another course, and raised vp trou∣bles and seditions in all quarters, as if by that meanes they should attaine the end of their purpose. Hell vomited vp all her furies of warre, the whole earth was in a tumult, young and old with tooth and naile were imployed to root out the Church of Christ: but God stretching forth his arme a∣gainst all their practises, shewed himselfe not only a conque∣rour, but also a most sharpe reuenger of all his aduersaries. This is most apparant in that which happened to Thomas A∣rondell an English man,History of Martyrs first booke. Archbishop of Canterbury, an ene∣mie and persecutor of the truth of Christ, who hauing put to death diuers holy and vpright men, thinking that all he did was gaine, was rooted out at last himselfe by a most straunge and horrible death: for he that sought to stop the mouth of God in his ministers, and to hinder the passage of his Gospel, had his tongue so swollen that it stopped his owne mouth, that before his death he could neither swallow nor speake, and so through famine died in great despaire. Foelix Eearle of Wartemberg one of the captains of the Emperour Charles the fift,Illiricus. being at supper at Ausbourg with many of his companions, where threats were blowen out on euery side against the faithfull, swore before them all, that before he died he would ride vp to his spurres in the blood of the Lutherans. But it happened in the same night that the hand of God so stroke him, that he was strangled and choked with his owne blood: and so he rode not, but bathed himselfe, not vp to the spurres, but vp to the throat, not in the blood of the Lutherans, but in his owne blood before he died. In the reigne of Francis de Valoys of late memory, the first king of France of that name, those men that shewed themselues frowardest, sharpest, and most cruell in burning
and murdering the holy martyrs; were also forwardest ex∣amples of the vengeance of God prepared for all such as they are. For proofe whereof, the miserable end of Iohn de Roma, a monke of the order of the white Friers may serue, who although in regard of his hood and habite ought not to be placed in the number of men of note, yet by reason of the notable example of Gods vengeance vpon him, wee may rightly place him in this ranke. This man therefore (at that time when the Christians of Cabrier and Merindol began to suffer persecution) hauing obtained a commission from the bishop of Prouince and the ambassadour of Auignion to make inquisition after and seaze vpon the bodies of all them that were called Lutherans, ceased not to afflict them with the cruellest torments he could deuise: Among many of his tortures this was one; to cause their bootes to be filled with boiling grease, and then fastening them ouerthwart wise ouer a bench their legs hanging ouer a gentle fire, to seeth them to death. The French king aduertised of this his cruelty, sent out his letters patents from the parliament of Prouince charging that the said ohn de Roma should be apprehen∣ded, imprisoned, and by processe of law condemned: which newes when the caitiue heard, hee fled backe as fast as hee could trot to Auignion, there purposing to recreate and de∣light himselfe with the excrements of his oppression and robbery which hee had wroong out of the purses of poore people: but see how contrary to his hope it fell out: for first hee was robbed of his euill gotten goods by his owne ser∣uants, and presently vpon the same fell sicke of so horrible and strange a disease, that no salue or medicine could bee found to asswage his paine: and beside it was withall so loth∣some, that a man could not endure his companie for the stinke and corruption which issued from him. For which cause the white Friers (his cloisterers) conueyed him out of their couent into the hospitall, where increasing in vlcers and vermine, and being become now odious not onely to others but to himselfe also, he would often cry
either to be deliuered from his noisomnesse, or to be slaine, being desirous but not able to perfourme the deed vpon him selfe. And thus in horrible torments and fearfull despaire, he most miserably died. Now being dead, there was none found that would giue sepulture to his rotten carkasse, had not a monke of the same order dragged the carrion into a ditch, which he prouided for the purpose. The lord of Reuest who a while supplied the place of the chiefe president in the parliament of Prouince, by whose meanes many of the faithfull were put to death, after hee was put beside his office, and returned home vnto his owne house, was attached with so grieuous a sicknesse, and such fu∣rious and mad fits withall, that his wife and neerest allies not daring to come neere him, hee like a franticke bedlem enra∣ged, and solitarily ended his life. A counsellour of the same court called Bellmnt, was so hote and zealous in proceeding against the poore prisoners for the word of Gods sake, that to the end to packe them soone to the fire, hee vsually departed not from the iudge∣ment hall from morning to euening, but caused his meat and drinke to be brought for his meales, returning not home but only at night to take his rest. But whilst hee thus strongly and endeauourously emploied himselfe about these affaires, there began a litle sore to rise vpon his foote, which at the first being no bigger then if a waspe had stung the place, grew quickly so red and full of paine, and so encreased the first day by ranckling ouer all his foot, and inflaming the same, that by the iudgement of Phisitians and Chirurgians, through the contagious fire that spred it selfe ouer his whole body, it seemed incurable, except by cutting off his foot the other members of the body might be preserued: which hee in no case willing to yeeld vnto, for all the medicines that were applied vnto it, found the second day his whole legge infe∣cted, and the third his whole thigh, and the fourth day his whole body: in so much that he died the same day, his dead body being all parched, as if it had bene rosted by a fire. And
thus hee that was so hote in burning poore Christians, was himselfe by a seeret flame of Gods wrath, as by slow and soft fire, burned and consumed to death. Lewes de Vaine brother in law to Menier the president of the said parliament of Prouince,History of Martyrs se∣cond booke. with the brother and sonne of Peter Durand, chiefe butcher of the city Aix, the eue∣ning before their horrible crueltie was executed at Merin∣doll, fell at debate amongst themselues, and the morrow as instruments of Gods iudgements, slew one another. The Iudge of the city Aix (one of that wretched crew) drowned himselfe in his returne,The same. as hee passed ouer the riuer Durance. As for the chiefe Iudge that was principall in that mur∣derous action,The same. touching the condemnation of those poore soules of Merindoll and Cabrieres, he likewise suddenly di∣ed before he saw the execution of that decree which him∣selfe had sed downe. Iohn Mesnier lord of Oppede another chiefe officer of the foresaid parliament, that got the leading of that murde∣ring armie against the poore Christians aforesaid, committed such excesse of cruelty, that the most barbarous heathen in the world would haue yearned to doe. For which cause hee was also summoned to appeare personally at the parliament of Paris, there to answere to those extortions, robberies, & oppressions, which were laid to his charge: and being con∣uinced and found guilty thereof, was neuerthelesse released and set at liberty; and that which is more, restored to his former state. Howbeit though he escaped the hands of men, yet was he ouertaken by the hand of God, who knew well enough the way how to entrap and abate his proud intents: for euen then when hee was in the height of worldly prospe∣rity, and busier then euer, in persecuting Christians, euen then was hee pulled downe by a fluxe of blood, which pro∣uoking his priuie partes, ingendred such a carnositie and thicknesse of flesh therein, and withall a restraint of vrine, that with horrible ourcries and rauing speeches hee died:
feeling a burning fire broiling his entrails from his nauell vp∣wards, and an extreme infection putrifying his lower parts: and beginning to feele in this life both in body and soule, the rigour of eternall fire, prepared for the deuill and his angels. Iohn Martin Trombant of Briqueras in Piemont, vaun∣ting himselfe euery foot in the hindrance of the Gospell, cut off a ministers nose of Angrogne in his brauery,2 Bookes of martyrs. but imme∣diatly after was himselfe assailed by a mad wolfe that gnaw∣ed off his nose as he had done the ministers and caused him like a mad man to end his life: which strange iudgement was notoriously knowen to all the countrey thereabout: and beside, it was neuer heard that this wolfe had euer harmed any man before, Gaspard of Reniame, one of the magi∣strates of the city of Anuers that adiudged to death certaine poore faithfull soules, receiued in the same place ere hee re∣mooued, a terrible sentence of Gods iudgement against him∣selfe; for hee fell desperate immediatly, and was faine to be led into his house halfe beside himselfe, where crying that hee had condemned the innocent blood, he sorthwith died. CHAP. XVI. Other Examples of the same subiect. ABout the same time, there happened a very straunge iudgement vpon an ancient lawier of Bourges, one Iohn Cranequin, a man of ripe wit natu∣rall, and a great practitioner in his profession, but very ignorant in the law of God, and all good literature, & so enuiously bent against all those that knew more then himselfe, and that abstained from the filthie pollutions of poperie, that hee serued in stead of a promootour, to enforme Ory the inquisitour, of them: but for
his labour, the arme of God stroke him with a marueilous straunge phrensie, that whatsoeuer his eies beheld, seemed in his iudgement to be crawling serpents: In such sort, that after hee had in vaine experienced all kind of medicines, yea, and vsed the helpe of wicked sorcerie and coniura∣tion, yet at length his senses were quite benummed and de∣priued him, and in that wretched and miserable estate, hee ended his life. Iohn Morin, a mighty enemie to the professors of Gods truth, one that laboured continually at Paris in apprehen∣ding and accusing the faithfull, in so much that hee sent dai∣ly, multitudes that appealed from him to the high court of the pallace, died himselfe in most grieuous and horrible tor∣ment. The Chauncellour of Prat, hee that in the Parlia∣ments of France, put vp the first bill against the faithfull, and gaue out the first commissions to put them to death, di∣ed swearing and blaspheming the name of God, his sto∣macke being most straungely gnawen in peeces, and consu∣med with wormes. The Chauncellour Oliuer, beeing restored to his former estate,Refer this a∣mong Apo∣staraes. Lib. 1. cap. 18. hauing first (against his conscience) renounced his religion: so also now (the same conscience of his, checking and reclaiming) hee spared not to shedde much innocent blood, by condemning them to death. But such a fearefull iudgement was denounced against him (by the very mouthes of the guiltlesse condemned soules) that stroke him into such a feare and terrour, that presently hee fell sicke, surpri∣sed with so extreame a melancholy, that sobbing forth sighes without intermission, and murmurings against God, hee so afflicted his halfe dead body, like a man robd and dispossest of sense and reason, that with his vehement fits hee would so shake the bedde, as if a young man in the prime of his yeeres with all his strength had assaied to do it. And when a certaine Cardinall came to visit him in this ex∣tremity, hee could not abide his sight, his paines encreasing therby: but cried out assoone as he perceiued him departed,
that it was the Cardinall that brought them all to damnati∣on. When hee had bene thus a long time tormented, at last in extreme anguish and feare, he died. Sleidan. lib. 9.Sir Thomas More, L. Chancellour of England, a sworne e∣nemy to the Gospell, and a profest persecutour by fire and sword of all the faithfull, as if thereby hee would grow fa∣mous and get renowme, caused to be erected a sumptu∣ous sepulchre, and thereby (to eternize the memory of his profane cruelty) to be engrauen the commendation of his worthy deeds: amongst which the principall was, that hee had persecuted with all his might the Lutherens, that is, the faithfull: but it fell out contrary to his hope, for being accu∣sed, conuicted, and condemned of high treason, his head was taken from him, and his body found no other sepulchre to lie in, but the gibbet. Cardinall Croscentius, the Popes ambassadour to the Councill of Trent, in the yeere of our Lord 1552, being ve∣ry busie in writing to his master the Pope, and hauing labou∣red all one night about his letters; behold as he raised him∣selfe in his chaire to stirre vp his wit and memory, ouerdulled with watching, a huge blacke dogge with great flaming eies and long eares dangling to the ground, appeared vnto him; which comming into his chamber, and making right towards him, euen vnder the table where he sate, vanished out of his sight: wherat he amazed & a while senslesse, recouering him selfe, called for a candle, & when he saw the dog could not be found, he fell presently sicke with a strong conceit, which neuer left him till his death: euer crying that they would driue away the blacke dogge which seemed to clime vpon his bed: and in that humour he died. 27 booke of his histories.Albertus Pighius, a great enemy of the truth also (in so much that Paulus Iouius calleth him the Lutheranes scourge) beeing at Bologne at the coronation of the Emperour vpon a scaffold to behold the pompe and glory of the solemnization, the scaffold bursting with the weight of the multitude, hee tumbled headlong amongst the guard
that stood below vpon the points of their halberds, piercing his body cleane through, the rest of his company escaping without any great hurt: for though the number of them which fell with the scaffold was great, yet very fewe found themselues hurt thereby, saue only this honourable Pighius that found his deaths wound, and lost his hearts blood, as hath bene shewed. Poncher,2. Booke of martyrs. The burning chamber was a court in France, which adiudged the Christians to be burned. Archbishop of Tours pursuing the execution of the burning chamber, was himselfe surprised with a fire from God, which beginning at his heele, could neuer be quench∣ed, till member after mēber being cut off, he died miserably. An Augustine frier named Lambert, doctor and Prior in the city of Liege, one of the troope of cruell inquisitours for religion, whilst he was preaching one day with open mouth against the faithfull, was cut short of a sudden in the midst of his sermon, beeing bereaued of sense and speech, in so much that he was faine to be carried out of the pulpit to his cloister in a chaire, and a few daies after, was found drowned in a ditch. In the yeere of our Lord 1527, there was one George Hala a Saxon, minister of the word and sacraments,Luther. and a stout professour of the reformed religion, who being for that cause sent for to appeare before the Archbishop of Mentz at As∣chaffenburge, was handled on this fashion: they tooke away his owne horse, and set him vpon the Archbishops fooles horse, and so sent him backe homewards, conducted by one appointed for the purpose, who not suffering him to ride the common and beaten way, but leading him a new course tho∣rough by and vncoth pathes, brought him into an ambush of theeues placed there by the bishops appointment, who set vpon him and murdred him at once; but it is notoriously knowen, that not one of that wicked rable came to a good end, but were consumed one after another. In a city of Scotland called Fanum Ianius, the chiefe mart towne of that countrey, foure of the chiefest citizens were accused by a monke before the Cardinall, for interrup∣ting
him in a sermon, and by him condemned to be hanged like heretiques, when no other crime could be laid to their charge,History of martyrs, part. 7. saue that they desired the monke to tie himselfe to his text, and not to roue vp and downe as he did, without any certen scope or application of matter. Now as they went to execution, their wiues fell downe at the Cardinals feete, be∣seeching and intreating pardon for their husbands liues: which he was so farre from graunting, that hee accused them also of heresie: and especially one of them (whose name was Helene) for hee caused her young infant to be pulled out of her armes, and her to be put to death with her husband, for speaking certaine words against the virgine Mary, which by no testimonies could be prooued against her. Which doome the godly woman taking cheerefully, and desiring to hang by her husbands side, they would not doe her that last fauour, but drowned her in a riuer running by, that it might truly be said, that no jot of mercy or compassion remained in them. But ere long the cruell Cardinall found as little sauour at an∣other butchers hands that slue him in his chamber when hee dreamed of nothing lesse, and in his Cardinals robes hanged him ouer the wall to the view of men. And thus God reuen∣ged the death of those innocents, whose bloods neuer cea∣sed crying for vengeance against their murder, vntill he had justly punished him in the same kind, and after the same fa∣shion which he had dealt with them. Theatrum hi∣storicum.Thomas Blauer, one of the priuie counsellours of the king of Scots, was a sore persecutour of the faithfull in that land: for which cause, lying on his death bed, he fell into despaire, and said hee was damned,Refer this also to hypocrisie, Lib. 1. cap. 22. and a castaway: and when the monkes came about him to comfort him, hee cried out vpon them, saying, that their Masses and other trash would doe him no good; for he neuer beleeued them: but all that he did was for loue of lucre, & not of religion, not respecting or be∣leeuing there was either a God or a deuil, or a hel or a heauē, and therefore he was damned, there was no remedy. And in this miserable case without any signe of repentance, he died.
But let vs come to our homebred English stories, and con∣sider the iudgements of God vpon the persecutors of Christs Gospell in Queene Maries time: And first to begin with Steuen Gardiner, who was one of the graund butchers in this land, what a miserable end came hee vnto? Euen the same day that B. Ridley, and M. Latimer were burnt at Ox∣ford; hee hearing newes thereof, reioiced greatly: and being at dinner, eate his meat merily.Acts and Mo∣numents, pag. 1788. But ere hee had eaten many bits, the sudden stroke of Gods terrible hand fell vpon him, in such sort, that immediatly he was taken from the boord, and brought to his bed, where hee continued fifteene daies in intollerable anguish, by reason hee could not expell his v∣rine, so that his body being miserably inflamed within (who had enflamed so many godly martyrs) was brought to a wretched end, with his tongue all blacke and swollen, han∣ging out of his mouth most horribly: a spectacle worthy to be beholden of all such bloody burning persecutours. Bonner,Pag. 2114. bishop of London, another archbutcher, though hee liued long after this man, and died also in his bed; yet was it so pro∣uided of God, that as he had beene a persecutor of the light, and a child of darkenesse, so his carkasse was tumbled in∣to the earth in obscure darkenesse at midnight, contrary to the order of all other Christians: and as he had beene a most cruell murderer, so was hee buried among theeues and murderers; a place by Gods iudgement rightly appointed for him.2099. Morgan bishop of S. Dauids sitting vpon the condemnati∣on of the blessed martyr, bishop Farrar, whose roome he vn∣iustly vsurped, was not long after stricken by Gods hand, after such a strange sort, that his meat would not go downe, but rise and picke vp againe, sometime at his mouth, some∣time blowne out of his nose, most horrible to behold, and so continued to his death: Where note moreouer, that when maister Leyson (being then sherife at bishop Farrars burning) had fetcht away the cattell of the said bishop, from his ser∣uants house into his owne custodie, diuers of them would
neuer eat meat, but lay bellowing and roaring, and so died. Bishop Thornton Suffragan of Douer, another grand per∣secutor, comming vpon a Saturday from the chapter house at Canterbury, and there vpon the Sunday following looking vpon his men playing at bowles, fell suddenly into a palsie, and died shortly after. But hee that will read more hereof, I referre him to the latter end of the Acts and Monuments of the English Church, where he shall find a whole catalogue of such like histories. The ouerthrow of many mighty ones in our age serue for a looking glasse to represent the high exploits of the won∣derfull iudgements which the king of kings hath sent vpon those that haue in any place or countrey whatsoeuer resisted and stroue against his truth: whereof some after great victo∣ries, which their singular dexteritie and worldly wisdome in the managing of their affaires haue atchieued, by a per∣uerse and ouerthwart end contrary to their former prosperi∣ty, haue darkened and obscured the renowme and glory of all their braue deeds, their good report dying with their bo∣dies, and their credit empaired and buried with them in their graues: Others in like manner hauing addressed all their for∣ces, laid their battery, and placed all their peeces and canons against the wals of Sion, and thinking to blow it vp and con∣sume it to ashes, haue made many breaches into the sides thereof, yea they haue so bent all their strength against it, and afflicted it with such outragious cruelty, and vnmerciful effusion of blood, that it is pitifull and lamentable to remem∣ber: howbeit after all their pollicies and practises, their cou∣rage hath bene at length abated, and themselues raked one after another out of this world, with manifest markes of the iust vengeance of God vpon them. For though it may seeme for a time that God sleepeth, and regardeth not the wrongs and oppressions of his seruants, yet he neuer faileth to carry a watchfull eie vpon them, and in his fittest time to reuenge himselfe vpon their enemies.
Along the verdant fields all richly dide With natures paintments, and with Floraes pride: Whose goodly bounds are liuely chrystall streames Begirt with bowres to keepe backe Phoebus beames, Euen when the quenchlesse torch, the worlds great eie, Aduanc't his rayes orethwartly from the skie, And by his power of heauenly influence, Reuiu'de the seeds of springs decaied essence: Then many flockes vnite in peace and loue, Not seeking ought but naturall behoue, Past quietly vncharg'd with other care, Saue of their feed within that pasture faire. These flockes a shepherd had (of power and skill) To fold and feed and saue them from all ill: By whose aduise they liu'd: whose wholsome voice They heard, and feard with loue, and did reioice Therein, with melodie of song and praise, And dance, to magnifie his name alwaies. He is their guide, they are his flock and fold, Nor will they be by any else controld: Well knowing that whome he takes care to feed, He will preserue and saue in time of need. Thus liu'd this holy flocke at hearts content, Till cruell beasts all set on rauishment, Broke off their peace, and ran vpon with rage Themselues, their young, and all their heritage: Slitting their throats, deuouring lambes and all, And dissipating them that scapt their thrall. Then did this iolly feast, to fast transforme, (So askt the fury of that ragefull storme) Their ioyfull song was turn'd to mournfull cries, And all their gladnesse chang'd to welladaies.
Whereat heauen greeuing, clad it selfe in black: But earth in vprore, triumpht at their wrack. What profits then the sheepehooke of their guide? Or that he lies vpon a beacons side With watchfull eie to circumscribe their traine, And hath no more regard vnto their paine? To saue them from such dangers imminent (Say some) as are so often incident. Tis not for that his arme wants strength to breake All proud attempts, that men of might doe make, Or that he will abandon vnto death His owne, deare bought with exchange of his breath: Nor must we thinke that though they die they perish: Death dies in them, and they in death reflorish: And this liues losse, a better life renews, Which after death eternally ensues. Though then their passions neuer seeme so great: Yet neuer comfort wants to swage their heat: Though strength of torments be extreame, in durance, Yet are they quencht, by hopes and faiths assurance. For thankfull hope, if God be grounded in it, Assures the heart and pacifies the spirit. To them that loue and reuerence his name, Prosperity betides and want of shame. Thus can no tyrant pull them from the hands Of mightie God, that for their safety stands. Who euer sees, and euer can defend Them whom he loues, he loues vnto the end: So that the more their furie ouer floweth, The more ech one his owne destruction soweth. And as they striue with God in policie; So are they sooner brought to miserie.
Like as the sauage bore dislog'd from den, And hotely chased by pursuit of men, Runnes furiously on them that come him neare, And gores himselfe vpon the hunters speare. The gentle puissant lamb, their champion bold, So helpes to conquer al that hurts his fold, That quickly they and all their progenie, Confounded is and brought to miserie. This is of Iuda the couragious Lion The conquering captaine, and the rock of Sion, Whose fauour is as great to Iacobs line: As is his fearfull frwone to Philistine. CHAP. XVII. Of Apostataes and Backsliders, that through infirmitie and feare haue fallen away. IT is a kind of Apostasie and Backsli∣ding condemned by this first com∣mandement of the law, when as hee that hath beene once enlightned by the word of God in the knowledge of saluation, and nourished & instru∣cted therin from his cradle, doth af∣terward cast behind his backe the grace of Gods spirit, or disallow thereof, & exempt himselfe from the seruice of God, to serue idols, or make any outward shew to doe it: which kind of sinne may be committed after two sorts; either through infirmitie and feare, or willingly and with deliberation: when not being pressed or constrained thereto by any outward meanes, a man dooth clearely and of himselfe abandon and forsake the true Religion, to march vnder the banner of than and Antichrist: and this
also of two sorts: either when a man dooth simply forsake the profession of the truth, to follow superstition and idola∣trie, without attempting any thing beside the meere deniall of his faith; or when after his reuolt he professeth not onely the contrarie religion, but also endeuoureth himselfe by all meanes possible to aduance it, and to oppresse and lay siege to the doctrine of Gods truth in those that maintaine the same. By this it appeareth that there are three kinds of apostasie: one as it were enforced and compelled, the second volunta∣rie, the last both voluntary and malicious: which though they be all very hainous and offensiue in the sight of God; yet the second and third sort are most dangerous, & of them also one more hurtfull and pernicious then the other, as wee shall perceiue by that which followeth. Now as all these kinds are different one from another; so I wil referre the ex∣amples of each sort to his seuerall place, that the efficacy therof may be the better perceiued. And first of those which haue fallen away through feare and infirmitie, and afterward in order of the rest. Although that they who by the conceit and feare of tortures presented before their eies, or of speedy and cruell death threatned against them, do decline and slide backe from the profession of the Gospell, may pretend for excuse the weakenesse and feeblenes of the flesh, yet doubt∣lesse they are found guiltie before the throne of God, for pre∣setting the loue of this transitorie and temporarie life before the zeale of his glorie, and the honor which is due to his on∣ly begotten sonne, especially at that time when they are cal∣led out of purpose by their Martyrdome to witnesse his sa∣cred truth before man, and he desireth most to bee glorified by their free and constant perseuerance therin: to the which perseuerance they are exhorted by many faire promises of e∣ternall life and happinesse: and from the contrarie terrefied by threats of death and confusion, and vpon paine to bee di∣scarded frō the presence of Christ before God, because they haue denied him here before men: which is the miserie of al miseries, & the greatest that can happen to any man; for what
shall become of that man whome the sonne of God dooth not acknowledge? Now to prooue that God is indeed high∣ly offended at this fainthearted cowardlinesse, hee himselfe hath made knowne vnto vs by the punishments vvhich di∣uerse times hee hath sent vpon the heades of such offenders. As in the time of the Emperour Valerian the eighth perse∣cutor of the church, vnder whose persecution albeit that many champions bestirred themselues most valiantly in that combate of faith, yet there wanted not some whose hearts failing them, and who in steed of maintaining and standing for their cause to the death, as they ought haue done, retired and gaue vp thēselues to the enemie at first assault. Amongst the number of which doubtie souldiors, there was one that went vp into the Capitall at Rome in that place where Iupi∣ters temple in old time stood,Ciprian in his sermons de lap∣su multorum. to abiure and recant Christ and his profession, which he had no sooner done, but he was pre∣sently strooke dumbe, and so was iustly punished in that very member wherewith he had offended. A woman likewise hauing renounced her profession,Ciprian. and feeling in her selfe no remorse of conscience for her fal, went as she was wont to doe in the time of her rest and prosperitie to the bathes and whot houses to refresh her selfe, as if al had gone well with her: but shee was so seased vpon and possessed by an euill spirit, that in stead of pleasure which shee sought for, she fell to lamenting and tormenting her owne flesh, and chopt in peeces with her dainty teeth her rebellious tongue, wherewith she had spoken wicked wordes and dishonoured God, and tasted meates offered to idols: and so this poore wretch whereas she should haue washed her selfe in teares of true repentance, and in the true bath of grace and mercie, be∣cause she had more care of clensing her body from filth, thē her soule from sin, became corrupt and filthy both body and soule, by the meanes of that vncleane spirit, which God had giuen power to afflict her: and armed her own mouth which had tasted chewed and swallowed that cursed food, furiously to rise against her selfe to destroy her: so that shee became
her owne murtherer, for she suruiued not long, by reason that her bowels and entrails were choked vp to the throat with paine. Ciprian.Another woman well stricken in yeares, that in like man∣ner had reuolted from the truth, thrust her selfe notwithstan∣ding into the assembly of the faithfull as they were recei∣uing the holy sacrament: but that holy food which nouri∣shed the soules of them that beleeue turned to her bane;Contempt of word and sa∣crament. lib. 1. cap. 34. for she found there in steed of peace a sword, in steed of nourish∣ment deadly and mortall poyson, in such sort that immediat∣ly after the receit of that holy supper, she began to bee mer∣uelously troubled and vexed in soule, and felt the hand of God so heauie vpon her for her offence committed in deny∣ing her sauiour to shun persecution, that trembling and stam∣ping she fell downe dead. Cyprian.There was also in like manner a certaine man that ha∣uing renounced his faith, did notwithstanding present him∣self at the celebration of the holy supper, presuming to come eat at his table, whom hee had a little before denied, and re∣ceiued into his hand part of the sacrament aswell as the rest, but thinking to put it into his mouth, it was turned into ashes; wherevpon hee stood amased,Contempt of sacraments. Lib. 1. cap. 34. and confounded in himselfe, God manifesting in him, that hee that reuoked his faith, and recoiled from Christ Iesus, Christ Iesus would recoile from him, and giue him ouer to death, by depriuing him of his grace, and spoiling him of the power of his quickning and sauing spirit. These are the fearefull examples of Gods Iudgements which Saint Ciprian reporteth to haue light vpon Backsli∣ders in his time, adding moreouer that besides these, many vvere possessed with Deuils, robbed of their wits, and en∣raged vvith furie and madnesse, and all for this offence of A∣postasie. Amongst all the examples of our age of Gods seuere iustice vpon Apostataes, the examples of Francis Spiera an Italian Lawier, a man of credite and authoritie in his coun∣trey,
is most pitifull and lamentable: who hauing embra∣ced the true religion vvith maruellous zeale, and made o∣pen profession of the same,Sleidan lib. 21.1 feared not freely to declare his opinion of euery point of doctrine that came in question: and grew in knowledge euery day more and more. But it was not long ere hee was complained off to the Popes Em∣bassadour, which when hee vnderstood, and saw the dan∣ger wherein hee was like to fall. After hee had long deba∣ted and disputed the matter in his owne conscience, the counsaile of the flesh and wordlie wisedome preuailing, hee resolued at last to goe to the Embassadour to the intent to appease his wrath, and doe whatsouer hee should com∣mand: Thus comming to Venice, and ouerruled with im∣moderate feare, he confessed that hee had done amisse and craued pardon for the same, promising euer after to bee an o∣bedient subiect to the Popes lawes: and that which is more, when it was enioined him that at his returne home, hee should in his owne countrie openly recant his former pro∣fession, hee refused not, but performed his recantation in due sort. But it chaunced very soone after that this miserable man fell sicke of bodie and soule, and began to despaire of Gods mercie towardes him. His Phisi∣tian perceiuing his disposition iudged that the cause of his bodies disease, was a vehement conceit and thought of mind: and therefore gaue aduise to minister coun∣saile to his troubled mind verie carefully, that the cause beeing taken away, the effect also might surcease: To this end many learned men frequented him euery day, re∣calling into his mind, and laying open before him manie expresse places of Scripture touching the greatnesse of Gods mercie: which thinges hee auouched to bee true: but said that those promises pertained not to him, be∣cause hee had renounced Christ Iesus, and forsworne the knowne truth, and that for this cause nothing was prepared for him but hell fire, which alreadie in soule hee saw and felt. I would (said hee) willingly if
it were possible loue God, but it is altogether impossible: I onely feare him without loue. These and such speeches vsed he with a stedfast countenance: neither did his tongue at a∣ny time run at randome, nor his answers sauour of indiscreti∣on or want of memorie: but aduisedly warned all that stood by, to take heed by his example how to listen too much to worldly wisdome, especially then when they should bee cal∣led before men to professe the religion of Christ. And lying in this extremity he refused all manner of sustenance, rebu∣king and being angrie with his sonnes that opened his mouth to make him swallow some food, to sustain him, saying, Since hee had forsaken his Lord and maister, all his creatures ought to forsake him; I am afeard of euery thing, there is not a crea∣ture that hath not conspired to worke my destruction; let me die, let mee die, that I may goe and feele that vnquenchahle fire which already consumeth mee, and which I can by no means escape. And thus he died indeed pined to death in de∣spaire and horrible torment of conscience. Centur. 3 cap. 12Nichomachus a man that stoutly professed Christ Iesus in prosperity, being brought to his triall at Troas, and put into torments, he denied him: and being deliuered by that means, consented to offer sacrifice vnto idols: But assone as hee had finished his sacrifice, he was hoisted vp by the spirit of dark∣nesse, whose darling now he was, & dashed against the earth, so that his teeth biting his prophane tongue (wherewith hee had denied his sauour) in two, he died incontinently. Tamerus a professour of the true religion vvas seduced by his brother to cleaue vnto Poperie,Theatrum hi∣storicum. and to forsake his first loue: but for his defection from the truth the Lord gaue him vp into a reprobat sence, so that falling into despaire, he hong himselfe. Richard Denton a blacksmith, dwelling at Wels in Cam∣bridgeshire, hauing beene a professor of the Gospell before time, when William Wolsey Martyr (whome the said Denton had first conuerted vnto the truth) sent him certaine money out of prison at Ely with this commendations, That he mar∣uelled
hee tarried so long behind him, seeing he was the first that deliuered him the booke of scripture into his hand,Acts & monu∣ments. pag 1717. and told him that it was the truth: his answere was this, I con∣fesse it is true, but alasse I cannot burne. But hee that could not burne in the cause of Christ, was afterward burned a∣gainst his will: for in the yeare 1564 his house was set on fire, and whilest hee went in to saue his goods, hee lost his life. There was also one Burton, Bailife of Crowland in Lin∣colnshire, who pretending an earnest friendship to the gospel in king Edwards time, after the kings death began lustily to set vp the Popish masse againe, and would haue beaten the poore Curate if hee had not setled himselfe thereto: but see how the Lords iudgement ouertooke him; as he came ri∣ding from Fennebancke one day a crow flying ouer his head, let fall her excrements vpon his face, so that it ran from the top of his nose, downe to his beard,Acts & monu∣ments. pag. 2101 the poisoned sent and sa∣uour whereof so annoied his stomacke, that he neuer ceased vomiting vntill he came home: and after falling deadly sicke would neuer receiue any meat, but vomited stil and complai∣ned of that stincke, cursing the crow that had poisoned him: to be short within few daies he died desperately without any token of repentance of his former life. Hither may wee ad the examples of one Hendrie Smith, a Lawier of the middle temple,Acts & monu∣ments. and Arnoldus Bomelius a stu∣dent of Louaine, both which hauing professed the truth a while, and after being seduced by euill companie, the one of Gilford, the other of Maister Tileman, Smith afterward han∣ged himselfe in his chamber in the temple in the year of our Lord, 1569. Bomelius murdered himselfe with his owne dag∣ger. And thus these two Apostataes felt the heauy scourge of Gods wrath for reuolting from the truth which they once professed.
CHAP. XVIII. Of those which haue willingly fallen away. THese kind of Apostataes which wee are now to speake of, are such as without any outward compulsion, threats, or likelihood of daunger, forsake freely Gods true Religion, and giue themselues ouer to all ido∣latry, against whom there is a decree ordained in the thirteenth of Deu∣tronomie by the lawgiuer of heauen, which is this, If the in∣habitants of any cittie haue turned from the Lord, to follow after strange Gods, let them be destroied with the edge of their sword, and their cittie consumed with fire, that they may bee vtterly ra∣sed out and brought to nothing. This was the sinne of Salomon King of Israell (a braue and mightie kingdome in his time) a man subiect to none for power,1. King. 11. nor fearing any for authoritie: yet for all this so filthily recoiling from the truth which hee knew and had professed, that in stead of seruing the true God, he became a setter vp of false Idols, and that of his owne free will and pleasure: he that had beene so well brought vp and instructed from his childhood in true religion by his schoole∣maister the Prophet Nathan, into whose charge he was com∣mitted: and so often and earnestly admonished by his father Dauid, to obserue diligētly the law of God to direct his waies thereby: and whom God vouchsafed this honour to appeare twise vnto, and to enrich and adorne with such excellent wis∣dome, that the queene of Saba hearing his report came to Ie∣rusalem to bee his auditour: euen this Salomon in his old age, when he should haue beene most stedfast and constant, suffe∣red himselfe to be seduced by the entisements of his strange wiues and concubines, to offer seruice vnto strange gods, & to forsake the God of heauen to worship the Idols of the Gen∣tiles.
And as his renowne was great and famous before for building that sumptuous and beautifull temple at Ierusalem: so was his obloquy and reproch the greater for erecting altars and chappels, for the idols of his wiues and concubines, euen for euery one of their idols, to the intent to flatter and please their humors: it was therefore iust and equall that the Lord (his wrath being proueked against him) raised vp two strong enemies that wrought him and his people much scath. Yea moreouer Ieroboam one of his owne seruants (whilest he yet liued) was by the ordinance of God designed king ouer ten tribes, & so God punished him for his idolatry & backsliding, leauing him but a small portion of the kingdome to continue to his successors: which had it not been for his father Dauids sake had ben also taken away. It is true that we read not that he euer hindred the seruice of the temple, or compelled or persuaded any man to worship an idol: yet he did enough to make him culpable before God of a greeuous sin, in that hee being the head & soueraign magistrat of the people, commit∣ted such wickednes & such Apostasie in Israell: beside it is a maruellous strange thing that in all his historie there is not so much as any token mentioned, or to be gathered, of his true repentance after this notable fall. And he that wel weigheth the nature & quality of this sin shal perceiue it that some what resembleth that which is spoken of in the 6. cha. to the Heb. ver. 4, 5, 6, for Salomon was not so ignorant and destitute of the knowledge of God, but rather had the treasure of wisedome in fulnesse and abundance, and was endowed with the gifts and graces of Gods spirit, that hee was able to instruct others and to discharge a Doctors place in the church, as hee also did both by word and writing. And although that the sonne of God was not as then yet manifested in the flesh: yet the power and efficacie of his death being euerlasting, and from the beginning, whereof the law with the cere∣monies and sacrifices thereof was as it were a schoolemai∣ster, could not bee hidden from him: therefore so soone as hee adicted himselfe to his Idolatrie, hee foorthwith
abandoned the holy ordinances and sacrifices of Gods law, and quitted himselfe of the promise of saluation therin con∣tained, disanulling and making of none effect as concerning himselfe, the grace of the mediator ordained from the be∣ginning, so that his downefall was terrible and perillous: yet there be that thinke that after all this he wrote the booke of Ecclesiastes as a declaration of his repentance, whose opinion I purpose not to contradict. Roboam his sonne succeeded him as well in the like∣nesse of his sinne as of his kingdome,2. Chron. 12. for after that the priests and Leuites forsaking the part of Ieroboam because of his Idols, and leauing their houses and possessions to strangers, had made repaire to him for feare of God and loue of his holy seruice: and that hee had disposed and put in order his publike affaires, for the ratifying and confirming of his king∣dome: presently hee and all his people forsooke the law of God, and gaue themselues ouer to Idolatrie and other gree∣uous sinnes: wherefore the Lord also forsooke and gaue them ouer to the handes of Caesac King of Aegypt, that rai∣sed vp a mightie power of men, euen a thousand and two hundred chariots, threescore thousand horsemen, with an infinite multitude of footmen, to make warre against him: So that all the strong Citties and fortresses of Iuda, no nor Hierusalem it selfe, was strong enough to repulse him from sacking and taking them, and robbing the Temple of their treasures, and despoiling the Kings pal∣laces of his riches, and carrying backe into Aegypt a rich prey of the best and beautifullest thinges that were therein. And this was the first shake that euer this kingdome re∣ceiued since it was a kingdome, whereby it began to waine and decline: Notwithstanding all this, yet the Lord had compassion and pittie of him and his people: and would not suffer his dignitie to bee troden vnder foote and quite suppressed, but restored him once a∣gaine into an honourable estate, because when hee was re∣proued by Semeia the Prophet, he humbled himselfe before
the Lord, and his Princes also: which is a manifest signe that his sinne was not an vniuersall Apostasie, whereby hee was wholly turned aside from God and all hope of grace, as his father Salomon was; but it was a particular reuolt, such as was that of his forefathers, the children of Israel, when they im∣magined that God would be present with them in the idola∣latrous golden calfe, and in that figure to worship him; so grosse and sencelesse were they: although yet Roboams sinne seemeth to exceed theirs in greatnesse and guiltinesse. The Iewes that in the time of Ptolomey Philopater abode in Ae∣gypt, and willingly renounced the law and seruice of God, in hope thereby better to prouide for their worldly commodi∣ties, enioied not long their ease and prosperity: for the other Iews which had couragiously stucke to their profession, and had beene miraculously deliuered from their enemies, being greeued and chafed at their recoile, made their supplicati∣ons to the king (whose heart God enclined to fauour their suit) that hee would permit them to reuenge Gods quarrell vpon those Apostataes as they had deserued:Machab. 7. alleaging that it was hard for them to be true subiects to the king, who for their bellies sake had rebelled against the commandements of God. The king seeing their request reasonable, and their reasons which they alleadged likely, not onely com∣mended them, but gaue them full authoritie to destroy all those that could be found in any place of his dominion, with∣out any further inquirie of the cause, or intelligence of the kings authority: insomuch that they put to death all those that they knew to haue defiled themselues by filthie Idols, doing them before all the shame they could deuise: so that at that time there were dispatched aboue three hundred persons: which when they had accomplished they reioiced greatly.
CHAP. XIX. Of the third and worst sort of Apostataes, those that through Malice forsake the truth. IF so bee that they of whom we haue spoken in the two former chapters are in their reuoltings inexcusable (as indeed they are) thē much more worthy condemnation are they, who not only in a villanous contempt cast away the grace of Gods spirit, and his holy worship: but also of a pur∣posed malice set themselues against the same, yea and ende∣uour with all their power vtterly to race and root it out, and in stead thereof to plant the lies errors and illusions of Sa∣than, by all meanes possible. Against this kind of monsters, sentence is pronounced in the thirteenth of Deutronomie to wit, That iustice should be executed vpon thē with al ex∣tremity, and no mercie and compassion showne vnto him, be he Prophet or what else, that goeth about to seduce others from the seruice of the almighty,2. King. 11. to follow false gods. This is the pitfall wherein Ieroboam the first king of Israell slipped by the peruersenesse of his owne conscience; who as he had by his rebellion against Rehoboam and the house of Dauid vp∣reared a new kingdome: so by rebellion against God and his house (in hope by that meanes to retaine his vsur∣ped state and people in subiection) vpreared also a new re∣ligion: for distrusting the promises of God which were made him by the Prophet Ahias, as touching the realme of Isra∣ell which hee was alreadie in possession of, and despising the good counsaile of God in respect of his owne inuentions, hee was so besotted and bleared with them, that iust after
the patterne of his Idolatrous forefathers, who by their Ae∣gyptian trickes had prouoked the wrath of God against thē∣selues, he set vp golden calues, and caused the people to wor∣ship them, keeping them so from going to Ierusalem to wor∣ship God: nor yet content with this, he also erected high pla∣ces to set his idols in; & hauing restrained the Priests and Le∣uits frō the exercise of their charge, he ordained a new order of priests to sacrifice & minister vnto his gods, & proclaimed a newer feast thē that that was in Iuda: euē the seuenth day of the 8 month; wherin he not only exiled the pure and sincere seruice of God, but also peruerted & turned vpside down the Ecclesiasticall discipline & pollicie of Gods church, which by the law had ben instituted. And that which is yet more,1. King. 13. as hee was offering incense on the altar at Bethell, when the Prophet cried out against the altar and exclaimed against that filthie idolatrie, by denouncing the vengeance of God against it and the maintainers therof,Contempt of Gods word. Lib. 1. cap. 34. he was so desperate and sencelesse as to offer violence to him, and to command that he should be attached: but the power of Gods displeasure was vpon him by and by, for that hand which hee had stret∣ched out against the Prophet dried vp, so that hee could not draw it back again; & at the very instant for a more manifest declaratiō of the wrath of God, the altar rent in peeces, & the ashes that were within were dispersed abroad. And although at the praier of that holy man his dried hand was restored to his former strength and soundnesse, yet returned not he from his vniust and disloiall dealing, but obstinately continued therein till his dying day. Wherefore also the fierce wrath of God hunted and pursued him continually, for first of all he was robbed of his sonne Abia, dying through sicknesse:1. King. 14. then hee was set vpon by Abia king of Iuda with an armie of foure hundred thousand men of warre:2. Chron. 13. and though his power was double in strength & number, arising to eight hun∣dred thousand persōs, yet was he & his vast at my quite discō∣fited, for he lost at that field fiue hundred thousād of his men,
beside certain cities which were yeelded to Abia in the pur∣sute of his victorie: his courage was so abated and empoue∣rished euer after this, that hee could neuer recouer strength to resist the king of Iuda any more: And so God reuenged at once the Apostasie both of the king and people of Israell: and last of all so strooke him after, that he died. Ioram king of Iuda although his father Iosaphat had instructed him from his childhood with holy and wholesome precepts,2 Chron. 21. and set before his face the example of his owne zeale, in pur∣ging the church of God from all idolatrie and superstition, and maintaining the true and pure seruice of God: yet did hee so foulie run astray from his fathers steps, that allying himselfe by the marriage of Athalia to the house of A∣chab, hee became not onely himselfe like to the kings of Is∣raell in their filthie Idolatrie, but also drew his people af∣ter him, causing the inhabitants of Ierusalem, and men of Iuda to runne a whoring after his strange gods, for which cause Elias the Prophet most sharpely reprooued him by letters; the contents whereof in summe was this: that be∣cause hee rebelled against the Lord God of his fathers, therfore, the people that were in his subiection should rebell against him. Presently the Arabians and Philistims rose vp against him, wasted his countrie, robbed him of his trea∣sures, tooke away his wiues, and put all his children to the sword, except little Ochozias his yoongest sonne that was preserued: And after all these miseries the Lord smote him with so outragious and vncurable a disease in his bowels, that after two yeares torment hee died thereof, his guts being fallen out of his belly with anguish. Ioas also king of the same countrie was one to whome God had beene manie waies beneficiall from his infancie,2. Chron. 22. for hee was euen then miraculously preserued from the bloody hand of Athalia, and after brought vp in the house of God vnder the tuition of that good Preist Iehoiada yet he was no sooner lifted vp into his roiall dignitie, but by and by hee and his
people started aside, to the worship of stocks and stones, at that time when hee had taken vpon him the repaire of the house of God. But all this came to passe after the decease of that good priest his tutour, whose good deeds towards him in sauing his life, and giuing him the crowne, he most vn∣thankfully recompenced by putting to death his sonne Za∣charias;2. Chron. 24. whome he caused (for reproouing and threatning his idolatry in a publicke assembly, incited thereto by the spirit of God) to be stoned to death in the porch of the Temple. But seeing he did so rebelliously set himselfe against the ho∣ly spirit, as if he would haue quite oppressed and extingui∣shed the power thereof, by the death of this holy Prophet, by whome it spake: God hissed for an armie of Syrians that gaue him battell, and conquered his souldiers, who in out∣ward shew, seemed much to strong for them: His princes al∣so that had seduced him, were destroied, & himselfe vexed with grieuous diseases: till at length his owne seruants con∣spired against him for the death of Zacharia, and slue him on his bed: yea and his memory was so odious, that they could not afford him a burying place among the sepulchres of their kings. Amazias the sonne of this wicked father,2. Chro 25. caried him∣selfe also at the first vprightly towards God in his seruice, but it lasted not long; for a while after he was corrupted and tur∣ned aside from that good way which he had begun, to tread after the by paths of his father Ioas: for after he had conque∣red the Idumeans, and slaine twenty thousand men of war, and spoiled diuers of their cities: in stead of rendring due thankes to God, who (without the aid of the Israelites) had giuen him that victory, he set vp the gods of the Edomites, which he had robbed them of, to be his gods, and worship∣ped and burned incense to them: so void of sense and reason was he. And being rebuked by the Prophet of his aduerse dealing, hee was so farre from humbling and repenting him∣selfe thereof, that quite contrary, he proudly withstood and reiected the Prophets threatnings, menacing him with death if he ceased not. Thus by this meanes hauing aggrauated his
sinne, and growing more and more obstinate, God made him an instrument to hasten his owne destruction: for being proud and puffed vp with the ouerthrow which he gaue the Edomites, hee defied the king of Israel, and prouoked him to battell also; but full euill to his ease: for he lost the day, and was carried prisoner to Ierusalem, where (before his face for more reproch) foure hundred cubits of the wall was bro∣ken downe, the temple and pallace ransackt of his treasures, & his children caried for hostges to Samaria. And not long after, treason was deuised against him in Ierusalem, so that he fled to Lachish, and being pursued thither also, was there taken and put to death.2. Chron. 28. Likewise king Ahaz for making mol∣ten images for Baalim, and walking in the idolatrous waies of the kings of Israel, and burning his sonnes with fire, after the abominations of the heathen in the valley of Ben-Hinnon, was forsaken of the Lord, and deliuered into the hands of the king of Syria, who caried him prisoner to Damascus: and not only so, but was also subdued by Pekah king of Israel, in that great battell, wherein his owne sonne with fourescore thousand men at armes, were slaine: yea, and two hundred thousand of all sorts, men, women, and children taken priso∣ners: for all these chastisements did hee not once reforme his life, but rather grew worse and worse. To make vp the num∣ber of his sinnes, he would needs sacrifice to the gods of Da∣mascus, also thinking to find succour at their hands: so that hee vtterly defaced the true seruice of God at Ierusalem, broke in pieces the holy vessels, lockt vp the temple dores, and placed in their stead his abominable idols for the people to worship: and erected altars in euery corner of the city to doe sacrifice on. But as hee rebelled on euery side against his God, so God raised vp enemies on euery side to disturbe him: The Edomites and Philistims assaulted him on one side, beate his people, tooke and ransackt his cities: on the other side, the Assyrians whome he had hired with a great summe for his helpe, turned to his vndoing and vtter ouer∣throw and confusion. What shall wee thinke of Manasses?
who reedified the high places and altars, which the zeale of Ezechias his father, had defaced and throwen downe,2. Chron 33. and adored and worshipped the plannets of heauen, the Sunne, the Moone, and the Starres, profaned the porch of Gods Temple with altars dedicated to strange gods, com∣mitting thereon all the abominations of the Gentiles:Idolatrie, Lib. 1. cap. 26. yea and caused his sonnes to passe thorough the valley of Ben∣hinnon, and was an obseruer of times and seasons, and gaue himselfe ouer to witchcraft, charming, and sorce∣ries, and vsed the helpe of familiar spirits and soothsayers: and that which is more, placed a carued Image in the house of God, flat against the second commaundement of the law: So that hee did not onely go astray and erre himselfe, in giuing ouer his mind to most wicked and damnable here∣sies: but also seduced the people by his pernitious exam∣ple and authoritie, to doe the like mischiefe. And that which is yet more and worst of all, hee made no account nor reckening of the admonitions of the Prophets, but the rather and the more, hardened his heart to runne out in∣to all manner of crueltie and wickednesse, that his sinnes might haue their full measure. For the very stones of the streetes of Ierusalem were stained from one corner to ano∣ther with the guiltlesse and innocent blood of those, that ei∣ther for disswading him from, or not yeeldihg vnto his abo∣minable and detestable Idolatry, were cruelly murdered: amongst the number of which slaine innocents, many sup∣pose that the Prophet Esaias (although hee was of the blood royall) was with a straunge manner of torment put to death.2. King. 12. Wherefore the flame of Gods ire was kindled against him and his people: so that they stirred vp the As∣syrians against them, whose power and force they being not able to resist, were subdued, and the king himselfe taken and put in fetters and bound in chaines, caried captiue to Baby∣lon: but being there in tribulation, he humbled his soule, and praied vnto the Lord his God: who for all his wic∣ked, cruell, and abominable Apostasie, was intreated of him,
and receiued him to mercy: yea and brought him againe to Ierusalem into his vnhoped for kingdom. Then was hee no more vnthankefull to the Lord for his wonderfull deliue∣rance but being touched with true repentance for his former life, abolished the strange gods, broke downe their altars, and restored againe the true religion of God, and gaue straight commandement to his people to do the like. Wherein it was the pleasure of the Highest to leaue a notable memorial vnto all posterity, of his great and infinite mercy towards poore and miserable sinners, to the end that no man (be his sinnes neuer so heinous) should at any time despaire: for, where sinne aboundeth,Rom. 5. there grace aboundeth much more. Ad∣mit that this reuolt of Manasses was far greater and more out∣ragious then was Salomons, yet his true repentance found the grace to be raised vp from that wofull downfall: for, God hath mercie on whome hee will haue mercie,Rom. 9.15. Rom. 11.33. and compassion on whome he will haue compassion. O the profound riches of the wisdome and knowledge of God! How vnspeakeable are his iudgements, and his waies past finding out. 2. Chron. 33.Amon the wicked sonne of this repentant father, commit∣ted also the like offence, in seruing strange gods; but recanted not by like repentance:Idolatry. Lib. 1. cap. 26, and therefore God gaue his owne seruants both will to conspire, and power to execute his de∣struction, after he had swaied the kingdome but two yeeres. CHAP. XX. Of the third and worst sort of Apostataes. BY how much the more God hath in these lat∣ter daies poured forth more plentifully his gra∣ces vpon the sonnes of men, by the manifesta∣tions of his sonne Christ Iesus in the flesh, and sent forth a more cleare light by the preaching of his Gospell into the world then was before times: by so much the more culpable before God, and guilty of eternall
damnation are they, who being once enlightned and made partakers of those excellent graces, come afterwards either to despise or make light account of them, or go about to sup∣presse the truth and quench the spirit, which instructed them therein. This is the sinne against the Holy Ghost, which is mentioned in the sixt and tenth chapter to the Hebrews; and in the 12 of Luke, and in another place, it is called a sinne vn∣to death, because it is impardonable, by reason that no excuse of ignorance can be pleaded, nor any plaister of true repen∣tance applied vnto it. The Apostataes of the old Testament vnder the law, were not guilty of this sin: for although there were many that willingly and maliciously reuolted and set themselues against the Prophets of God, making warre as it were with the holy ghost, yet seeing they had no such cleare testimonies of Christ Iesus, & declaratiō of Gods spirit as we haue, their sin can not be properly said directly to be against the H. ghost, & so neuer to be remitted; according to the de∣scription of this sin in those passages of Scripture, which were before recited: as it may manifestly appeare by the former example of king Manasses. The Apostle himselfe likewise doth auerre the truth hereof, when he saith, If wee sinne wl∣lingly after that wee haue receiued the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sinnes:Heb. 10.26, 27, 28, 29. but a fearefull loo∣king for of iudgement, and violent fire which shall deuoure the aduersaries. If any man despised Moses law, he died without mer∣cie vnder two or three witnesses: of how much sorer punishment suppose yee shall he be worthy, which treadeth vnder foot the son of God, and counteth the blood of the Testament as a prophane thing, whereby hee was sanctified, and doth despight the spirit of grace? Here we may see, that this sinne is proper to those on∣ly that liued vnder the Gospell, and haue tasted of the com∣fort and knowledge of Christ. Iudas Iscariot (that wicked & accursed varlet) committed the deed, and feeles the scourge of this great sinne: for he (being a disciple, nay an Apostle of Christ Iesus, mooued with couetousnes, after he had deui∣sed and concluded of the manner and complot of his treason
with the enemies sold his Lord and master the Sauiour of the world, for thirty peeces of siluer, and betraied him into the hands of theeues and murderers, who sought nothing but his destruction. After this vile traitour had perfourmed this execrable purpose (by reason whereof hee is called the sonne of perdition) hee could find no rest nor repose in his guilty conscience, but was horribly troubled and tormented with remorse of his wickednesse, iudging himselfe worthy of a thousand deaths, for betraying that innocent and guiltlesse blood. If he looked vp, hee saw the vengeance of God ready to fall vpon him and ensnare him: if hee looked downe, hee saw nothing but hell gaping to swallow him vp: the light of this world was odious to him, and his owne life displeased him, so that being plunged into the bottomles pit of despaire, he at last strangled himselfe,Matth. 27. Acts. 1. and burst in twaine in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out. Suid.There is a notable example of Lucian, who hauing pro∣fessed Christianity for a season vnder the Emperour Traian, fell away afterwards, and became so profane and impious, as to make a mocke at religion and diuinity, whereupon his sirname was called Atheist. This wretch, as hee barked out (like a foule mouthed dog) bitter taunts against the religion of Christ, seeking to rent and abolish it: so he was himselfe in Gods vengeance torne in pieces and deuoured of dogs. Porphyrie also (a whelpe of the same litter) after hee had receiued the knowledge of the truth, for despite and anger that he was reprooued of his faults by the Christians, set him∣selfe against them, and published bookes full of horrible blasphemies to discredit and ouerthtow the Christian faith. But when he perceiued how fully and sufficiently hee was confuted, and that he was reputed an accursed and confoun∣ded wretch for his labour, in terrible despaire and anguish of soule, he died. Iulian the Emperour, sirnamed the Apostate, cast himselfe headlong into the same gulfe: for hauing beene brought vp and instructed from his childhood in the Christian faith, and
afterward a while a profest reader thereof to others in the Church, assoone as he had obtained the Empire, malitiously reuolted from his profession, and resisted with all his power,Socrat. Theod. Sozom. the saith and Church of Christ, endeauouring by all meanes possible, either by force to ruinate and destroy it, or by fine sleights and subtilties to vndermine it. And because his pur∣pose was to doe what hurt he could to Christians; therefore he studied by all he could to please, content, and vphold the contrary party, I meane the Painyms: hee caused their tem∣ples first to be opened, which Constantine his predecessour had shut vp: hee tooke from the Christian Churches & their ministers, those priuiledges, liberties, and commodities which the said Constantine had bestowed vpon them: and not con∣tent with this, hee confiscated the Church reuenewes,Atheisme, Lib. 1. cap. 25. and imposed great taxes and tributes vpon all that professed the name of Christians, and forbad them to haue any schooles of learning for their children. And yet more to vexe and grieue them, he translated many ordes of the Church disci∣pline and pollicie into Paganisme. After he had thus by all meanes striuen to beate downe the scepter of Christs king∣dome, it turned quite contrary to his expectation; for in stead thereof, the scepter of his owne kingdome was broken and brought to nought: at that time when making warre vpon the Persians, he was wounded with an arrow, which pierced his armour, and diued so deepe into his side,Socrat. lib. 3. hist. ecclesiast. cap. 20. that hee died thereof. When he vndertooke this voiage, hee was furnish∣ed with such brauery both of apparell and all things else, as it might seeme it appertained to him and none else to o∣uerwhelme and ouersway the world, still belching out threats against poore Christians, whome he had determined at his returne from Persia vtterly to destroy and leaue none aliue, as was afterwards reported by one of his counsaile. The number of his souldiers was so innumerable, and his strength so impregnable, that hee made no other recke∣ning, but to be lord of Persia in a verie short space. But loe how the Lord ouerturneth the attempts of his enemies:
this great army (as S. Chrysostome reporteth against the hea∣then) in which he put so much confidence, seemed ere long to be rather a vast and weake multitude of women & infants, then an host of warriours: for by his euil and foolish conduct and gouernment, there rose so great a famine amongst them, that their horses which were prouided for the battell, serued for their bellies, yea and for want of that too, many hundreds died for hunger and thirst. Euer when he skirmished his own side came to the worst, doing more scath to themselues, then to their enemies: and last (leading them so vndiscretely) they could not by any meanes escape, but were constrained after he was slaine, to intreat the Persians to suffer them to retire: and so as many as could, escaped and fled away to saue their liues. And thus this braue armie was thus miserably dismem∣bred and discomfited, to the euerlasting shame of that wic∣ked Apostate. One of the treasurers of this wicked Emperour, (who to please his master,Theod. lib. 3. cap. 13. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 8. Contempt the word, Lib. 1. cap. 34. forsooke also the religion of Christ) being on a time mocking and deriding the ministery of the holy word, died miserably on a sudden, vomiting his owne blood out of his mouth: and (as Chrysostome saith) his priuie parts be∣ing rotten and putrified, and consumed with lice, for all that euer he could doe to remedy the same. It is recorded of Trebellius the first king of the Bulgarians, that being conuerted with his people to the faith of Christ, to the end to giue himselfe the quieter to the meditation & exercise of religion, resigned ouer his kingdome to his eldest sonne: whome when he perceiued to renounce the faith, and to follow strange gods, he not only depriued of all his roiall dignity, but also caused his eies to be put out for a punishment of his Apostasie, and bestowed the kingdome vpon his other sonne: shewing thereby, that hee that abandoneth the true light of saluation, is not worthy to enioy the comfortable light of the world. A Diuine of Louaine, one Iames Latonus, who was well instructed at the first in the knowledge of the truth: after∣wards
renouncing the same, endeuoured with all his power to impugne & oppresse it: this man being on a time mounted in∣to a pulpit to preach before the Emperor Charles the fift, was at the very instant so amased & astonished, that no man could perceiue what he said, & so made himself a laughing stock to all that audience: seeing himselfe thus disgraced, he returned frō Brussels to Louaine, where he fell into such grief & sorow of mind for the dishonor which hee had gotten, that it turned at length into despaire: and in his daily lectures these or like words oftentimes escaped him, after that goodly sermon, that he had impugned the truth of God: which when diuers of his own coat heard, they caused him to be shut vp fast in a house, where in desperation he died telling euery man he was dam∣ned, and that hee could not hope for saluation or remission of his sinnes, because that of meere malice hee had resisted and made war with God. Cardinal Poole an Englishman, had also somtimes professed himself to be wel seene in the sincerity of the gospel, yet con∣trary to his conscience he sent into his countrie the trophees and ensignes of Antichrist the Pope, which before had been rased out, and abolished the realme: but he died two or three daies after queene Mary, in horrible griefes terrors and feare∣fulnesse, without any shew of repentance. Stephan Gardiner bishop of Winchester, and afterward Chancelor of England, shewed in his yoong yeares some for∣wardnesse to withstand the Popish abuses and superstitions: but assoone as he was exalted to honor he turned ouer a new leafe, & began freshly and furiously to afflict and to rend the poor and faithfull seruants of Christ, putting them to the cru∣ellest deaths hee could deuise. And yet more to discouer his profanesse & rebellion, he wrot many books against the pure religion of God: & being thus swolne with venomous spight against the son of God, beside the extreame couetousnesse, whoredomes, & extortions which raigned in him, behold the Lord laid his hand of wrath vpon him, & stroke him with so strange a malady, that before his death such horrible stincke
issued from him, that none of his friends and seruants no not himselfe could endure the sauour therof: his belly was swoln like a taber, his eies distracted and sunke into his head, his cheeks thin, & the appearance of his whole face very terrible: his breath sauoured of a filthie & intollerable stincke, and all his members were rotten, with continual griefes & sownings: yet this vile wretch in the middest of al these torments cea∣sed not to yell out continual blasphemies, and infamous spee∣ches, and so despighting and maugring God, died. Peter Castellan bishop of Maston hauing attained to great riches and renowne by the meanes of the gospell, turned not∣withstanding his backe to Christ, and mightily inueyed in his sermons at Orleance against the profession of his religi∣on: seeking to make it knowne that he had not onely abiured and denied it, but also that hee was a profest aduersarie vnto it. This man sitting at a time in his chaire, fell into a strange disease which no Phisition had euer seen or could search out the cause of, for one halfe of his body was extreme hote and burned like fire, the other extreame cold and frozen like ise: and in this torment with horrible cries and gronings hee en∣ded his life. A gray frier called Picard, who once was not ashamed of the Gospell, afterwards set himselfe to preach against that which he had professed, & being in the pulpit at Orleance af∣ter infinit blasphemies which he disgorged against the truth, at last said, That he protested before God and the whole as∣semblie that hee would neuer preach more after that day, be∣cause he was an Apostatae: which saying hee by and by im∣pudently and constantly denied to the perill & damnation of his owne soule: thinking by his horrible curses & forswearings to abuse the poore ignorant and superstitious people: but he no sooner came into the field, but the puissant hand of God ouerreached him and stroke him speechlesse, so that he was caried thence halfe dead: and with in short space died alto∣gether without any appearance of repentance. Among many other iudges which shewed themselues hot
and rigorous in persecuting and proceeding against the faith∣full prisoners of Valence in Daulphin and other Romanes, at that season when two ministers of the same citie suffered martyrdome: one Lanbespin a Counsellor, and Ponsenas the Kings attourney at the parlement of Grenoble, both two hauing beene professors in times past, were not the back∣wardest in that action: but God made them both strange examples of his wrath; for Lanbespin falling in loue with a young maid was so extreamely passionate therein, that hee forewent his owne estate, and all bounds of ciuill honestie, to follow her vp and downe whether soeuer shee went: and seeing his loue and labour despised and set at naught, hee so pined away with verie thought, that making no reckoning of himselfe, such a multitude of lice so fed vpon him, & took so good liking of their pasture, that by no meanes he could be clensed of them, for they increased & issued out of euery part of his body in such number, as maggots are wont to engender in a dead & rotten carrion. At length a litle before his death seeing his owne miserie, and feeling Gods heauie vengeance vpon him, he began to despaire of all mercie; & to the end to abridge his miserable daies, hee resolued to hunger starue himself to death: which purpose the lice furthered, for they stack so thick in his throat as if they would haue choked him euery momēt: neither could he suffer any sustenance to passe downe by reason of them. They that were eie witnesses of this pittifull spectacle, were wonderously mooued with compassion, and constrained him to eat whether hee would or not. And that they might make him take cullisses and other stewed broathes, because hee refused and stroue a∣gainst them, they bound his armes and put gagges into his mouth to keepe it open whilest others poured in the food. And in this wise being gagged, he died like a mad beast with aboundance of lice that went downe his throat: in so much that the very Papists themselues stucke not to say,Persecution. lib. 1. cap. 15. That as hee caused the ministers of Va∣lence to haue gagges thrust into their mouthes and so
put to death: so likewise hee himselfe died with a gag in his mouth. As touching Ponsnas commonly called Bourrell, (a very butcher indeed of poore Christians) after hee had sold his owne patrimonie and his wiues and friends also to the end to buy out his office, & had spent that which remained in house keeping, hoping in short space to rake vp twise as much as he had scattered, fell suddainly into a strange and vnknown di∣sease, and shortly grew in despaire of Gods succour and fauor towards him, by a strong remembrance of those of Valence and the other Romanes which hee had put to death, which would neuer depart out of his mind, but still presented them∣selues before him:Persecution. Lib. 1. cap. 15. so that as one bestraught of reason & sense, he denied his maker and called vpon his destroier the De∣uill with most horrible and bitter cursings: which when his clarke perceiued, he laid out before him the mercies of God out of all places of the scripture to comfort and restore his decaied sence. But in stead of returning to God by repen∣tance and praier, hee continued obstinate, and answered his clarke (whose name was Steuen) in this wife: Steuen, Steuen, thou art blacke: So I am and it please you (quoth hee) but I am neither Turke nor Moore, nor Bohemian, but a Gas∣coigne of red haire. No, no (answered he) not so, but thou art blacke: but it is with sinne. That is true (quoth hee) but I hope in the bountifull mercie of God that for the loue of Christ who died for mee, my blacke sinnes shall not bee im∣puted to me. There he redoubling his choler, cried mainely after his clarke, calling him Lutheran, Huguenot, villaine. At which noise his friends without rushed in to know what the matter was: but hee commanded that Steuen his clarke should presently haue a paire of bolts clapt on his heeles, and to bee burned for an Heretike. In briefe his choler and rage boiled so furiously in him, that in short space hee died a fearfull death, with horrible houling & outcries: his creditors scarce gaue them respite to draw his carcase out of his bed, before they seased vpon all his goods, not leauing his poore
wife and children so much as a bed of straw to lie in: so grie∣uous was the curse of God vpon his house. Another great Prince hauing in former time vsed his au∣thoritie and power to the aduancing of Gods kingdome: af∣terwards being seduced by the allurements of the world re∣nounced God, and took part with the enemies of his church to make warre against it; in which warre hee was wounded to death: and is one notable example of Gods iust venge∣ance to all that shall in like manner fall away. CHAP. XXI. Of Heretikes. AS it is a matter necessarily appertai∣ning to the first commandemēt that the puritie and sinceritie of the doc∣trine of Gods word be maintained, by the rule whereof hee would haue vs both know him and vnderstand the holy mysteries which are reuea∣led to vs therein: so also by the con∣trarie, whatsoeuer tendeth to the corrupting or falsifieng of the same word, rising from foolish and strange opinions of humane reason, the same transgresseth the limits of this com∣mandement: of which sort is Heresie, an euill of it owne na∣ture verie pernicious and contagious, and no lesse to bee fea∣red and shunned then the heate of persecution: and by meanes whereof the whole nation of Christendome hath beene heretofore tossed with many troubles, and the church of God greeuously vexed. But as truth got euer the vpper hand, and preuailed against falshood: so the brochers and vpholders of falshood came euer to the worse, and were confounded as well by the strength of truth, as by the speciall iudgements of God sent downe vpon the most part of them.
Acts. 5.36.39. Euseb. eccle. hist. lib 2. cap. 10. Ioseph. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 1. & lib. 20, cap. 2.Theudas and Iudas Galilaeus were two that seduced the Iewes before Christ: for the first of them said hee was a Prophet sent from God, and that hee could deuide the wa∣ters of Iordan by his word, as Ioshua the seruant of the Lord did. The other promised to deliuer them from the seruitude and the yoke of the Romanes. And both of them by that means drew much people after them: so prone is the cōmon multitude to follow nouelties, and to beleeue euery new fan∣gle that is but yesterday set on broch. But they came both to a deserued destruction: for Fatus the gouernour of Iury o∣uertooke Theudas, & sending his trunck to the graue, carried his head as a monument to Ierusalem. As for Iudas hee peri∣shed also & al his followers were dispersed, manifesting their ends that their works were not of God but of men, and ther∣fore must needs come to naught. Act. 13.After Christ (in the Apostles time) there was one E∣limas a sorcerer that mightily withstood the doctrine of Paul and Barnabas before Sergius Paulus the Deputy, and sowed a contrarie heresie in his mind, but Paul full of the holy Ghost set his eies on him and said: O full of all subtil∣tie and mischiefe, the child of the Deuill and enemie of righte∣ousnesse, wilt thou not cease to peruert the straight waies of the Lord? Now therefore behold the hand of the Lord is vpon thee, and thou shalt be blind for a season. And immediately there fell vpon him a mist and darkenesse, and he went about to seeke some to lead him by the hand. And this recompense gained he for his erronious and hereticall practise. Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 6. Philip. M. chron.A while after him vnder the Empire of Adrian a∣rose there another called Bencochab that professed him∣selfe to bee the Messias, and to haue descended from Heauen in the likenesse of a Starre, for the safetie and redemption of the people: by which fallacie hee drew after him a world of seditious Disciples: but at length hee and manie of his credulous rout were slaine, and was called by the Iewes Bencozba (that is) the sonne of a lie, and this was the goodly redemption which this
Heretike brought vpon his owne head and many of his fellowes. It is reported of Cerinthus an Heretike, that hee de∣nying and going about to darken the doctrine of Christs euerlasting kingdome,Euseb. was ouerwhelmed by the sodaine fall of an whote house which fell vpon him and his associ∣ates, assoone as Saint Iohn was departed from it: for Irene∣us saith, that hee heard Polycarpus often report how Saint Iohn being about to enter into the bathes at Ephesus, when hee perceiued Cerinthus alreadie within, departed verie hastily, saying to those that bore him companie, that hee feared that the house would fall vpon their heads, be∣cause of Cerinthus the Heretike that was therein at that instant. Manes,Euseb. Socrat. of whom the Maniches tooke their name and first oririginall, forged in his foolish braine a fiction of two gods and two beginners, and reiecting the old Testament & the true God which is reuealed in the same, published a fifth Gospell of his owne forgerie, yea and was so besotted with folly (as Suidas testifieth of him) that hee reported him∣selfe to be the holy Ghost: when hee had thus with his de∣uelish heresies and blasphemies infected the world, and was pursued by Gods iust iudgement, at last for other wicked pra∣ctises hee had his skin pulled ouer his eares aliue, and so died in miserie. Montanus that blasphemous caitife, of whom came the Montanistes, or Pepuzian heretikes of a towne in Phrigia called Pepuza, denied Christ our sauiour to bee God, and said he was but a man only like other men, without any parti∣cipation of diuine essence: hee called himselfe the comfor∣ter and holy spirit which was forepromised to come into the world: and his two wiues, Priscilla and Maximilla, hee na∣med his prophetisses, and their writings prophecies: howbe∣it all their cunning could not foretell nor preuent a wret∣ched and desperate end which befell him, for hee hong him∣self after he had deluded the world a long seasō, & proued by
his end, his life to haue beene vile and damnable, according to the Prouerbe,Nicephor. lib. 4. cap. 22. Centur. 2. cap. 8. Qualis vita, finis ita, A cursed life and a cur∣sed death. Of all Heretikes that euer troubled and afflicted Gods church, the Arians were the chiefe: the author and ringlea∣der of which crue, as by his vainglorious pride and ambition he sought to extoll himselfe aboue the clouds, bosting and vaunting in his damnable error:Socrat. Theod. Sozom. so by the iust vengeance of God, he was abased lower then hell, and put in euerlasting shame & opprobrie: for he had long time as it were entered the list and combated with Christ, & was condemned for an Heretike by the Nicene counsell, and his books burned: and then afterwards making shew before Constantine the Empe∣rour with a solemne oth to recant his old errors, and approue the profession of faith which the counsell of Nice had set forth concerning Christs diuinity, whereunto also he subscri∣bed his name: but all that he did was in hipocrisie, to the end to renue and republish the more boldly his false and pernici∣ous doctrine. But when hee thought himselfe neerest to the attainement of his purpose, and braued it most with his supporters and companions, euen then the Lord stroke him with a soddaine feare in the open street, and with such horrible panges in his guts, and vehement de∣sire of disburdening nature, that hee was faine to come vn∣to the publike houses appointed for that purpose, taking them which were next at hand for a shift: but he neuer shif∣ted from them againe, for his breath went out of his mouth, and his guts ran out of his fundament, and there lay hee dead vpon his owne excrements. As the Emperour Gonstantius was a great fauourer and supporter of this sect and maintained it against, and in despight of true Christians, and by that meanes stirred vp schismes and dissentions throughout all Christendome:Socrat lib. 2. cap. 47. so the Lord to requite him stirred vp one Iulian whom he himselfe had promoted to honour to rebell against him: whose practi∣ses as hee went about to suppresse and was euen readie
to encounter, a grieuous apoplexie suddenly surcharged him so sore, that he died of it before he could bring his purpose to passe. The Emperour Valence was infected also with this poison,R ff. lib. 2. c. 13. Iornand. wherewith likewise hee infected the Gothes, who by his meanes were become the greater part Arrians and not Chri∣stians: but neither went he vnpunished, for when hee mar∣ched forth to represse the rage of the furious Gothes, who were spred ouer all Thracia, and had giuen them battell, hee lost the day; and being shamefully put to flight, was pursued so fiercely, that he was faine to hide himselfe in a litle house, which being set on fire by the Gothes, he was burnt therein. As for Nestorius, which would maintaine by his foolish & dangerous opinions, that the diuinitie of Christ was deuided from his humanity, making as it were two Christs of one, and two persons of one,Niceph. lib. 14. cap. 36. and so turned vpside downe the whole ground worke of our saluation, escaped no more the iust ven∣geance of God, then all other heretikes did: for first hee was banished into a farre countrey, and there tormented with a strange disease: the very wormes did gnaw in pieces his blas∣phemous tongue, and at length the earth opened her mouth and swallowed him vp. Concerning the Anabaptists, which rose vp about fiue hundred yeres since, it is euidently knowen how diuers waies God scourged and plagued many of them: some of them were destroied by troupes and by thousands: others, misera∣bly executed and put to death in diuers places, as well for their monstrous & damnable heresies, as for many mischiefes and outrages which they committed. By all which things, God doth exhibite and set before our eies, how deare & pre∣cious in his sight the purenesse of his holy word, & the vnion of his Church is: and how carefull & zealous euery one of vs ought to be in maintaining and vpholding the same: when as he reuengeth himselfe so sharply vpon all those that go about to peruert and corrupt the sincerity therof, or which be bree∣ders of new sects and diuisions among his people.
Olympus, (by office bishop of Carthage, but by profession a fauourer and maintainer of the Arrian heresie) being vp∣on a time in a bath washing himselfe,Paul. Diac. in Anastas. hist. Sabel. lib. 5. c. 4. Blasphemie, Lib. 1. cap. 31. Atheisme, Lib. 1. cap. 25. hee vttered with an impious mouth, blasphemous words against the holy Tri∣nitie: but a threefold thunderbolt came from aboue, and stroke him dead in the same place; teaching him by his paine, and all other by experience, what it is to blaspheme the Lord of heauen, or with polluted lippes to mention his sacred maiestie: this happened in the yeere of our Lord God 510. Cyrill hath recorded vnto vs of his owne knowledge, a more wonderfull and admirable wonder of God vpon an he∣retique then all the rest, and such an one indeed, as the like (I dare say) was neuer heard of, the history is this; After the decease of S. Ierome, there stood vp one Sabinianus, a peruerse and blasphemous fellow, that denied the distincti∣ons of persons in the Trinitie, and affirmed the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost to be but one indistinct person: and to giue credit to his heresie, he wrote a booke of such blasphemies, tending to the confirmation of the same; and fathered it vpon S. Ierome, as being the authour of it. But Sil∣uanus the bishop of Nazaren mightily withstood, and repro∣ued him for deprauing so worthy a man now dead; and offe∣ring his life for the truth, made this bargaine with Sabinianus, that if S. Ierome the next day did not by some miracle testifie the falsnesse of his cause, hee would offer his throat to the hangman, and abide death: but if he did that, then he should die. This was agreed vpon by each party; and the day fol∣lowing both of them accompanied with great expectation of the people, resorted into the Temple of Ierusalem to de∣cide the controuersie. Now the day was past, and no mira∣cle appeared, so that Siluanus was commaunded to yeeld his necke to that punishment which himselfe was authour of: which as hee, most willingly and confidently did, be∣hold, an Image like to Saint Ierome in shew, appeared and slaied the hangmans hand, which was now ready to strike;
and vanishing forthwith, another miracle succeeded, Sabinia∣nus head fell from his shoulders, no man striking at it: and his carkasse remained vpon the ground dead and senselesse. Whereat the people amazed, praising God, claue vnto Sil∣uanus, and abiured Sabinianus heresie. Wherein wee may obserue the wonderfull wisdome of God, both in punishing his enemies, and trying his children whether they will stand to his truth or no: and learne therby, neither rashly to mea∣sure and limit the purposes of God, nor yet timerously to de∣spaire of helpe in a good cause, though we see no meanes nor likelihood thereof. Grimeald king of Lumbardie, was infected with the Ar∣rian heresie, for which cause the Lord punished him with vntimely death, for hauing beene let blood, the eleuenth day after as he stroue to draw a bow, hee opened the vaine a new, and so bled to death. Cabades,Casp. hed, lib. 3. cap. 10. & 15. king of Persia when hee saw his sonne Phorsuasa addicted to the Maniches, he assembled as many as he could of that sect into one place, and there setting his souldiers on them, slew them till there was not one left. Photinus a Gallograecian, for renuing the heresie of Hebion,Platina sub. Siricio 7. and affirming Christ to be but an excellent man borne natu∣rally by Mary, after the manner of other men, excelling in iustice and morall vertues, was by the Emperour Valentinia∣nus iustly banished. The Emperour Iustinian,Niceph. lb. 27. cap. 31. fauouring the heresie of the Ap∣thardocites, when as he gaue out one edict whereby Anasta∣sius the bishop and all other that maintained the truth should be banished,Zen. com. 3. suddenly he was stroken with an inward and in∣uisible plague, which tooke away his life, and forestalled his wicked & cruell determination from comming to the desired effect. In all which examples we may see how God doth not only punish heretikes themselues, but also their fauourers and supporters, yea the very places & cities wherin they liued & broched their blasphemies:Paul. Dia. lib. 5. as by the destructiō of Antioch is seene, which being a very sink of heretiks, was partly cōsumed
with fire from heauen aboue, in the seuenth yeere of Iustinus the Emperour, and partly ouerthrowen with earthquakes below, wherein Euphrasius the bishop and many other were destroied Moreouer, besides those, there were vnder Pope Inno∣cent the third, certaine heretiques celled Albigonses, or Al∣biani, which being possessed with the same spirit of fury, that the Maniches were, affirmed that there were two Gods; one good, and another euill: they denied the resurrection, despi∣sed the sacraments, and said that the soules of men after their separation, passed either into hogs, oxen, serpents, or men, ac∣cording to their merits:Contempt of the word, Lib. 1. cap. 34. they would not spare to pollute the temples appointed for the seruice of God, with their excre∣ments, and other filthy actions: and to defile the holy bibles with vrine in despite and contumely: This heresie like an euill weed, so grew and increased, that the braunches therof spred ouer almost all Europe; a thousand cities were pollu∣ted therewith: so that it was high time to cut it short by vi∣olence & the sword, as it was: for they were oppressed with so huge a slaughter, that an hundred thousand of them were slaine, partly by warre, partly by fire at one time. Gregory of Tours hath recorded the life and death of an hereticall monke of Bordeaux, that by the helpe of Magicke wrought miracles, and tooke vpon him the name and title of Christ, saying hee could cure diseases, and restore those that were past helpe by phisicke, vnto their healths: he went at∣tired with garments made of goars haire, and an hood, pro∣fessing an austerity of life abroad, whereas he plaied the glut∣ton at home: but at length his cousenage was discouered, & he was banished the citie, as a man vnfit for ciuill societie. In the yeere of our Lord God 1204 in the Empire of Otto the fourth, there was one Almaricus also that denied the pre∣sence of Christ in the sacrament,Atheisme, Lib. 1. cap. 25. and said, that God spake as well in profane Ouid, as holy Augustine: he scoffed at the do∣ctrine of the resurrection, and esteemed heauen and hell but as an old wiues fable: hee beeing dead, his disciples were
brought forth into a large field neere Paris, and there in the presence of the French king, degraded and burnt: the dead carkasse of Almaricus being taken out of the sepulchre and burnt amongst them. It fell out that whilst they were in bur∣ning, there arose so huge a tempest, that heauen and earth seemed to mooue out of their places, wherein doubtlesse the soules of these wicked men felt by experience, that hell was no fable, but a thing and such a thing as waited for all such re∣bels against God as they were. Anastasius, Emperour of Constantinople, being corrupted with the heresie of Eutiches, published an edict, wherein all men were commanded to worship God not vnder three per∣sons as a trinity, but as a quaternitie, containing in it foure per∣sons: and could not by any counsell be brought from that de∣uilish errour, but repelled from him diuers bishops with great reproch, which came to perswade him to the contrary: for which cause not long after, a flash of lightning from heauen suddenly seazed vpon him, and so he perished when hee had reigned eight and twentie yeeres. Iustinus the second also, who after the death of Iustinian obtained the Imperiall crowne, was a man of exceeding pride and crueltie, contemning pouertie and murdering the nobilitie for the most part. In auarice his desire was so insati∣ate, that he caused iron chests to be prepared, wherein hee might locke vp that treasure which by vniust exactions hee had extorted of the people. Notwithstanding all this, hee prospered well enough, vntill he fell into the heresie of Pe∣lagian, soone after which, the Lord bereft him of his wits, and shortly after of his life also, when he had reigned eleuen yeeres. Mahomet, by birth an Arabian, and by profession one of the most monstrous heretikes that euer liued, began his he∣resie in the yeere 625, his offspring was but out of a base stocke: for being fatherlesse, one Abdemonoples a man of the house of Ismael, bought him for his slaue, and loued him greatly for his fauour and wit: for which cause, he made him
ruler ouer his marchandize and other businesse. Now in the meane while one Sergius a monke, (flying for heresie into Arabia) instructed him in the heresie of Nestorius: a while af∣ter, his master died without children, and left behind him much riches, and his wife a widow of fifty yeeres of age, whome Mahomet married; and when shee died, was made heire vnto all her riches. So that now (what for his wealth and cunning in magicke) he was had in high honour among the common people. Wherefore (by the counsell of Sergius) he called himselfe, The great Prophet of God. And shortly after (when his fame was published) hee deuised a law and kind of religion called Alcaron, wherein he borrowed some∣thing almost of all the heresies that were before his time: with the Sabellians he denied the Trinitie: with the Mani∣clies he said there was but two persons in the Deity: hee de∣nied the equalitie of the Father with the Sonne, with Euno∣mius: and said with Macedone, that the Holy Ghost was a creature: and approoued the community of women, with the Nicholaits: hee borrowed of the Iewes circumcision, and of the Gentiles much superstition: and somewhat he tooke of the Christian verity, besides many deuilish fantasies inuen∣ted of his owne braine: those that obeied his law, he called Sarazins. Now after he had liued in these monstrous abuses fourty yeeres, the Lord cut him off by the falling sicknesse, which he had dissembled a long time, saying when hee was taken therewith, that the Angell Gabriel appeared vnto him, whose brightnesse hee could not behold; but the Lord made that his destruction, which he imagined would be for his honour, and setting forth his sect. Stow Chron.Infinite be the examples of the destruction & iudgement of priuat heretikes in all ages, & therfore we will content our selues with them that be most famous. In the yeere of our Lord 1561, and the third yere of the reigne of Q. Elizabeth, there was in London one William Geffery that constantly a∣uouched a companion of his, called Iohn Moore, to be Christ our Sauiour, and could not be reclaimed from this mad per∣swasion,
vntill he was whipped from Southwarke to Bedlam, where the said Moore meeting him, was whipped also vntill they both confessed Christ to be in heauen, and themselues to be sinfull and wicked men. But most strange it is,The same. how diuers sensible & wise mē were deluded & caried beside themselues by the subtilty of Satan in the yeere 1591, & the reigne of Q. Elizabeth 33: the me∣mory thereof is yet fresh in euery mans head and mouth, and therfore. I will but briefly touch the same. Edmond Coppinger & Henry Arthington, two gentlemen being associated with one William Hacket, somtimes a profane & very leud person, but now cōuerted in outward shew, though not in inward af∣fection, were so seduced by his hypocriticall behauiour & the deuils extraordinary deuices, that from one point to another they came at last to thinke, that this Hacket was anointed to be the Iudge of the world: & therfore comming on a day to Hackes lodging in London,Hypocrisie in regard of Hac∣ket, lib. 1. c. 22. he told them that he had bin an∣nointed of the H. ghost: then Coppinger asked him what his pleasure was to be done: Go your way (saith he) & proclaime in the city that Christ Iesus is come with his fan in his hand to iudge the earth: & if they wil not beleeue it, let them come & kill me if they can. Then Coppinger answered, it should be don forthwith: & therupon (like mad men) he & Arthington ran into the streets, & proclaimed their message aforesaid, & whē by reason of the concourse of people they could not pro∣ceed any further, they got vp into two empty carts in Cheap, crying, Repent, repent, for Christ Iesus is come to iudge the world: & then pulling a paper out of his bosom, he read out of it ma∣ny things touching the office & calling of Hacket, how he re∣presented Christ by partaking part of his glorified body, &c. besides, they called themselues his prophets, one of Iustice, another of mercy. And thus these simple men were strangely deceiued by a miraculous illusion of Satan, who no doubt by strange apparitions had brought them into this vain conceit. But let vs obserue the end of it, it was thus: The whole citie being in a maze, tooke Hacket the breeder of this deuise,
and arraigning him before the Maior & other Iustices, found him guilty as well of this seditious practise, as of speaking traiterous words against the Queene: Wherefore hee was shortly after hanged on a gibbet in Cheape-side, counterfai∣ting to his last, his old deuises, and at length vttering horri∣ble blasphemies against the maiestie of God. As for his Pro∣phets, Coppinger died the next day in Bridewell, and Ar∣thington was kept in prison vpon hope of repentance. This though it be no fit example for Heresie, yet because it commeth somewhat neere vnto it, I thought it meet to in∣sert it in this place. CHAP. XXII. Of Hypocrites. AS God is a spirit and truth, so hee will be worshipped in truth of spi∣rit and affection, and not in hy∣pocrisie and dissimulation: for which cause hee commaundeth vs by the mouth of Moses in the sixt and tenth Chapters of Deu∣teronomie, To loue and honour him with all our heart, with all our soule, and all our strength, which Hypocrites are so farre from doing, that they haue nothing in them but a vaine shew of coined religion, and so by that meanes breake the first commaundement, thinking to bleare Gods eies with their outward shewes and ceremonies, as if hee were like men to see nothing but that which is without, and offereth it selfe to the view: but it is quite contrary: for it is he that descrieth the heart,1. Sam. 16. and searcheth out all the corners thereof, to see what truth and sinceritie is therein; and therefore hateth and detesteth all hypocrisie, and abhorreth all such seruice as is perfourmed only for fashion sake or in regard of men: as ap∣peareth
by the reproofes and checkes which the Prophet E∣say denounceth against the hypocrites of his time: who made shew of honouring God, but it was but with their lips and vaine and friuolous ceremonies, not in truth of heart and af∣fection:Mat. 23. so our Sauiour Christ thundred out his curses a∣gainst the Scribes and Pharisies with the iudgements & ven∣geance of God for their Hypocrisie.Num. 22. With this sinne was Ba∣laam that wicked Prophet vpon whom God bestowed a cer∣taine gift of prophecie, infected: for when King Balac sent for him to curse the Israelites, he made as though he would no enterprise any thing contrary to the will of God, as if he had had him in great reuerence and estimation: neuerthelesse being allured and entised by the golden presents which were sent him, hee despised Gods commandement, and dis∣couered his owne secret impietie, and became an hired flue and enemie to the people of God: but as hee was in iourney towards him, there happened a strange and prodigious thing, an Angell met him by the way with a naked sword in his hand, readie to hew him in peeces, whome when he himselfe being blinded with couetousnesse as with a vaile, could not perceiue, his asse saw and was afraid; and that which was more strange the poore brute and dumbe beast,2. Pet. 2.16. speaking in anew language like a man, reprooued his maisters madnesse: whereat hee being sore amased, and notwithstanding all the asses humbling before the Angell, yet pursued his vnhappie iourney to his eternall shame and confusion, as one of an ob∣stinate and hardened heart: for hee was forced by the spi∣rite of God to blesse those whome hee had purposed curse: and yet further discouering his Hypocrisie and en∣uious disposition, hee was the cause why the Israelites prouoked the wrath of God against themselues, through the pernicious and deceiuable counsell which he gaue to the Madianites: for which cause he himselfe was in the end slain.Num. 25. Num. 3. In this range may wee place, Geefie, Blizeus seruant, who being as it were the Disciple and profest follower both of his maisters life and doctrine, the true Prophet of God,
by whom for the further assurance and confirmation of the grace and blessing of God hee had seene many notable and excellent miracles wrought:2. King. 5. yet notwithstanding was not true of heart, but drawne aside by desire of lucre, that caused him secretly (vnwitting to his maister) to runne af∣ter Naaman the Syrian,Auarice lib. 2. cap. 35. in his maisters name, for the money and apparell which his maister had before refused: and sup∣posing his knauerie to be so hidden that it could not come to light, God discouered and pulled off his vizard, and puni∣shed as well the deed as the manner of doing thereof, vpon him and his posterity with a perpetuall leprosie. Saint Luke in the first chapter of the Acts doth at large describe the hi∣pocrisie of Ananias and Saphira, who that they might seem zealous to Godward, and charitable toward the Saints, hauing sold a certaine possession vnder pretence of giuing the price thereof among the poore, retained couertly a cer∣taine portion of it to their owne vse, being so impudent as to lie vnto the Holy-ghost, the president of the Church and sounder of all secrets: but being attached by the mouth of Peter, a iust and fearefull iudgement of God fell on them both: euen their sodaine death at the Apostles feet one after the other. Nicephorus telleth of one Philip the first Emperour that vndertooke the name and profession of Christ, but by the re∣port of other writers, it proceeded not from any zeale of re∣ligion or feare of God: but onely to the intent to counterfeit a kind of honestie and couer his foule vices and cruelties vn∣der the cloke of religion. But God quickly espied and pu∣nished his deepe hypocrisie: for before hee had raigned full fiue yeares, both hee and his sonne were slaine at Verona by his men of warre. Let vs learne then this lesson, by these examples to carrie our selues in all purenesse, sinceritie, and good conscience before God; that our thoughts, wordes, and deedes being estranged from all hypocrisie and dissimulation, may bee agreeable and acceptable in his sight.
Moreouer euen as hypocrisie can wind and insinuate her selfe into the pure and sincere seruice of God, as hath ben de∣clared; so doth she play her part with no lesse brauery and o∣stentation in superstition and idolatrie: for the truth whereof (before I proceed further) I will set downe a hystorie not al∣together vnworthy the reading and remembring: Two hun∣dred yeares are not yet past since there was in the raigne of Charles the seuenth king of France, certaine preaching Fri∣er of Britaine called Frier Thomas,Euguerran de monstr. & Vol. 2. who by his dissembling customes and brags, vnder pretence of a certaine reformation of manners, so mightily deceiued the whole world, that eue∣ry where he was reputed for a holy man: this Frier puffed vp with a greedie desire of vainglorie, vsed to goe from towne to towne and from countrie to countrie, finding exceeding honourable entertainement in euery place, which hee tooke very willingly; and that hee might ride at the more ease, he got him a little yoong mule that would goe verie softly, and in this sort appointed, hee was accompanied with diuerse of his owne order, and many other Disciples that went for the most part one foot by him: the people flocked to∣gether from all quarters to see him, yea and many were so besotted as to forsake their fathers, mothers, wiues, and children to attend vpon this holy man: alwaies when hee came neere to any city the Burgesses and Gentlemen and Clergie with one consent came foorth to meete him, doing him as much honour and reuerence (saith mine author) as they would haue done to one of Christs Apostles if hee were aliue: hee was very well content that very honourable personages, as Knights and such others, being on foote should hold his mule by the bridle, to bee in stead of pages and lacquies to lead him into the townes: his en∣trance into euery Cittie was with great pompe and mag∣nificence, and his lodging prouided at the richest and state∣liest Burgesse house. Now that he might the better play his part, they prepared him in the best and conuenient places of the city ascaffold richly hung & garnished, vpō the which his
custome was first to say Masse, thē to begin his sermon, wher∣in hee ripped vp the vices of euery estate, but reproued es∣pecially the Clergies enormities, because of their concubines and whores which they maintained: wherein he did say no∣thing but that which was good & lawfull: but in the same he vsed no discretion, but ioined madnesse & sacriledge with his Monkish nature in stirring vp litle children to exclaim vpon women for their attire: promising certaine daies of pardon to them, as if he had beene a God: so that ladies and gentlewo∣men were inforced to lay aside for a season their accustomed trinckets. Moreouer also towards the end of his sermons hee commanded to be brought vnto him their chestbords, cards, dice, nine pinnes, & such other trash, which hee openly threw into the fire to be burned before them all: and that he might giue more strength and credite to this his paltrie riffraffe hee caused the men and women to bee deuided on ech side with a line drawne betwixt them as in a tennis court: and by this meanes hee drew together sometimes twenty thousand per∣sons: so readie and zealous, is and euer hath beene the world to follow after such hypocriticall deceiuers, rather then the true preachers of Gods word. But let vs hear the issue of this holy hypocrit, it was thus, when hee had in the forenamed sort trauersed aswell France and Flanders; it took him in the head to passe the mountains and visit Rome: imagining that it was no hard matter to ob∣taine the Popeship, seeing that in all places where hee went there was equall honour giuen vnto him: or if hee should faile of that hope, yet at least the Pope and his cardinals would entertaine him honourably: but it happened far shorr of his expectation, for Popes are not so prodigall of their honors to do any such reuerence to a poore silly Monke, but are very niggards and sparing thereof euen towards Kings; so farre are they from leauing their thrones of maiesty to any other: neither must wee thinke that the Pope cared greatly for all those tricks and quiddities of Frier Thomas, seeing hee himselfe is the onely Marchant of such trash. When hee
was arriued at Rome, Pope Eugenius seeing that hee came not according to custome to kisse his holinesse feet, sent for him twise, and vnderstanding that he refused to come, and that hee fained himselfe to bee euill at ease: sent his treasu∣rer, but not to impart to him any treasure, but to apprehend and attach him. The Frier now perceiuing that inquirie was made for him, and that they were at his chamber dore, leapt out at a window thinking by that meanes to escape: but hee was quickly taken prisoner by the treasurers seruants waiting before the dore, and brought before the consistorie of Car∣dinals: law proceeded against him, by doome wherof though no erronious opinions could bee proued against him, hee was adiudged to the stake to bee burned for an Heretike: but it was sufficient to make him guiltie, because hee defamed the Priests in his sermons, and had spoken so broadly of their gos∣sips, and had beene so bold to vsurpe the authority of giuing pardons, which the Popes claim for a priuiledge of their own sea, and besides had made no more account of him that is a pettie God on earth: but had done all these things without his leaue and license: it was an hard matter to bee induced of the bishops of Rome that a silly Monke should so intermed∣dle with their affaires, and should derogate any whit from their supremacie: seeing that they quit themselues so wel with Kings and Emperours, and can at euery right occasion make them stoope: neither is it to be doubted, but that Pope Eu∣genius was very iealous of the honour which Frier Thomas at∣tained vnto in euery place, & fearfull least his presence might disturbe his present estate. By this meanes God who vseth all instruments for his owne purpose, and can direct euery parti∣cular to the performing of his will, did punish and correct the hypocrisie of this Monke, that seemed to bee holy and wise being indeed nothing but foolish, stubborne and ambitious. Moreouer most notable was the hypocrisie of two counter∣fait holy maids,Stow. chron. one of Kent in England called Elizabeth Bar∣ton, the other of France called Ioane la Pucelle: the former of which by the procurement & information of one Richard
Master, person of Aldington, and Edward Bocking Doctor of diuinity a Monk of Canterbury, and diuerse others, counter∣feited such manner of traunces and distortions in her bodie, with the vttering of diuers counterfeit vertues, & holy words tending to the rebuke of sinne, & reprouing such new opini∣ons as there begā to spread, that she won great credit amongst the people, & drew after her a multitude of fauourites: be∣sides shee would prophesie of things to come, as that shee should bee helped of her disease by none but the image of our lady in Aldington; whether being brought, she appeared to the people to be sodainly releeued from her sicknesse: by means of which hypocrital dissimulation, she was brought in∣to maruellous estimation, not only with the common people, but with diuerse great men also, insomuch that a book was put in print, touching her fained miracles & reuelations. Howbeit not content to delude the people, shee began also to medle with the king himself, Henry the eigth: saying that if he pro∣ceeded to be deuorced from his wife Queene Katharine he should not remaine king one month after, and in the reputati∣on of God not one day: for which & many other tricks pra∣ctised by her, shee with her complices was arraigned of high treason, and after confession of all her knauerie, drawne from the tower to Tiborne and there hanged; the holy maides head being set vpon London bridge, & the others on certain gates of the city. Stow. chron.The other named la Pucelle de dieu, maruellously delu∣ded with her counterfeit hipocrisie, Charles the seuenth king of France, and al the whole French nation in such sort that so much credit was attributed vnto her, that she was honoured as a saint, and thought to bee sent of God to the aid of the French king: by her meanes Orleance was won from the En∣glish, and many other exploits atchieued, which (to be short) I will refer the reader vnto in the French Chronicles, where they shall find her admirable knauerie at large discouered. But touching her end it was on this sort: as shee marched on horsebacke to the town of Champaigne, to remoue the siege
wherewith it was girt by the Duke of Burgoine and other of the English captaines, Sir Iohn Leupembrough a Burgonian knight took her aliue, and conueied her to the city of Roane, where she faining her self with child, when the contrarie was knowne, was condemned and burnt. And thus these two ho∣ly women that in a diuerse kind mocked the people of En∣gland and France by their hypocrisie, by the iustice of God came to deserued destructions. CHAP. XXIII. Of Coniurers, and Enchanters. IF God by his first commandement hath enioined euery one of vs to loue serue and cleaue unto him alone in the coniunction and vnity of a true faith and hope vnremoueable: there is no doubt but he forbiddeth on the other side that which is contrarie to this foresaid dutie, and herein espe∣cially that cursed familiarity which diuerse miserable wret∣ches haue with that lying spirit the father of error, by whose delusions and subtiltie they busie themselues in the studie of sorceries and enchantments, wherevpon it is forbidden the Israelites in the nineteenth of Leuiticus,Leuit. 19.31. to turne after fami∣liar spirites, or to seeke to soothsayers to bee defiled by them: and the more to withdraw men from this damnable crime, in the chapter following there is a threat set downe against it in manner of a commandement,20.27. That if either man or woman haue a spirit of diuination or soothsaying in them, they should die the death, they should stone them to death, their blood should be vpon them:Exod. 22.18. so in the twentie two of Exodus the law of God saith, Thou shalt not suffer a witch to liue: and Mo∣ses following the same steps, giueth an expresse charge in
in the eighteenth of Deutronotny against this sinne saying, Let none bee found among thee that vseth witchcraft,Deu. 18.10.11. nor that regardeth the clouds or times, nor a sorcerer, or a charmer, or that counselleth with a spirit, or a teller of fortunes, or that asketh counsell at the dead: for all that doe such things are abhominati∣on vnto the Lord:1. Sam. 15. Isay. 8.19.20. and therefore this sinne in the 1. Sam. 15. Is reputed amongst the most hainous and enormous sinnes that can bee? When they shall say vnto you (saith the Prophet) en∣quire at them that haue a spirit of diuination and at the sooth∣saier which whisper and murmure: answer Should not a people in∣quire at their God? From the liuing to the dead? To the law and to the testimony? Wherfore it was a commendable thing and worthy the imitation when they that had receiued the faith by Paules preaching,Acts. 19.19. hauing before vsed curious arts as Ma∣gicke and such like, being touched with the feare of God brought their bookes and burned them before all men, al∣though the price thereof amounted to fifty thousand peeces of siluer, which by Budeus his supputatiō ariseth to fiue thou∣sand French crownes. The counsels, as that of Carthage, and that other of Constantinople kept the second time in the suburbes, vtterly condemned the practise of all coniurers and enchanters. The twelue tables in Rome adiudged to pu∣nishmēts those that bewitched the standing corn. And for the ciuill law, this kind is condemned both by the law Iulia and Cornelia. In like manner the wisest Emperours, those I meane that attained to the honor of Christianity, ordained diuerse edicts and prohibitions vnder very shape & greeuous punish∣ments against all such villanie: as Constantine in the ninth booke of the Cod. tit. 18. enacted that whosoeuer should at∣tempt any action by art Magicke against the safety of any person, or should bring in or stirre vp any man to make him fall into any mischiefe or riotous demeanour, should suffer a greeuous punishment: in the fifth law hee forbiddeth euery man to aske counsaile at witches, or to vse the helpe of charmers and sorcerers vnder the paine of death. Let them (saith hee in the sixt law) bee throwne to wild beasts to bee
deuoured, that by coniuring or the helpe of familiar spirits go about to kill either their enemies or any other. Moreouer, in the seuenth law hee willeth, that not so much as his owne courtiers and seruants, if they were found faulty in this crime, should be spared but seuerely punished: yet neuerthelesse, many of this age giue themselues ouer to this filthy sinne, without either feare of God or respect of law: Some tho∣rough a foolish and dangerous curiositie: others through the ouerruling of their owne vile and wicked affections; and a third sort troubled with the terrours of an euill conscience, desire to know what shall befall and happen vnto them in the end. Thus Saul the first king of Israel being troubled in him∣selfe, & terrified with the army of the Philistims that came against him, would needs foreknow his owne fortune, and the issue of this doubtfull warre. Now whereas before whilst he perfourmed the duty of a good king, and obeied the com∣maundement of God, hee had cleansed his realme of wit∣ches and enchaunters: yet is he now so mad as to make them serue his owne turne, and to vse their counsels in his extre∣mitie, adding this wickednesse to the number of his other great sinnes, that the measure thereof might be full: hee went therefore to a witch to seeke counsell, who caused a deuill to appeare and speake unto him in the shape of Sa∣muel, and foretell him of (Gods iust iudgement vpon his wickednesse) his vtter and finall ruine and destruction. Plutarch in the life of Romulus reporteth of one Cleo∣medes, a man in proportion of body and cruell practises,Plutarch. Ro∣mulus. huge and giantlike: who for that hee was the cause of the death of many little children, and was pursued, by the parents of those dead infants who sought to be reuenged on him for that cruell part, hee hid himselfe in a coffer closing the lid fast to him: but when the coffer was broken vp, the coniu∣rer was not therein neither aliue nor dead, but was transpor∣ted by the malicious spirit the deuill, vnto a place of greater torment.
Ancient histories make mention of one Piso, a man of cre∣dit and authoritie among the Romanes,Tacit. whome the Empe∣rour Tiberius gaue vnto his sonne Germanicus for an helper & counsellour in the managing of his affaires in Asia, so well was he perswaded both of his sufficiencie, courage, and loial∣tie towards him. It chanced a while after that hee was suspe∣cted to haue bewitched to death the said Germanicus: the signes & markes of which suspition were, certaine dead mens bones digged out of the earth with diuers charmes and cur∣ses, and Germanicus name engrauen in tables of lead, and such like trash which witches exercise to murder men withall, were found with him: whereupon Tiberius himselfe accu∣sed him of that crime, but would not haue the ordinary iud∣ges to sit vpon it: but by speciall priuiledge committed the enquiry thereof vnto the Senate. Pise, when euery man thought hee was preparing himselfe for his defence against the morrow (like a wise man to preuent all mischiefes) was found dead the day before, hauing his throat cut: and as most likelihood was, finding himselfe guilty of the fact, and too weake to ouerway the other side, forestalled the infamie of a most shamefull death, by killing himselfe: although there be that say, that the Emperour sent one of purpose to dispatch him in this manner. Lib. 3. cap. 4. Of the Northren people.Olaus Magnus telleth of one Methtin, a noble magitian in old time, that by his delusions did so deceiue and blind the poore ignorant people, that they accounted him not only for some mightie man, but rather for some demy god; & in token of the honour and reuerence they bare him,Refer this al∣so to the lib. 1. cap 24. they offered vp sacrifices vnto him, which he refused not: but at last his kna∣ueries and cousenages being laid open, they killed him whom before they so much esteemed: & because his dead carkasse with filthy stinke infected the approchers, they digged it vp, and broched it vpon the end of a stake to be deuoured of wild beasts. Chap. 18. of the foresaid book.Another called Hollere (as the same authour witnesseth) plaied the like tricks in abusing the peoples minds as strongly
as the other did: insomuch that he was reputed also for a god: for he ioined with his craft, strength and power, to make him∣selfe of greater authority in the world. Whē he listed to passe ouer the sea, hee vsed no other ship, but a bone figured with certaine charmes, wherby he was transported, as if both sailes & wind had helped & driuen him forwards; yet his enchan∣ted bone was not of power to saue him from being murdered of his enemies. The same authour writeth, that in Denmarke there was one Otto a great rouer & pirat by sea, who vsed like∣wise to passe the seas without the helpe of ship or any other vessell, & sunke & drowned all his enemies with the waues which by his cunning he stirred vp, but at last this cunning practiser was ouerreached by one more expert in his Art then himselfe, and as hee had serued others, so was hee himselfe serued, euen swallowed vp of the waues. There was a coniurer at Saltzbourg, that vaunted that he could gather togither all the serpents within halfe a mile round about into a ditch, and feed them and bring them vp there: and being about the experiment, behold the old and grand serpent came in the while, which whilst he thought by the force of his charmes to make to enter into the ditch a∣mong the rest, he set vpon, and enclosed him round about like a girdle so strongly, that he drew him perforce into the ditch with him, where he miserably died. Marke here the wages of such wicked miscreants, that as they make it their occupa∣tion to abuse simple folke, they are themselues abused & cou∣sened of the deuill, who is a finer iuggler then them all. It was a very lamentable spectacle that chanced to the gouernour of Mascon, a magitian whome the deuill snatched vp in dinner while, and hoisted aloft, carrying him three times about the towne of Mascon in the presence of many beholders, to whome hee cryed on this manner, Helpe, helpe, my friends:Hugo de Clam. so that the whole towne stood amazed thereat, yea and the remembrance of this strange accident, sticketh at this day fast in the minds of all the inhabitants of the countrey: and they say, that this wretch hauing giuen
himselfe to the deuill, prouided store of holy bread (as they call it) which hee alwaies carried about with him, thinking thereby to keepe himselfe from his clawes: but it serued him to small stead, as his end declared. About the yeere 1437, Charles the seuenth being king of France, Sir Giles of Britaine, lord of Rayes, and high Con∣stable of France, was accused (by the report of Enguerran de Monstrelet) for hauing murdered many infants and women great with child,Vol. 2. to the number of eight score or more, with whose blood he either writ or caused to be written, books full of coniurations, hoping by that abominable meanes to at∣taine to high matters: but it happened cleane crosse & con∣trary to his expectation and practise, for being conuinced of those horrible crimes (it being Gods will that such grosse and palpable sinnes should not go vnpunished) hee was adiudged to be hanged and burned to death, which was also accor∣dingly executed at Nantes by the authoritie of the Duke of Britaine. Iohn Francis Picus of Mirand saith, that hee conferred di∣uers times with many, who being enticed with a vaine hope of knowing things to come, were afterwards so grieuously tormented by the deuill (with whome they had made some bargaine) that they thought themselues thrise happy, if they escaped with their liues. He saith moreouer, that there was in his time a certaine coniurer that promised a too curious & no great wise prince, to present vnto him vpon a stage the siege of Troy, and Achilles and Hector fighting togither as they did when they were aliue: but he could not performe his promise, for another sport and spectacle more hideous & ougly to his person, for hee was taken away aliue by a deuill in such sort, that he was neuer afterward heard of. In our owne memory the Earle of Aspremont and his bro∣ther lord of Orne, were made famous and in euery mans mouth for their straunge and prodigious feats, wherein they were so vnreasonably dissolute and vainglorious, that some∣time they made it their sport and pastime to breake downe
all the windowes about the castle Aspremont where they kept (which lieth in Lorraine two miles from S. Michael) and threw them peece meale into a deep well, to heare them crie plumpe: but this vaine excesse prefaged a ruine and destruc∣tion to come, aswell vpon their house, which at this present lieth desolate and ruinous in many respects, as vpon thēselues that finished their daies in miserie one after another; as wee shall now vnderstand of the one, the Lord of Orne:Albeit the author forget himselfe, for there is no more mentiō made of him in the whole booke. as for the Earle how he died wee shall see more at large in the se∣cond booke & 28 chapter, to which place his history proper∣ly belongeth. Now it chanced that as this Lord of Orne was of most wicked and cruell conditions, so he had an euil fauou∣red looke answerable to his inclination, and name to be a con∣iurer: the report that went of his cruelty was this; that vpon a time he put the baker (one of his seruants, whose wife he v∣sed secretly to entertaine) into a tunne, which he caused to be rouled from the top of a hill into the bottome, bounsing some times as high as a pike, as the place gaue occasion: but by the great mercy of God, notwithstanding all this, this poore man saued his life. Furthermore, it was a common report that whē any Gentlemen or Lords came to see him, they were enter∣tained (as they thought) very honorably being serued with al sort of most dainty fare and exquisite dishes, as if hee had not spared to make them the best cheare that might bee: but at their departure they that thought themselues wel refreshed, found their stomacks empty & almost pined for want of food, hauing neither eaten nor drunk any thing saue in imagination only: & it is to bee thought that their horses found no better fare then their masters. It happened one day that a certaine Lord being departed from his house, one of his men hauing left something behind returned to the castle, & entering so∣dainly into the hal where they dined a little before, he espied a Munkie beating the maister of the house that had feasted them of late, very sore: And there be others that say that hee hath ben seene through the chinke of a dore lying on a table vpon his belly all at length, & a Monkie scourging him verie
strangely, to whome he should say, Let me alone, let me a∣lone; Wilt thou alwaies torment me thus? And thus he con∣tinued a long time: but at length, after he had made away all his subhance, hee was brought to such extremitie, that being destitute of maintenance and forsaken of all men, hee was faine (for want of a better refuge) to betake himself to the hospitall of Paris, which was his last mansion house wherein he died. See here to how pitifull & miserable an end this man fell, that hauing beene esteemed amongst the mighties of this world; for making no more account of God, and for fol∣lowing the illusions of Satan, the common enemie of man∣kind, became so poore and wretched as to die in an hospitall among creeples and beggers. It is not long since there was in Lorraine, a certaine man called Coulen, that was ouermuch giuen to this cursed Art, amongst whose tricks this was one to be wondred at: that he would suffer Harquebouses or a pistoll to be shot at him, and catch their bullets in his hand without receiuing any hurt: but vpon a certaine time one of his seruants being angry with him, hot him such a knock with a pistoll (notwithstanding all his great cunning) that he killed him therewith. Moreouer it is worthy to be obserued, that within these two hundred yeeres hitherto, more monkes and priests haue bene found giuen ouer to these abominations and deuilish∣nesses, then of all other degrees of people watsoeuer, as it is declared in the second volume of Enguerran de Monstrelet more at large: where he maketh mention of a monke that vsed to practise his sorceries in the top of a tower of an Ab∣bey lying neere to Login vpon Marne, where the deuils pre∣sented themselues to be at his commaundement: and this was in the raigne of Charles the sixt. In the same booke it is recorded, that in the raigne of Charles the seuenth, one Master William Ediline Doctor in Diuinitie, and Prior of S. Germaine in Lay, hauing bene an Augustane frier, gaue him∣selfe to the denill for his pleasure, euen to haue his will of a certaine women: he was vpon a time in a place where a syna∣gogue
of people were gathered togither, where to the end that he might quickly be (as he himselfe confessed) he tooke a broome and rode vpon it: he confessed also that hee had done homage to that enemie of God the deuill, who appea∣red vnto him in the shape of a sheepe, and made him kisse his hinder parts, as he reported: for which causes,A sweet kisse doubtlesse. he was pla∣ced vpon a scaffold, and openly made to weare a paper con∣taining his owne faults, and afterwards alotted to liue priso∣ner all the rest of his life laden with irons, in the bishop of Eureux his house, which was accordingly executed: this happened in the yeere 1453. In the reigne of the same king 1457, there was a certaine curat of a village neere to Soissons, who to reuenge himselfe of a farmer that reteined from him the tenths which were appointed to the knights of the Rhodes, went to a witch of whome he receiued in gift a fat tode in an earthen pot, which shee, had a long while fed and brought vp, which shee com∣manded him to baptize, as hee also did, and called it by the name of Iohn:Contempt of sacraments. Lib. 1. cap. 34. albeit I tremble to recite so monstrous & vile a fact, yet that euery man might see, how deadly besotted those sort of people are, that giue themselues ouer to Satan, and with what power of errour he ouerwhelmeth them, and beside how full of malice this vncleane spirit is, that as it were in despight of God would profane the holy sacrament of baptisme. This good holy curar after he had consecrated the holy ghost, gaue it also to the toad to eat, and afterward restored it to the witch againe, who killing the toad, and cutting it in pieces, with other such like sorceries, caused a young wench to carry it secretly into the farmers house, and to put it vnder the table as they were at dinner, whereupon immediatly the farmer and his chldren that were at the ta∣ble fell suddenly sicke, & three daies after died: the witch her selfe being detected, was burned, but the Curat suffred only a litle imprisonment in the bishop of Paris house, and that not long, for what with friēdship & mony he was soon deliuered. Froissard, who was treasurer & canon of Chymay, reporteth
of another Curat in the countrey of Beare (nner Charles the seuenth) that had a familiar spirit, which he called Or∣thon: whose helpe he vsed to the disturbance of the lord of Corasse, by causing a terrible noise to be heard euery night by him and his seruants in his castle, because the said lord withheld his tithes from him, and conuerted them to his owne vse. In the yeere 150 at Nuremberg a certaine priest studi∣ed Art magicke,Wierus. and being very couetous of gold and siluer; the deuill (whome he serued) shewed him through a chry∣stall certaine treasures hidden in the city: he by and by (gree∣dy of this rich prey) went to that part of the city, where hee supposed it to haue lien buried: & being arriued at the place with a companion whome he brought to this pretie pastime, fell a searching and digging vp a hollow pit, vntill he percei∣ued a coffer that lay in the bottome of the hole, with a great blacke dog lying by it: whether he was no sooner entred, but the earth fell downe and filled vp the hole, and smothered and crushed him to death: so this poore priest was intrap∣ped and rewarded by his master no other waies then hee de∣serued; but otherwise then he expected or looked for. Naucler. vinc. &c.Howbeit they are not onely simple priests and friers that deale with these cursed artes, but euen Popes themselues. Siluester the second, who (as Platina and others report) was first a coniuring frier, and gaue himselfe to the deuill vpon condition he might be Pope, as he was indeed; and hauing obtained his purpose as it seemed, hee began earnestly to de∣sire to know the day wherein hee should die, which also his schoolemaster the deuill reuealed vnto him, but vnder such doubtfull tearmes, that he dreamed in his foolish conceit of immortalitie, and that he should neuer die. It chanced on a time as he was singing masse at Rome in a Temple called Ie∣rusalem (which was the place assigned for him to die in) and not Ierusalem in Palaestina (as he made himselfe falsly be∣leeue) he heard a great noise of deuils that came to fetch him away,A note wor∣thy the noting (note that this was done in masse while) whereat hee
being terrified and tormented, and seeing himselfe not able any waies to escape, he desired his people to rend his body in pieces after his death, and lay it vpon a charriot, and let horses draw it whether they would; which was accordingly perfourmed: for as soone as hee was dead, the pieces of his carkasse were carried out of the Church of Laterane by the wicked spirit, who as he ruled him in life, so he was the chiefe in his death and funerals. By like means came Benedict the ninth to the Popedome, for he was a detestable magitian:Benno. Balleus. and in the ten yeres wher∣in he was Pope hauing committed infinite villanies and mis∣chiefes, was at last by his familiar friend the deuill strangled to death in a forrest, whither he went to apply himselfe the more quieter to his coniurings. Gregorio the sixt, scholler to Siluester, as great a coniurer s his master, wrought much mischiefe in his time,Bal. but was at last banished Rome, and ended his life in misety in Ger∣many. Iohn the two and twentieth, being of no better disposition then these we haue spoken of, but following iudiciall astrolo∣gie, fed himselfe with a vaine hope of long life, whereof hee vanted himselfe among his familiars, one day aboue the rest at Viterbum, in a chamber which hee had lately builded, saying, that hee should liue a great while, hee was assured of it: presently the flore brake suddenly in pieces, and hee was found seuen daies after crushed to pieces vnder the ruines thereof. All this notwithhanding, yet other Pope eased not to suffer themselues to be infected with this execrable poison: as Hildebrand, who was called Gregorie the seuenth, and Alexander the sixt, of which kind we shall see a whole legend in the next booke and 43 chapter; do but marke these holy fathers how abominable they were, to be in such sort giuen ouer to Satan. Cornelius Agrippa, a great student in this cursed Art, and a man famous both by his owne workes and others report for his Necromancie,Iouius in elogij vtrorum illu∣strium. went alwaies accompanied with an euill
spirit in the similitude of a blacke dog: but when his time of death drew neare, and he was vrged to repentance, he tooke off the enchaunted collar from the dogs necke, and sent him away with these tearmes, Get thee hence thou cursed beast, which hast vtterly destroied mee: neither was the dog euer af∣ter seene: some say hee leapt into Araris and neuer came out againe. Agrippa himselfe died at Lions in a base and beg∣gerly Inne. Zoreastres, king of Bactria, is notified to haue beene the in∣uentor of Astrologie and Magicke,Theat. hist. but the deuill (whose mi∣nisterie he vsed) when he was too importunate with him, bur∣ned him to death. Charles the seuenth of Fraunce, put Egidius de Raxa mar∣shiall of his kingdome,Fulgos. lib. 9. cap. 1. to a cruell and filthie death, because hee practised this arte, and in the same had murdered an hundred and twenty teeming women and young infants: he caused him to be hanged vpon a fke by a hote fire, and ro∣sted to death. Bladud the sonne of Lud king of Britaine, now called En∣gland, in the yeere of the world 3100, hee that builded the citie Bath (as our late histories witnesse) and also made ther∣in the hote bathes, addicted himselfe so much to the de∣uilish arte of Necromancie, that he wrought wonders there∣by: in so much that hee made himselfe wings, and attemp∣ted to flie like Dedalus: but the deuill (as euer, like a false knaue) forsooke him in his iourney, so that he fell downe and brake his necke. In the yeere of our Lord 1578, one Smon Penbrooke dwel∣ling in S. Georges parish in London, being a figure setter, and vehemently suspected to be a coniurer; by the commaunde∣ment of the iudge appeared in the parish Church of S. Saui∣our at a court holden there: where, whilst hee was busie in entertaining a proctour, and leaned his head vpon a pew a good space, the proctour began to lift vp his head to see what hee ailed, and found him departing out of this life, and straight waies hee fell downe rattling in the throat, without
speaking any one word: this straunge iudgement happened before many witnesses, who searching him, found about him fiue deuilish bookes of coniuration, and most abomina∣ble practises, with a picture in tinne of a man hauing three dice in his hand with this writing, Chance dice fortunately, and much other trash: so that euery one confessed it to be a iust iudgement against sorcerie, and a great example to cause o∣thers to feare the iustice of God. Now let euery one learne by these examples to feare God, and to stand firme & sted∣fast to his holy word without turning from it on any side, so shall he be safe from such like miserable ends as these wic∣ked varlets come vnto. CHAP. XXXIIII. Of those that through pride and vainglory, stroue to vsurpe the honour due vnto God. A Forgetfull and vnthankfull mind for the benefits which God bestow∣eth vpon vs, is a braunch of the breach of this first commaunde∣ment, as well as those which went before: and this is, when we ascribe not vnto God the glory of his be∣nefits to giue him thanks for them, but through a foolish pride extoll our selues higher then we ought, presuming aboue measure and reason in our owne power, desire to place our selues in a higher degree then is meet. With this fond and foolish affection (I know not how) our first fathers were tickled and tainted from the be∣ginning to thinke to empaire the glory of God:Gen. 3. and they also were puffed vp with the blast of ambition, that I know not with what fond, foolish, rash, and proud conceit,
went about after the flood to build a city and tower of excee∣ding height, by that meanes to win fame and reputation a∣mongst men:Gen. 11. In stead whereof, they ought rather to haue praised God by remembring his gratious goodnesse in their miraculous deliuerance in their fathers persons, from that ge∣nerall deluge and shipwracke of the world: but forasmuch as with a proud and high stomacke they lifted vp themselues against God, to whome onely all glory appertaineth, there∣fore God also set himselfe against them and against their o∣uer bold practises, interrupting all their determined presump∣tuous purposes, by such a confusion and alteration of tongues which he sent amongst them, that one could not vnderstand another: so that with shame they were constrained to leaue their begun worke. And besides, instead of that strong and sure habitation which they dreamed on to maintaine and de∣fend themselues by against all enemies, and the fortresse & castle wereby they went about to keepe other in subiection to them, they were forced to forsake the place by the iust iudgement of God, who scattered and dispersed them hi∣ther and thither, that hee might bring them to that estate & condition, which they most of all feared and stroue to shun; And thus God resisteth the proud, and fauoureth the hum∣ble: loe here the punishment wherwith God punished their sinne, remaining still vpon them vntill this day, for a chastise∣ment of their proud spirits: with the staine of this sinne, most commonly the mightiest potentates of this world are defi∣led, who although both by word and writing auouch & con∣fesse their power to be by the grace of God: yet for the most part, they are very vnthankfull for the same, and so proud and high minded, that they shew themselues most obstinate and vngratefull of all men: for oftentimes they robbe him of the honour and glory which is peculiar vnto himselfe, and attribute it to themselues, in setting forth their braue and sumptuous shewes and triumphes: this is the sinne whereof Nabuchadnezzar king of Babell was reprooued; for God ha∣uing bestowed vpon him a kingdome with such pompe and
renowme, that hee made whole nations to tremble before his face, and putting many people in subiection vnder him, hee (in stead of giuing thankes for these great benefits) exal∣ted himselfe, suffering his heart to swell, and his vnderstan∣ding to waxe hard with pride, not regarding the Lord who extolled him so high: and yet notwithstanding he was con∣strained to confesse and acknowleege him for the true God, to haue an euerlasting kingdome, and an infinite power, as well by the forewarning of dreames which Daniel interpre∣ted, as by the miraculous deliuerance of the three yong men out of the burning furnace: therefore as hee walked one day in his roiall pallace at Babylon, and vaunted of his greatnesse and magnificense, saying to himselfe,Dan. 4. Is not this great Babel which I haue built for the house of the kingdome, by the might of my power, and for the honour of my maiestie? Now whilst the word was yet in his mouth, a voice was heard from heauen, saying, O king, to thee it is spoken, Thy kingdome shall depart from thee: and according to the tenor of the voice, hee was immediatly deposed from his roiall seat, spoiled of all his glo∣ry, driuen from the society of men, depriued of sense, & made a companion for the bruit beasts, and wild asses, eating grasse like oxen, euen so long, vntill his haire was growen stiffe like Eagles feathers, and his nailes like the clawes of birds. In which estate, hee continued the space of seuen yeeres: euen hee, that a little before was so proud and arrogant, and hee that had conquered so many kingdomes and nations, that triumphed ouer Iewry and Ierusalem, with the kings there∣of. This is a most excellent looking glasse for kings to behold the ficklenesse and instabilitie of all their power and pompe, when it pleaseth God to humble and bring them vnder: there is neither sceptet, crowne, stay, or strength of man that is able to hinder and turne aside the hand of the Almightie, the King of kings, from abasing and weakening the most high and strong of this world, let them be neuer so braue and iolly, and bringing them vnto a low, contemptible, and bru∣tish estate.
Besides this which we haue already touched, there is an∣other kind of pride and presumption most damnable and de∣testable of all: and it is, when a man doth so much forget himselfe, as to sease and take vpon him that honour which appertaineth only to God, ascribing to himselfe a certaine deity: one would hardly thinke that there were any such in the world, so proud as to commit this sinne, did not experi∣ence by certaine examples teach vs the contrary: As first of all the king of Tyre, whose heart was so exalted with the multitude of iches, and the renowme and greatnesse of his house, that hee doubted not to esteeme himselfe a god, and to desire maiesty and power correspondent thereunto: for which presumption,Chap. 28.1, 2, 3, &c. God by the Prophet Ezechiel re∣prooued him, and threatned his destruction, which after∣ward came vpon him, when by the power of a strange and terrible nation, his goodly godhead was ouercome and mur∣dered, feeling in deed that he was no god as he supposed, but a man subiect to death and misery. King Herod, sirnamed Agrippa, which put Iames the bro∣ther of Iohn to death,Act. 12. and imprisoned Peter, with purpose to make him tast of the same cup, was puffed vp with no lesse sacrilegious pride, for being vpon a time seated in his throne of iudgement, and araied in his roiall robes, shewing forth his greatnesse and magnificense in the presence of the Em∣bassadours of Tyre and Sidon, that desired to continue in peace with him, as he spake vnto them the people shouted and cried, That it was the voice of God and not of man: which titles of honour hee disclaimed not, and therefore the Angell of the Lord smote him suddenly, because hee gaue not the glory to God: so that he was eaten with worms and gaue vp the ghost. Iosephus reporteth the same story more at large on this manner: Vpon the second day of the solemnization of the plaies which Herod caused to be cele∣brated for the Emperours health, there being a great num∣ber of gentlemen and Lords present that came from all quar∣ters to this feast;Iewish anti∣quities. Lib. 19. cap. 7. hee came betime in the morning to the
Theatre, clad in a garment all wouen with siluer of a mar∣ueilous workmanship; vpon which, as the sunne rising cast his beames, there glittered out such an excellent bright∣nesse, that thereby his pernicious flatterers tooke occasion to call him with a loud voice by the name of God: for the which sacrilegious speech, hee not reproouing nor forbid∣ding them, was presently taken with most grieuous and hor∣rible dolours and gripes in his bowels, so that looking vpon the people, hee vttered these words: Behold here your goodly god, whome you but now so highly honoured, ready to die with extreame paine: And so hee died in deed most miserably, euen when hee was in the top of his honour and iollitie, and as it were, in the midst of his earthly para∣dise, being beaten downe and swallowed vp with confusion and ignominie, not stroken with the edge of sword or speare, (for that had beene far more honourable) but gnawen in pie∣ces with lice and vermine. Simon Magus, otherwise called Simon the Samaritane, borne in a village called Gitton, after hee was cursed of Pe∣ter the Apostle, for offering to buy the giftes of the spirit of God with money, went to Rome,Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 12. Philip. in Chron. Cent. . lib. 2. cap. 11. and there putting in practise his magicall artes, and working miracles by the de∣uill, was reputed a god, and had an image erected in his honour with this inscription, To Simon the holy God: besides, all the Samaritanes, and diuers also of other nations accoun∣ted him no lesse, as appeared by the reuerence and honour which they did vnto him: in so much, as they called his companion, or rather his whore Helena (for that was her profession in Tyre a citie of Phenicia) The first moouer that distilled out of Simons bosome. Now hee, to foster this foo∣lish and ridiculous opinion of theirs, and to eternize his name, boasted that hee would at a certaine time flie vp in∣to heauen, which, as hee attempted to doe by the helpe of the deuill, Peter the Apostle commaunded the vncleane spirit to cast him downe againe, so that he fell vpon the earth and was bruised to death, and prooued himselfe thereby to
be no more then a mortall, wicked, and detestable wretch. Moreouer, elsewhere wee read of Alexander the great, whose courage and magnanimitie was so exceeding great, that he enterprised to go out of Greece and set vpon all Asia, only with an army of two and thirty thousand footmen,Oros. lib. 3. fiue hundred horse, and an hundred and fourescore ships: and in this appointment passing the seas, hee conquered in short space, the greatest part of the world: for which cause, he was represented to the Prophet Daniel in a vision, by the figure of a Leopard with wings on his backe, to notifie the great di∣ligence and speedy expedition which he vsed in compassing so many sudden and great victories; with pride whereof, hee was so soone infected, that hee would brooke no equall nor companion in his Empire; but as heauen had but one sonne, so hee thought the earth ought to haue but one monarch, which was himselfe:Iust. lib. 11. which mind of his, he made knowen by his answere to king Darius demaunding peace, and offering him the one halfe of his kingdome to be quiet; when he re∣fused to accord thereunto, saying, He scorned to be a partner in the halfe, and hoped to be ful possessour of the whole. Af∣ter his first victory had of Darius, & his entrance into Aegypt (which he tooke without blowes, as also hee did Rhodes and Cicilia) he practised and suborned the priests that ministred at the Oracle of Hammon, to make him be pronounced and entituled by the Oracle, The sonne of Iupiter: (which kind of iuggling and deceit was common at that time) Hauing ob∣tained this honour, forthwith he caused himselfe to be wor∣shipped as a god,Iust. lib. 12. Curt. lib. 8. according to the custom of the kings of Per∣sia: neither wanted hee flatterers about him that egged him forward, & soothed him vp in this proud humor: albeit that many of the better sort endeauoured tooth and naile to turne him from it. It happened as he warred in India, he receiued so sore a wound, that with paine thereof hee was constrained to say, Though he was the renowmed sonne of Iupiter, yet hee ceased not to feele the infirmities of a weak & diseased body: finally, being returned to Babylon, where many embassadors
of diuerse farre countries, as of Carthage, and other cities in Affrica, Spaine, France, Sicilie, Sardinia, and certaine Cit∣ties of Italy, were arriued, to congratulate his good successe, for the great renown which by his worthy deeds he had got∣ten; as he lay there taking his rest many daies, and bathing himselfe in all kind of pleasure, one day after a great feast that lasted a whole day and a night, in a banket after supper being ready to returne home, he was poysoned; when before he had drunke his whole draught hee gaue a deepe sigh sud∣denly, as if he had beene thrust through with a dart, and was carried away in a sowne, vexed with such horrible torment, that had he not beene restrained he would haue killed him∣selfe. And on this manner he that could not content himselfe with the condition of a man, but would needs clymbe aboue the clouds to goe in equipage with God, drunke vp his owne death, leauing as sodainly all his worldly pompe, as he had so∣dainly gotten it: which vanished like smoke, none of his chil∣dren being any whit the better by it. There was in Siracusa a city of Sicilia (which is now cal∣led Saragosse) a Phisition called Menecrates, whose folly and presumption was so great that hee accounted himselfe a god: and desired to bee so reputed by others: insomuch that he required no other wages and recompence of the patients which hee tooke in hand (as Aelianus witnesseth) but that they should onely acknowledge him to bee Iupiter, and call him so, & auow themselues to his seruice. Vpon a time Denis the tyrant desirous to make some pastime with him, made a feast and inuited him amongst others to be his guest: but be∣cause he was a god, to do him honor answerable to his name, hee placed him a table all alone, and set before him no di∣shes, but onely a censer with frankincense, which was a pro∣per and conuenient seruice for the gods: this honourable du∣tie pleased the Phisitian very wel at the first, so that he snuf∣fed vp the perfume most willinglie: but when this poore god saw the other guests eating and drinking indeed, and himselfe not being able to bee fed with smoke, readie to
starue with hunger rose vp and went away all enraged in himselfe, and derided of others, hauing more need to purge his owne braine from their superfluous humor, then others from their sicknesses. Caligula the first Emperour, being become an ordinarie despiser and open mocker of all religion, it came presentlie in his braine to beleeue (so drunken was hee with a draught of his owne foolish conceit) that there was no other God but himselfe: therefore he caused men to worship him, & to kisse his hands or his feet in token of reuerence, (which honor afterwards the Popes tooke vnto them) yea and was so be∣sotted, that he went about by certaine engines of art to coun∣terfeit thunder and lightnings: albeit in all this pride and ar∣rogancie or rather folly, there was none so timorous and fearefull as he, or that would sooner vpon lighter occasion be dismaied. One day as he was by mount Aetna in Cicilie hea∣ring by chance the violent cracking of the flames which all that season ascended out of the top of the hill, it stroke so soddaine and horrible a feare into him, that he neuer ceased flying all night till hee came to Phar in Messina. Euery little thunderclap put him in feare of death, for hee would leape vp and downe like a mad man when hee heard it thunder, finding himselfe not able by all his godhead to defend him∣selfe from the power thereof: but if there chanced greater crackes then ordinarie, then would not his whote bed hold him, but needes must he run into the cold floure vnderneath the bed to hide himselfe. Thus was hee compelled against his will to feare him, whome willinglie hee would not deigne to acknowledge. And thus it falleth out with all wicked miserable Atheists whose hearts imagine there is no God: and therfore haue so little assurance in themselues, that there need no thunder and lightning to amase them: for the shaking of euerie leafe, is sufficient to make them tremble. To conclude, this Atheist void of reli∣gion and feare of God, and full of all prophanesse, was according to his due desert murthered by one of his owne
seruants: of the which, will follow more at large in the next booke. Domitian likewise was so blinded with pride, that he would be called a god and worshipped:Oros. lib. 7. ca. 7. of whome also wee will speake in the second booke, and 34 chapter. To these we may adde them also,Dionys. Halie. Lib. 1. antiq. Roman. that to the end to make themselues feared and reuerenced as gods, haue counterfai∣ted the lightnings and thunders of heauen, as we read of one Alladius a Latin king that raigned before Romulus: who be∣ing a most wicked tyrant & a contemner of God, inuented a trick whereby to represent to the eare and eie, the rattling & swift shine of both thunder & lightning; that by that meanes astonishing his subiects, he might be guised of them for a god: but it chanced that his house being set on fire with true light∣ning, & ouerthrown with the violent strength of tempestuous rain, togither with the ouerflowing of a pond that stood nere, he perished by fire & water, burnt & drowned, & all at once. Did not the king of Elide the like, and to the same end al∣so by the deuice of a chariot drawn about with foure horses, wherein were certaine iron workes, which with wrinching a∣bout, gaue an horrible sound resembling thunder, and torches and squibs which hee caused to be throwen about like light∣nings in such sort, that he oftentimes burnt the beholders:Diod. lib. 4. & in this manner hee went vp and downe brauing it, especially ouer an iron bridge which hee had of purpose built to passe and repasse ouer at his pleasure; vntill Gods long suffering could not endure any longer such outragious and presump∣tuous madnesse, but sent a thunderbolt from heauen vpon his head, that all the world might see by his destruction, the ex∣ceeding folly and vaine pride which bewitched him in his life time: Which history the Poet in the person of Sibilla setteth downe at large to this effect. I saw Salmon in cruell torments lie, For counterfatting thunder of the skie, And Ioues cleare lightning: whilst with torches bright,
Drawne with foure steedes, and brandishing his light, He rode triumphantly through Elis streats, And made all Grecia wonder at his feats. Thinking to win the honor of a god, (Mad as he was) by scattertng fire abroad. With brazen engines, and with courses faining, A noise like that which in the clouds is raining, And no where else: but God from thickest skie, No torch, but such a thunderbolt let flie At him, that headlong whirld him from his cell, And tumbled downe into the deepest hell. Thus this arrogant king was punished according to the qua∣lity of his offence, euen in the same kind wherin he offended, which thing though it bee found written in a Poet, yet ought not be reiected for an old wiues tale, seeing it is not incredible that a king might make such pastimes, & yron crashing noises, nor that he might be iustly punished for the same; and the ra∣ther because Caligula did the like, as wee haue heard before. And we read also that one Arthemisius in the time of the Emperour Iustinian, counterfeited by certain engines and de∣uises in his owne house in Constantinople,Agath. lib. 5. bell. Gothis. such earthquakes, lightnings and thunders, that would astonish a wise braine to heare or behold them on a sodaine. But aboue all others that by darkening the glorie of God to encrease their own power haue prowdly exalted thēselues against him, the Popes are the ringleaders, whose vnbrideled boldnes hath ben so much the more impudent & pernicious, for that in tearming themselues the seruants of the seruants of God, in word; in deed, take vnto them the authoritie and power of God himself: as of pardoning & absoluing sins, crea∣ting laws & ordinances at their pleasure in binding or vnbin∣ding mens consciences; which things appertain to God only: nay they haue ben so brasen faced, as to cōmand Angels and deuils, as Clement the fift did in one of his buls: so impudent, as to be carried like idols vpon their vassal shoulders, & weare
three crownes vpon their heads: so prowd and arrogant as to constraine kings and Emperours to kisse their feet, to make them their vassals, to vsurpe Lordship & dominion ouer them and all their lands and possessions: and to dispossesse whome they like not, of kingdomes, & enstall in their roomes whom they please: and all this by the thunder of excommunicati∣on, whereby they make themselues feared and stood in awe of. By which dealings of theirs they verifie in themselues that which the scripture speaketh of Antichrist, which is the man of sinne, the sonne of perdition,2. Thes. 2.3. an aduersarie and one that exalteth himselfe against all which is called God, or which is worshipped, till he bee set as a god in the temple of God, shewing himselfe that he is God. Wherefore also the heauie vengeance of God is manifest vpon them, by the great and horrible punishments they haue beene tormented with; for some of them haue had their eies pulled out, others haue died in prisons, a third sort haue beene smothered to death, a fourth hath beene killed with the sword, a fift hath died with hunger, a sixt bene stoned, a seuenth poysoned, and yet there hath not wanted an eigth sort whom the deuill himselfe hath stifled. This it is to ouerreach the clouds,Sabel Aenead. 9. lib. 7. Iohn le Maire de Besges. Nih. Giles, of the Chronicles of Fraunce. and not content with earthly power, to vsurpe a supremacy and praeeminence o∣uer kings: such was the pride of Pope Boniface the eigth, whē he sent an embassage to Philip the Faire, king of France, to command him to take vpon him an expedition against the Sarasens beyond the sea, vpon paine of forfeiting his king∣dome into his hands: and when hauing his sword by his side he shamed not to say, that he alone and none else was Empe∣rour and Lord of all the world: in demonstration wherof he bestowed the Empire vpon Duke Albert, together with the crowne of Fraunce: and not content herewith, his insolen∣cie was so importunat, that he charged Philip the Faire to ac∣knowledge himselfe to bee his subiect in all causes as well spirituall as temporall: and to leuie a subsidie for his holinesse out of his Clergie, disabling his authority in bestowing
church liuings, which prerogatiue hee chalenged to his sea: the conclusion of this bull was in these words: Aliud cre∣dentes fatitos reputamus: as much to say, as whosoeuer is of another mind then this, we esteeme him a foole. Wherevnto the King answered in this wise, Philippus dei gratia Francorum rex Bonifacio se gerenti pro summ pontificé salutem modicam si∣ue nullam. Sciat tua maxima fatuitas, in temporalibus nos alicui non subesse, ecclesiarum & prebendarum vacantium collationem ad nos iure regio pertinere: secus autem credentes fatuos repu∣tamus deuiantes, in English thus, Philip by the grace of God King of France, to Boniface bearing himselfe for Pope little or no health. Be it knowne vnto thy exceeding great foolishnesse, that we in temporall affaires are subiect to none, that the bestowing of benefices belongeth to vs by our royall right: and if there bee any that thinke otherwise, we hold them for erronious fooles. A me∣morable answere well beseeming a true royall and French heart: immediately hee assembling together a nationall councill of all the Barons and prelates within his dominion at Paris, wherein Boniface being pronounced an Heretike, a Si∣monist, and a manslaier, it was agreed vpon by a ioint consent that the king should doe no more obeysance, but reiect as nothing worth, whatsoeuer he should impose. Wherfore the king to tame his proud & malicious nature, dispatched secret∣ly two hundred men at armes, vnder the conduct of one cap∣taine oguard towards Auian in Naples (whither his holines was fled for feare of diuerse whose houses and castels he had caused to be rased downe) there to surprise him on a sodaine: which stratageme they speedily performed, and carried him prisoner to Rome, where hee died most miserably. Peter Me∣sie a Spanish Gentleman of Seuill, saith in many of his le∣ctures that he died in prison enraged with famine. Nicholas Gilles in his first volume of French chronicles, reporteth that he died in the castell Saint Angelo, through a flux of his bel∣ly which cast him into a frenzie, that hee gnew off his owne handes: and that at the hower of his death there were heard horrible thunders and tempests and lightnings round about:
this is hee in whose honour this fine Epitaph was made: Intrauit vt vulpes, regnauit vt leo, mortuus est vt canis:Sabel. Aenead. 9. lib. 7. He entered like a fox, raigned like a lion, and died like a dog. And this was hee that on the first day of Lent giuing ashes to the bishop of Genes, in stead of vsing the ordinarie forme of speech which is, Momento homo quod cinis es, & in cinerem conuerteris, Remember man that thou art ashes, and into ashes thou shalt returne: said in despight and mockerie, Me∣mento homo quia Gibellinus es, & cum Gibellinis in cinerem con∣uerteris: Remember that thou art a Gibelline, and together with the Gibillines thou shalt bee turned into ashes: and in stead of laying the ashes vpon his forehead, threw them into his eies; and forthwith depriued him of his Bishoprick, and would haue done worse if it had ben in his power: mark what little account this holy father himselfe made of these cere∣monies: and therefore it is no maruell if others mocke at them, seeing the Popes themselues make them but matters of pastime. If it bee so therefore that no man ought to arrogate to himselfe any title of diety, then consequently it is no lesse vnlawfull to giue that diuine honour to any other mor∣tall creature: and therefore the people of Cesarea faul∣ted greatly when blasphemously they called King Herod a god, as hath beene declared before. Likewise it was high and prowd presumption in the Senate of Rome not to re∣ceiue any god to their Commonwealth without their owne foreapprobation and consent, as if that God could not main∣taine his dignitie, nor stand without the good liking and as∣sent of men; or as if that man could deifie whom he listed, which is a most rediculous and absurd thing. And thus the Romans in time of Tiberius consecrating to themselues a whole legion, euen thousands of false gods,Tertullian apolog. would not admit of the true God & his sonne Christ, but reiected him aboue all others. Among al the vanities of the Athenians this was one worthy noting, how they ordained that Demetrius, Alexāders successor
(for reestablishing their popular and ancient liberty) with his father Antigonus should be called kings, and honored with the title of Sauing gods, and to haue a Priest that should offer sacrifice vnto them: and moreouer caused their pictures to be drawn in the same bāner where the pictures of Iupiter & Mi∣nerua (the protectors of their city) were drawen, in brodered worke: but this goodly banner as is was carried about in pro∣cession was rent in peeces by a tempestuous storme that arose soddainly, God thereby manifesting how odious and displea∣sant both this new and old superstition was in his sight: be∣sides that doe but consider the laudable vertues that so com∣mended this new god Demetrius, to make them honour him in such sort: they were violence, and cruelties, intemperance, with all inordinate lasciuiousnes, vilanies, and whoredomes: so that it was no maruel if they had made him a God, being vn∣worthy altogether of humane society. This new found god hauing gotten a great victory by sea, as hee triumphed and braued it with ships after the same, was so shattered with a so∣dain tempest, that the greatest part of his nauy went to wrack, and afterwards was vanquished by Seleuchus in a battel, wher∣in his father Antigonus was slain: & whē he thought to retire to Athens, they shut their gates vpon him, whom a little be∣fore they had canonized for a god: for which cause he raised war against them, & so wearied them with onsets on ech side, and so inclosed them both by sea & land, that being brought to extreame famine & necessity, they were compelled to en∣tertaine him againe, and to behold the horrible outrages of their own made god, to their griefe & confusion. But not long after Seleuchus once againe damped his courage, in so much that hauing liued three years in a countrie of Siuia like a ba∣nished outlaw, for fear to be deliuered into his hands, & wea∣ry of his own life, he stuffed himself so with food that he burst in peeces. Therefore let euery man learne by these examples not to translate the honor and maiestie of God to any crea∣ture, but to leaue it to him alone, who is iealous therof, & will not (as the Prophet saith) giue his glorie vnto another.
CHAP. XXV. Of Epicures and Atheists. AS touching voluptuous Epicures and cursed Atheists, that deny the prouidence of God, beleeue not the immortality of the soule, think there is no such thing as life to come, and consequently impugne all diuinity, liuing in this world like brute beasts, & like dogs and swine, wallowing in all sensuality; they do also strike themselues against this commandement, by going about to wipe out and deface the knowledge of God, and if it were possible, to extinguish his very essence; wherein they shew themselues more then mad, and brutish, whereas not∣withstanding all the euident testimonies of the vertue, boun∣ty, wisedome, and eternall power of God, which they daily see with their eies, and feele in themselues, doe neuerthelesse striue to quench his light of nature which enlightneth and persuadeth them and all Nations of this, There is a God, by whom we liue, moue, and haue our being;Acts. 17.28. who although in his essence is inuisible, yet maketh he himselfe knowne and as it were seene by his workes and creatures, and mighty gouern∣mēt of the world, that he that would seeke after him, may (as one might say) handle and feele him. Therefore they that would persuade themselues that this glorious heauen & mas∣sy earth wanted a guider and a gouernour, haue their vnder∣standing blinded from sight of things manifest, & their hearts peruerted from all shew of reason: for is there any substance of this world that hath no cause of his subsisting? Is there a day without a sonne? Are there fruits and no trees? Plants and no seeds? Can it raine without a cloud? Bee a tempest without wind? Can a ship saile without a Pilote? Or a house
be built without a carpenter or builder? If then euery part of this world hath his particular cause of being and depen∣dance, is it likely that the whole is without cause to bee to it a furnishing and gouernement? Say you hogges and dogges doe you not beleeue that which you see: or if your eies bee bored out that you cannot see, must you thinke there is no sonne nor light, because your eies are in darknesse and blind∣nes? Can you behold all the secrets of nature? Is there no∣thing but a voice, a singing of birds, or an harmonious con∣sort of musicall instruments in the world? And yet who per∣ceiueth these small things? Can you behold the wind? Can you see the sweet smell of fragrant flowers along the fields? Can you see the secrets of your owne bodies, your entrals, your heart and your brain? And yet you cease not to beleeue that there are such things, except you be heartlesse & braine∣lesse indeed: Why then doe you measure God by your own fight, & do not beleeue there is a God because he is inuisible, since that hee manifesteth himselfe more apparently both to vnderstanding & sence then either voice, smell, or wind? doe not your owne othes blasphemies and horrible cursings bear witnesse against you, when you sweare by, despight and mau∣gre him whom you deny to be? doth not euery thunderclap constraine you to tremble at the blast of his voice: if any ca∣lamity approch neere vnto or light vpon you, or if death bee threatened or set before your eies, doe you not then feele in spight of all your reason, that the seuere iudgement of God doth waken vp your dull & sleepy conscience to come to his triall? There was neuer yet any nation or people so harbarous which by the persuasion and instinct of nature hath not al∣waies beleeued a certain diety, and to thinke otherwise is not only a detestable thing, but also most absurd & so cōtrary to humane reason, that the very Paynims haue very little tolle∣rated such horrible blasphemie. The Athenians are witnesses hereof,Cic. of the na∣ture of gods. Lib. 1. who banished Protagoras their city and countrie be∣cause in the beginning of one of his books he called in questiō the diety: & caused his bookes to be burned openly. Neither
shewed they any lesse seueritie towards Diagoras surnamed the Atheist,Diodor. 13. when being as some say iniuriously and falsly ac∣cused of this crime, and for feare of punishment fled away, they proclaimed that whosoeuer did kill him, should haue a talent of siluer in recompence, which in value is as much as six hundred crownes after the rate of 35 shillings French to the crowne. How much more then is the state of Christen∣dome at this day to bee lamented, which wee see in many places infected with such a contagious pestilence, that diuers men inuenomed with this deadly poyson, are so mischieuous and wretched as to make roome for Atheisme, by forbidding and hindering by all means possible the course of the gospel: wherein they make knowne what they are and what zeale they bear to the religion & seruice of God, & with what af∣fection they are led towards the good & safety of the Com∣monwealth, and what hereafter is to be hoped of them: for where there is no knowledge nor fear of God, there also is no bridle nor bond to restraine and hold men backe from doing euill: wherevpon they grow to that passe to be most insolent and prophane. This is the diuinity and goodly instructiō that commeth beyond the mountaines from that scientificall V∣niuersitie and Colledge of the right reuerend maisters, and from the excellent holinesse of some of their Popes: whose manner of life is so dissolute, lasciuious, dishonest and Sarda∣napal like,Vide lib. 1. cap. 20. Lucian. Por∣phory, Iulian. &c Bale. that thereby their Atheisme is euidently and no∣toriously knowne and talked of by euery one. Hereof Pope Leo the tenth a Florentine by birth, may serue for an example: who as he was a very effeminate person, gi∣uen to all manner of delights and pleasure, hauing no other care but of himselfe, and his owne filthie carcasses ease; so had hee no more tast at all nor feeling of God and his holy word, then a dog: hee made the promises and threats contained in holy scripture, and all else that we beleeue, mat∣ter to laugh at, and things friuolous and of no waight, moc∣king at the simplicitie, the faith and beleefe of Christians: for one day when Cardinall Bembus (who also shewed himselfe
to bee none of the best Christians in the world, by his Ve∣netian hystorie, where as oft as hee speaketh of God hee vseth the plurall number after the manner of Heathen wri∣ters) alleadged a place out of the Gospell, his damnable impudēcie was so great as to replie, That this fable of Christ had brought to him and such as hee, no little profite. Oh stincking and cursed throat to belch out such monstrous blasphemie! doe not these speeches bewray a villanous and abhominable Atheist, if euer any were? Is not this to de∣clare himselfe openlie to bee Antichrist? For hee is Anti∣christ which denieth Iesus to bee Christ, and which de∣nieth the Father and the Sonne,1. Iohn 2.22. according as Saint Iohn sayth. Albeit in the meane while this cursed caitife that had as much religion as a dog, made shew to bee the protector and defendor of the Catholicke faith, making warre with all his power against Christ Iesus in the person of his ser∣uant Luther. Now after hee had by his pardons and indulgences drawne out a world of money, and heaped vp great treasures by the maintenance of courtizans and Whores, and had enriched his bastards, one day being at meat hee receiued newes of the ouerthrow of the French in Lumbardie, whereat hee reioiced out of measure, and for that good tidings doubled his good cheare: sodainely hee was constrained to turne his coppie from ioy into sad∣nesse, from pleasure into griefe and gnashing of teeth, by a most bitter and vnlooked for death which depriued him at once of all his pleasures, to make him drinke the cup of Gods fierce wrath, and to throw him down headlong into e∣uerlasting paines and torments which were prouided for him. Pope Leo (saith S. Martin of Belay in his second book of me∣morable things) hearing of the great losse which the French men sustained at Millan tooke so great ioy thereat, that a ca∣tar and an ague insuing, killed him within three daies after: a happie man indeed to die with ioy. Pope Iulius the third was one of the same stampe,Bale. Veag. nothing inferiour to the former in all manner of dissolute and infamous liuing and vile and
cursed talke, making knowne by his impietie, that hee had none other God but his belly,Vide lib. 1. cap. 21. Heresie. and that hee was none of Christs fold but one of Epicures crew; hee was such a glut∣ton, and so passionate in his lusts, and so prophane a despiser of God and his word, that once at supper being enraged & blas∣pheming because they had not serued in a cold pecock which he commanded to bee kept whole at dinner, though there were other hote on the table, a Cardinal that was present de∣sired him not to be so moued for so small a trifle: What (quoth he) if it pleased God to bee so angry for eating of an apple as to thrust Adam and Eue out of Paradise, should not I which am his vicar be angrie for a pecocke, which is far more worth then any apple? See how this wicked wretch prophaned the holy scripture, and like an Epicure and Atheist mocked God: but hee died of the gout after he had ben long plagued with it together with other diseases, leauing none other good name behind him saue the report of a most wicked and abo∣minable man. Philip Strozze whom Paulus Iouius reporteth to haue ben commonly bruted to be an Atheist,Tom. 2. lib. 36. was an exile of Florence and afterwards prisoner there, in the time of Cosimus Medius the Prince of that Commonwealth (against whom this Phi∣lip had enterprised to make warre) and being in prison hee kil∣led himselfe with a sword of a Spaniard his keeper which by ouersight hee had left behind, setting the point against his throat & falling down vpon it: so may all Atheists perish and come to naught. Francis Rabelais hauing suckt vp also this poison, vsed like a prophane villaine to make all religion a matter to laugh and mocke at: but God depriued him of his sences, that as hee had led a brutish life so he might die a brutish death: for he died mocking all those that talked of God, or made any mention of mercy in his eares. How miserable was the end of Periers, the author of that detestable booke intituled Symbalum mundi, wherin he open∣ly mocked at God and his religion: euen hee fell finally into
despaire, and notwithstanding all that guarded him killed himselfe. Iodelle also, a Frenel tragicall Poet, being an Epicure and an Atheist, made a very tragicall and most pittifull end: for he died in great miserie and distresse euen pined to death after he had rioted out al his substance and consumed his pa∣trimonie. Lignereles the courtier to make himselfe seeme a man of seruice made open profession of Atheisme, but his end and destruction came from thence, whence hee looked for credit and aduancement. To bring the matter to an end, I will here set downe a notable and strange thing, that chanced in the reigne of Lewis the ninth (as Enguerran de Monstrelet in his se∣cond volume of Hystories recordeth it:) vpon the fif∣teenth day of Iune in the yeare of our Lord God 1464 there happened a strange thing in the pallace at Pa∣ris: so it was that there was a matter in law to bee tri∣ed betwixt the Bishop of Angiers and a rich Cittizen, whome the Bishop charged to haue spoken before ma∣nie witnesses, that hee beleeued not that there was ei∣there God or Deuill, Heauen or hell. Now whilest the Bi∣shops Lawier laid to his charge these things, the place be∣gan to tremble verie much, wherein they were, and a stone fell downe from the roofe amongst them all without hur∣ting any: yet euery man was sore afraid, and departed out of the house vntill the morrow: when the matter was begun againe to bee pleaded, which was no sooner in hand, but the chamber begun afresh to shake, and one of the sum∣mers came forth of his mortise hole, falling downwards two foot and there staied: so that all that were within the hall looking to haue beene slaine outright, ran out so violently that some left behind them their caps, others their hoodes, others their slippers: summarily, glad was hee that could get out first; neither durst they plead any more causes in that place vntill it was mended. Thus much reporteth Enguerran without mention of any decision of
that matter: now for as much as nothing happeneth by chance, it is most likely that God by that accident would giue vs to vnderstand both how monstrous and detestable all such speeches are, as also how men ought to feare & abhorre them, seeing that the dumbe & senslesse creatures & wood, beames, planckes and stones, and the earth at selfe, (by nature stedfast and fixed) are so farre from enduring them, that they are moued withall. There was a certaine blasphemous wretch that on a time being with his companions in a common Inne carousing and making merrie;Discipulus de tempore Ser∣mon. 132. asked them if they thought a man was pos∣sessed with a soule or no: wherevnto when some replied, that the soules of men were immortall, and that some of them after release from the body liued in heauen, o∣thers in hell; for so the writings of the Prophets and Apo∣stles instructed them: hee answered and swore that hee thought it nothing so, but rather that there was no soule in man to suruiue the bodie, but that Heauen and hell were meere fables, and inuentions of Priests to get gaine by; and for himselfe hee was ready to sell his soule to any that would buy it: then one of his companions tooke vp a cup of wine and said, sell mee thy soule for this cup of wine: which hee receiuing bad him take his soule, and dranke vp the wine. Now Sathan himselfe was there in a mans shape, (as commonly hee is neuer farre from such meetings) and bought it againe of the other at the same price, and by and by bad him giue him his soule: the whole companie affirming it was meet hee should haue it, since hee had bought it, not perceiuing the De∣uill: but presentlie hee laying hold on this soule seller, carried him into the aire before them all, toward his owne habitation, to the great astonishment and amazement of the beholders: and from that day to this hee was neuer heard of, but tried to his paine that men had soules: and that hell was no fable according to his godlesse and profane opinion.
Pherecides by birth a Syrian, a tragicall Poet and a Phi∣losopher by profession,Aelianus de var. hist. lib. 4. boasted impudently amongst his schollers of his prosperity learning, and wisdome, saying: that although hee offered no sacrifices vnto the gods, yet hee lead a more quiet and prosperous life then those that were addicted to religion, and therefore hee passed not for any such vanitie. But ere long his impietie was iustly re∣uenged, for the Lord strooke him with such a strange di∣sease, that out of his bodie issued such a slimie and filthie sweat, and engendered such a number of lice and wormes, that his bowels being consumed by them hee died most miserably. Theat. histori∣cum.At Hamburge not long since there liued an impious wretch that despised the preaching of the Gospell and the ministers thereof, accounting it as a vaine thing, not worthie the beleeuing of any man: neither did he thus himselfe only but also seduced many others, bringing them to all Atheisme and vngodlinesse. Wherfore the Lord iustly recompenced him for his impiety: for he that before had no sence nor fee∣ling of God in his conscience, being touched with the finger of the almightie, grew to the contrary, euen to too much feeling and knowledge of God, that hee fell into extreame despaire, affirming now his sins to be past forgiuenes because he had withdrawne others from the truth aswell as himselfe, whereas before he thought himselfe guiltie of no sinne; and that God was so iust that he would not forgiue him, wheras before he thought there was no God: (so mighty is the ope∣ration of the Lord when he pleaseth to touch the conscience of man) finally, continuing in this desperate case, hee threw himselfe from the roofe of a house into a well, and not finding water enough to drowne him, hee thrust his head into the bottome thereof till hee had made an end of his life. Theat. histori∣cum.In the yeare of our Lord 1502 there liued one Hermannus Biswick, a grand Atheist, and a notable instrument of Sa∣than, who affirmed that the world neuer had beginning, as
foolish Moses dreamed: and that there was neither Angels nor deuils, nor hell, nor future life, but that the soules of men perished with their bodies: besides, that Christ Iesus was no∣thing els, but a seducer of the people; and that the faith of Christians, and whatsoeuer else is contained in holy writs, was meere vanity. These articles full of impietie and blas∣phemie, hee constantly auouched to the death: And for the same cause was togither with his bookes burnt in Hol∣land. A certaine rich man at Holberstadium abounding with all manner of earthly commodities,Theatr. histor. gaue himselfe so much to his pleasure, that he became besotted therewith: in such sort, that hee made no reckening of religion, nor any good thing; but dared to say, that if he might lead such a life con∣tinually vpon earth, hee would not enuie heauen, nor desire any exchange. Notwithstanding ere long (contrary to his expectation) the Lord cut him off by death, and so his desi∣red pleasure came to an end. But after his death there appea∣red such diabolicall apparitions in his house, that no man da∣ring to inhabit in it, became desolate, for euery day there ap∣peared the image of this Epicure sitting at a boord with a number of his guests, drinking, carousing, and making good cheare; and his table furnished with delicates, and attended on by many that ministred necessaries vnto them, beside with minstrels, trumpetters, and such like. In summe, what∣soeuer he delighted in his life time, was there to be seene e∣uery day, the Lord permitting Satan to bleare mens eies with such strange shewes, to the end that others might be terrified from such epicurisme and impietie. Not inferiour to any of the former in Atheisme & impiety, and equall to all in maner of punishment was one of our own nation, of fresh and late memory, called Marlin,Marlow. by profession a scholler, brought vp from his youth in the Vniuersitie of Cambridge, but by practise a play-maker, and a Poet of scur∣rilitie, who by giuing too large a swinge to his owne wit, and suffering his lust to haue the full raines, fell (not without iust
desert) to that outrage and extremitie, that hee denied God and his sonne Christ, and not only in word blasphemed the trinitie, but also (as it is credibly reported) wrote bookes a∣gainst it, affirming our Sauiour to be but a deceiuer, and Mo∣ses to be but a coniurer and seducer of the people, and the holy Bible to be but vaine and idle stories, and all religion but a deuice of pollicie. But see what a hooke the Lord put in the nosthrils of this barking dogge: It so fell out, that in London streets as he purposed to stab one whome hee ought a grudge vnto with his dagger, the other party perceiuing so auoided the stroke, that withall catching hold of his wrest, he stabbed his owne dagger into his owne head, in such sort, that notwithstanding all the meanes of surgerie that could be wrought, hee shortly after died thereof. The manner of his death being so terrible (for hee euen cursed and blasphemed to his last gaspe, and togither with his breath an oth flew out of his mouth) that it was not only a manifest signe of Gods iudgement, but also an horrible and fearefull terrour to all that beheld him. But herein did the iustice of God most no∣tably appeare, in that hee compelled his owne hand which had written those blasphemies to be the instrument to punish him, and that in his braine, which had deuised the same. I would to God (and I pray it from my heart) that all Atheists in this realme, and in all the world beside, would by the re∣membrance and consideration of this example, either forsake their horrible impietie, or that they might in like manner come to destruction: and so that abominable sinne which so flourisheth amongst men of greatest name, might either be quite extinquished and tooted out, or at least smothered and kept vnder, that it durst not shew it head any more in the worlds eye.
CHAP. XXVI. Touching the transgressours of the second com∣mandement, by Idolatrie. WEe haue hitherto seene how and in what sort they, that either by malice, or impiety, or Apostasie, or heresie, or otherwise haue transgressed the first commandement, haue beene punished: Let vs now consider the iudgements that haue befallen Idolatours, the breakers of the second commaundement. But before wee proceed, wee must know, that as it is required of vs by the first commaundement to hold God for our true and onely God, to repose all our whole trust and confidence in him, and call vpon him, serue and worship him alone: so in the se∣cond, the contrary to this is forbidden; which is, to doe any manner of seruice, honour, and reuerence by deuotion to I∣dols, forasmuch as he is a spirit (that is to say,Iohn. 4. of a spirituall na∣ture and essence which is infinite and incomprehensible) so loueth he a spirituall worship and seruice which is answerable to his nature, and not by images or pictures, and such other outward and corruptible meanes, which hee hath in no wise commanded: wherefore Isaiah the Prophet reproouing the folly and vanity of idolatours saith,Chap. 40.18. To whome will you liken God, or what similitude will you set vp vnto him. Therefore if it be not Gods will, that vnder pretence and colour of his owne name, any image or picture should be adored, (being a thing not only inconuenient, but also absurd and vnseemely) much lesse can he abide to haue them worshipped vnder the name and title of any creature whatsoeuer. And for this cause gaue he the second commandement, Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen image, &c. which prohibition the Israelielits brake in the desert, when they set vp a golden calfe, & bowed them∣selues before it after the maner of the Painyms, giuing it the
honour which was only due to God: whereby they incurred the indignation of Almightie God,Exod. 32. who is strong and iea∣lous of suffering any such slander to be done vnto his name: wherefore hee caused three thousand of them to be stroken & wounded to death by the hand of the Leuits, at the com∣maundement of Moses, to make his anger against idolatrie more manifest, by causing them to be executioners of his re∣uenge, who were ordained for the ministery of his Church, and the seruice of the altar and tabernacle. Howbeit for all this, the same people not long after, fell backe into the same sinne, and bowed themselues before strange gods, & through the allurements of the daughters of Moab ioyned themselues to Belphegor:Num. 25. for which cause, the Lord being incensed, stroke them with so grieuous a plague, that there died of them in one day about twenty and foure thousand persons. And albeit that after all this, being brought by him into the land of promise, hee had forbidden and threatned them for cleauing to the idols of the nations whose land they pos∣sessed, yet were they so prone to idolatry, that notwithstan∣ding all this, they fell to serue Baal and Astaroth: wherefore the fire of Gods wrath was enflamed against them, and hee gaue them ouer to be a spoile and prey vnto their enemies on euery side, so that for many yeeres, sometimes the Moa∣bites oppressed them, otherwhiles the Madianites, and euer after the death of any of their Iudges and rulers which God raised vp for their deliuerance, some grieuous punishment be∣fell them: for then (being without law or gouernment) euery man did that which seemed good in his owne eies, and so tur∣ned aside from the right way. Now albeit these examples may seeme to haue some affi∣nity with Apostasie, yet because the ignorance and rude∣ness of the people was rather the cause of their falling away from God, then any wilfull affection that raigned in them, therefore wee place them in this rancke, as well as they that haue beene alwaies brought vp and nuzled in Idolatrie. 2. Chron. 22.One of this crew was Ochosias king of Iuda sonne of
Ioram, who hauing before him an euill president of his wic∣ked father, and a worse instruction and bringing vp of his mother Athaliah, who togither with the house of Achab pricked him forward to euill, ioyned himselfe to them, and to their idols, and for that cause was wrapped in the same pu∣nishment & destruction with Ioram the king of Israel, whome Iehu slew togither with the princes of Iuda, and many of his neere kinsmen. And to be short, Idolatry hath bene the de∣cay and ruine of the kingdome of Iuda, as at all other times, so especially vnder Ioachas sonne of Iosias,2. King. 23. that raigned not a∣boue three moneths in Ierusalem before hee was taken and led captiue into Aegypt by the king thereof, and there died: from which time the whole land became tributary to the king of Aegypt. And not long after it was vtterly destroied by the forces of Nabuchadnezzar, king of Babel that came a∣gainst Ierusalem and tooke it, and caried king Ioahim with his mother, his princes, his seruants, and the treasures of the temple, and his owne house, into Babylon. And finally,2. King. 24.25. tooke Zedechias that fled away, and before his eies caused his sonnes to be slaine, which assoone as he had beheld, commaunded him also to be pulled out, and so binding him in chaines of iron, carried him prisoner to Babylon: putting all the princes of Iuda to the sword, consuming with fire the temple with the kings pallace, and all the goodly buildings of Ierusalem. And thus the whole kingdome (though by an especiall pre∣rogatiue consecrated and ordained of God himselfe) ceased to be a kingdome, and came to such an end, that it was ne∣uer reestablished by God, but begun and confirmed by the filthy idolatry of Ieroboams calues,Vide lib. 1. c. 19. which as his successours maintained and fauoured more or lesse, so were they exposed to more or lesse plagues and incumbrances. Nadab, Ieroboams sonne, being nuzled and nurtured vp in Idoll worship, after the example of his father,1 King. 15.27. receiued a con∣digne punishment for his iniquitie: for Baasa the sonne of A∣hijah put both him and all the offspring of Ieroboam house to the sword, and raigned in his stead: who also being no whit
better then those whome he had slaine, was punished in the person of Ela his sonne; whome Zambri one of his seruants slew. And this againe vsurping the crowne, enioyed it but seuen daies, at the end whereof (seeing himselfe in daunger in the citie Tirza taken by Amri, whome the people had chosen for their king) went into the pallace of the kings house, and burned himselfe. As for Achab, hee multiplied idolatry in Israel, and committed more wickednesse then all his predecessours, wherefore the wrath of God was stret∣ched out against hi and his: for hee himselfe was wounded to death in battaile by the Sitians, his sonne Ioram slaine by Iehu, and threescore and ten of his children put to death in Samaria by their gouernours and chiefe of the city, sending their heads in baskets to Iehu. Aboue all, a most notable and manifest example of Gods iudgement, was seene in the death of Iezabel his wife, that had beene his spurre and pro∣uoker to all mischiefe, when by her Eunuches and most tru∣stie seruants at the commandement of Iehu shee was thrown downe out of a window, and trampled vnder the horse seer, and last of all deuoured of dogges. Moreouer, the greatest number of the kings of Israel that succeeded him were mur∣dered one after another, so that the kingdome fell to such a low decline, that it became first tributary to the king of As∣syria, and afterward inuaded and subuerted by him, and the inhabitants transported into his land: whence they neuer returned, but remained scattered here and there like vaga∣bonds, and all for their abominable idolatrie: which ought to be a lesson to all people, princes, and kings, that seeing God spared not these two realmes of Iuda and Israel, but destroied and rooted them out from the earth; much lesse will he spare any other kingdome and monarchie which con∣tinue by their images and idoll worship to stirre vp his indig∣nation against them.
CHAP. XXVII. Of many euils that haue come vpon Christen∣dome for idolatrie. IF wee consider and search out the cause of the ruine of the East Em∣pire, and of so many famous and flo∣rishing Churches as were before-time in the greatest part of Europe, & namely in Greece, wee shall find, that Idolatry hath beene the cause of all: for euen as it got footing and increase in their dominions; so equally did the power of Sa∣racens and Turkish tyrany take root and foundation amongst them, and prospered so well, that the rest of the world trem∣bled at the report thereof; God hauing raised and fortified them, as beforetime he had done the Assyrians and Babylo∣nians as whips and scourges to chasten the people and nati∣ons of the world that wickedly had abused his holy gospell, & bearing the name of Christians, had become idolaters: for no other name then this can be giuen them, that in deuotion do any maner of homage to images & pictures, whatsoeuer may superficially be alledged to the contrary. For be it the image either of Prophet, Apostle, or Christ Iesus himself, yet it is necessary that the law of God stand whole and sound, which saith, Thou shalt make thy selfe no grauen image, nor any likenes of things either in heauen aboue, or in earth beneath:Epiphan. Iohn Bishop of Ierusalem. thou shalt not bow downe to them, nor worship them, &c. Wherefore he perfourmed the part of a good bishop, that finding a vaile spred in the entrance of a Church dore wherein the image of Christ or of some other Saint was pictured, rent it in peeces, with these words, That it was against the authoritie of the sa∣cred scripture to haue any image of Christ set vp in the Church. After the same manner, Serenus bishop of Marseilla, beate down & banished all images out of his Churches, as occasions of idolatry: & to shun them the more, it was ordained in the
Elibertine councill, that no image nor picture should be set vp in any Church: for which cause also the Emperour Leo the third, by an open edict commanded his subiects to cast out of their temples all pictures and statues of Saints,Paul. Diacon. Lib. 6. cap. 14. Angels, and whatsoeuer, to the intent that all occasions of Idolatry might be taken away: yea and he burned some, and punished diuers otherwise, that in this regard were not pliant, but disobedient to his commaundement. After which time, when images were recalled into Greece & into Constantinople (the chiefe city and seat of the east Empire) it came to passe by a great and dreadfull, yet iust iudgement of God, that this famous and renowmed city, in the worlds eie impregnable, after long siege, and great and furious assaults, was at length taken by the Turkes, who hauing wonne the breach and entred with fury, droue the poore Emperour Paleologus (euen till then fighting for the cities defence) to that extremity, that in reti∣ring among the prease of his owne souldiers, he was thronged and trampled to death; and his slaine body being found, was beheaded, and his head contemptuously caried about the ci∣ty vpon a launce. Now after the massacre of many thousand men, to make vp a complete and absolute cruelty, they drew the Empresse with her daughters, and many other Ladies & gentlewomen to a banquet, where after many vile and horri∣ble wrongs and disgraces, they killed and tore them in pieces in most monstrous manner. In all which, the execution of Gods most iust wrath for idolatry did most liuely appeare: which sinne, accompanied with many other execrable and vile vices, must needs draw after it a grieuous and terrible punishment to serue for example to others that were to come: neither was it a thing by chance or haphazzard that the chri∣stians were made a mocking stocke vnto them in that wofull day, when in their bloody triumphes they caused a crucifixe to be caried through the streets in contempt, and throwing durt vpon it, cried in their language, This is the gallant God of Christians. And thus did God license and permit these sa∣uage Turkes to commit eueryday grieuous outrages, and to
make great wastes and desolations in all Christendome, till that they grew so mighty that it is to bee feared least the saying of Lactantius touching the returne of the Empire into Asia, be not verified and accomplished verie shortly, if there bee no amendment practised: for we see by wofull ex∣perience, that almost all the forces which Christian Princes haue mustered together from all quarters in pretence to re∣sist their furie and rage, haue not onely beene bootlesse and vnprofitable, but also that which is worse, giuen them further occasion by their bloodie victories and wonderfull slaugh∣ter of so many millions of men, to make them more obsti∣nate in their detestable Mahumetisme and Turkish religion, then they were before: for they make their boasts thereof, and reare vp trophees of their cruelties, taking no more pit∣tie of the vanquished, then a butcher doth of sheepe alot∣ted to the slaughter. Whereof we haue a pittifull example in rhe ouerthrow of the French armie which Iohn the sonne of Philip duke of Burgundie led against the Turke Pazaite, and by the trecherie and cowardise of the Hungarians, who in the time of battaile turned their backes and fled, was ouer∣come: in that this wicked and cruell tyger expresly charged that all the prisoners (in number many) should be murdered one after another; which was readily executed before his eies: so that sauing the chiefe captaine and certain few lords of the companie that were spared in respect of great ransoms, there scaped not one aliue. Besides these generall calamities, the Lord hath particu∣larly showne foorth his indignation against priuate persons and places for Idolatrie:Cent. 4. cap. 3. as in Spoletium at one rime there perished by an earthquake three hundred and fiftie, whilst they were offering sacrifice vnto their Idols. At Rome vn∣der the empire of Alexander Seuerus, after that the left hand of the image of Iupiter was miraculously melted,Cent 3. cap. 14. the priests going about to pacifie the anger of their gods with Lecti∣sterns and Sacrifices, foure of them togither with the altar and Idoll were stricken in peeces with a thunderbolt, and
sodenly such a horrible darkenesse ouerspread all the Citty, that most of the inhabitants ran out into the fields all ama∣zed. Moreouer did not the Lord send lightning from Hea∣uen to inflame that notorious Temple for Idolatrie of Apol∣lo,Theodor. lib. 3. cap. 9. & 10. or rather the Deuill of Delphos, in the time of Iulian the wicked Apostatae, whilest hee was exercising tortures vpon one Theodorus a Christian, and did it not consume the image of Apollo to ashes? The famous and rich Temple of Iupi∣ter at Apamea, how strangely did it come to ruine and de∣struction?Nicphor. lib. 12. cap. 27. For when the President and Tribunes who had in charge to destroy it, thought it a thing almost vnpossible by reason of the strength of the wals and matter of it, Mar∣cellus the Bishop vndertooke the labor and found out a man that promised to shake and roote vp the foundation of it by fire, but when hee had put it in practise, a blacke Deuill ap∣peared and hindered the natural operation of the fire, which when Marcellus perceiued, hee by earnest and zealous pray∣er droue away the Deuill, and so the fire rekindled and con∣sumed it to nothing. In all which examples wee may see the wonderfull indignation of God against Idol-worshippers, when by such strange and extraordinarie meanes hee brin∣geth them to destruction. And this doubtlesse is no new course, for euen since the beginning of the world (if we con∣sult histories) wee shall find, that well nie all kingdomes, pla∣ces, persons, and countries that haue beene any wise infected with this sinne haue still come to some ruine or other, and to some great ouerthrow, and their idolatrie suppressed by some notable and strange accident, whereof S. Ierome may may bee a witnesse, who affirmeth that when Iesus being a child was carried into Aegypt for feare of Herod, all the I∣dols of Aegypt fell downe, and all their Oracles became mute,Isai. 19.1. which the Prophet Isaias foreseeing saith, Behold the Lord rideth vpon a swift cloud, and shall come into Aegypt, and the Idols of Aegypt shall melt in the middest of her: Besides the generall silence of the Deuill in all his Oracles through∣out the world presently vpon Christs incarnation is a thing
knowne and confessed of all men. Notwithstanding al which the holy Pope will still maintaine his idolatrie, albeit the Lord hath made knowne manifest tokens of his indignation against it. As appeareth by that which happened in the year 1451 being the Popes Iubilie, when such a concourse of people was made from all quarters of the world to honour that superstitious day: for the people being vpon Adrians bridge were so thrust together that two hundred men and three horses lost their liues being trampled vpon and stifled to death▪ manie fell into the water ouer the bridge, and so pe∣rished: of whom an hundred and thirty were buried at Saint Selsus: and these are the fruits of their indulgences which are so much brought and sought for, and of their Iubilies, proceeding from the Bishop of Rome his impious and sacra∣legious zeale. Now to eschew these and such like misfor∣tunes the true and onely meanes is, an vnfeigned diuersion from all Idolatrie and superstition, and whatsoeuer else con∣trarieth the pure seruice of God, and a conuersion vnto him to serue him in spirite and truth as the Scripture exhor∣teth. CHAP. XXVIII. Of those that at any time corrupted and mingled Gods re∣ligion with humane inuentions, or went about to change and disquiet the discipline of the Church. NOw seeing that God hath set downe a certaine forme of doctrine and instructi∣on, according to which hee would haue vs to serue him, and established a kind of discipline and pollicie to bee obserued and maintained of euerie
man inuiolablie, it behooueth therefore euery Christian to conforme himselfe vnto this order: and not to bee guided by euerie fickle imagination of his own braine, or euerie rash presumption that ariseth in himselfe, but onely by the direct rule of Gods word, which onely wee ought to follow: by meanes of neglecting which dutie many vaine and pernici∣ous ceremonies and strange superstitions haue beene brought in, and swaied mightily: by reason whereof, great controuer∣sies and disputations are taken vp at this day. Albeit indeed it bee a thing manifest, that being not grounded and prop∣ped vpon the anchore of the scriptures, they ought to be a∣bolished, what braue outward shew in appearance soeuer they beare. And that they that set abroch such things are not blame∣lesse and excusable before God,Leuit. 20. Numb. 34. it appeareth by the punish∣ment of Nadab and Abihu, who being ordained Priestes of God to sacrifice and offer onely those things which were commaunded in the law, yet were so euill aduised as to offer strange incense, and perfume vpon the altar, receiued at the very instant of the fact condigne punishment for their pre∣sumption: for soddainly this their strange fire inuaded them so fiercely and so piercingly, that they were soone burned and consumed therewith, and so they were not spared albeit they were Aarons sonnes euen his first borne, and Moses nephews; that by them all other might feare and take warning how to enterprise any thing in Gods seruice contrary to his expresse ordinance. This moderation also ought to be obserued in the church discipline, to wit, that euery man contain himselfe within the precincts of his vocation, and that none intrude themselues into any charge without being called of god therunto: wher∣in Corah greatly faulted,Numb. 16. when being not cōtent with the dig∣nity of a Leuits office which God had bestowed vpon him, he ambitiously aspired to the priests office, & besides this stir∣red vp and drew to his faction Dathan & Abiram, & many o∣thers, to the number of two hundred & fifty persons, against
Moses and Aaron: but hee drew withall the vengeance of God downe vpon himselfe, and all that took his part in most horrible and fearefull manner: for some of them (to wit) the two hundred and fifty, (who notwithstanding Moses reproof, were so hardy and presumptuous as to present themselues the next morrow after the tumult, openly before the tabernacle to offer incense as if they had ben true priests) were for their flame of ambition and pride set on fire and consumed with the flame of Gods wrath: others (to wit Dathan and A∣biram) for their audacious enterprise against God in the per∣son of his seruants Moses and Aaron, and their high minded∣nesse and rebellion in not comming out of their tents at the commandement of Moses were throwne down into the low∣est pit, the earth opening her mouth & swallowing them vp aliue with their tents and families and all that belonged vnto them, to the fearfull amazement of the whole people that were beholders of this spectacle. Oziah king of Iuda caried himselfe a long while vprightly and modestly in the seruice of God:2. Chron. 26. but after God had gi∣uē him many great victories ouer his enemies the Philistims, the Arabians, the Amorites: and that his renowne and feare was spred not only to his neighbours, but also to strange nati∣ons, by & by his heart was puft vp with pride & selfe conceit, that he dared to enter the temple of God, and burne incense vpon the altar, which belonged only to the priests office to do: & not obeying the strong resistance & countermaund of the good priests that had charge of the temple, hee was stro∣ken with a leprosie & hastily carried out and sequestred from the society of men all his life time. And so this prowd king that foolishly tooke vpon him more then was lawfull & con∣uenient, was forced to recoile, and to be still, being humbled vnder so grieuous a scourge as neuer forsook him til his death. When the arke of the couenant was in bringing from Abinadabs house in Kyriathiarim in a cart guided by Vz∣za and Ahio, Abinadabs sonnes,1. Sam. 6. 1. Chron. 13. it fell out by the way that it being shaken by the oxen (vnfit seruitors for such a worke)
Vzza put forth his hand to hold it, but therin he went beyond his charge, & therefore was punished forthwith with present death, for his inconsiderate rashnes: for albeit he was both a Leuit and thought no euill in his heart, yet in no respect was he licenced to touch the arke, being a thing lawfull for the Priests onely. Let therefore euery one bee aduised by these examples to follow that rule in seruing God, which is by him designed in all simplicitie, modesty, and obedience, without altering or declining, or vndertaking any thing aboue or be∣side their calling. CHAP. XXIX. Of Periurers. THe third commandement, which is, Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine, is first and es∣pecially broken by periurie, when God is so lightly esteemed, nay so despised that without any regard had to his name (that is to say) to his greatnes, maiesty, power, diuine ver∣tue and fearfull iustice, (for these be his names) men by fraud and malice abuse their othes, either in denying that which is true, or affirming that which is vntrue, or neglecting their pro∣mises made & vowed to others: for this is neither to haue re∣spect vnto his presence who is euery where, nor reuerence to his maiestie who is God of heauen and earth, but rather to make him bear witnes to our lie & falshood: as if he approued it, or had no power to reuenge the iniury & dishonor done vn∣to him. And therfore against such in threatning words he de∣nounceth this iudgement, that Hee will not hold him guiltlesse that taketh his name in vain. Howbeit very many ouerboldly giue themselues ouer to this sinne, making little or no consci∣ence to cousen one another euen by forswearings, whereby they giue most cleare euidence against themselues, that they
haue very little feare of God before their eies, and are not guided by any other rule, saue of their owne affections, by which they square-out, and build their othes and pull them downe againe at their pleasures, for let it be a matter of van∣tage, and then they wil keepe them, but straightway if a con∣trarie persuasion come in their braine they will cancell them by and by: wherein they deale farre worse and more iniuri∣ously with God, then with their knowne enemies: for hee that contrarie to his sworne faith, deceiueth his enemie, de∣clareth that therein he feareth him, but feareth not God; and careth for him, but contemneth God. It was therefore not-without good reason that all antiquity euer marked thē with the coat of infamie that forswore themselues. And therevp∣on it is that Homer so often taunteth the Troians by reason of their so vsuall periuries.Diod. lib. 2. ca. 2. The Aegyptians had them in detestation as prophane persons, and reputed it so capitall a crime that whosoeuer was conuinced thereof was punished by death. The ancient Romanes reuerenced nothing more then Faith in publicke affaires, for which cause they had in their city a temple dedicated to it: wherein for a more streight bond they vsed solemnly to promise and sweare to all the conditions of peace, truces and bargaines, which they made, and to curse those which went about first to breake them: for greater solemnitie and confirmation here∣of they were accustomed at those times to offer sacri∣fices to the image of faith for more reuerence sake. Hence it was that Attilius Regulus chiefe captaine of the Romane army against the Carthaginians was so high∣ly commended of all men, because when hee was ouercome and taken prisoner and sent to Rome, he on∣ly for his othes sake which hee had sworne returned againe to the enemie, albeit hee knew what greeuous torments were prouided for him at his returne. O∣thers also that came with him though they were entrea∣ted, and by their parents, wiues and allies instantly vrged not to returne to Hannibals campe could in no wise bee
moued therevnto: but because they had sworne to the ene∣mie, if the Romans did not accord to those conditions which were offered, to come againe: they preferred the bond and reuerence of their promised faith, though accompanied with perpetuall captiuity, before their priuate commodities, and neerest linke of affection. But two of those ten (for so many were they) falsified their oth, & whatsoeuer mist they may cast to darken and disguise their periurie with, yet were they condemned of all men for cowards, and fainthearted traitors: in so much that the Censors also noted them with infamie for the fact, whereat they tooke such griefe and inward sorrow, that being wearie of their liues, they slew themselues. Now what can they pretend that pro∣fesse themselues Christians and Catholickes to excuse their periuries,Cic. offic. lib. 1. seeing that the very Heathen crie out so loud and cleare, that an oth and faith is so sacredly to be kept towards our enemies? This is one of the greatest vertues and com∣mendations which the Psalmist attributeth to the faithfull man, and him that feareth God, and whome God auou∣cheth for his owne,Psal. 15. Iosh. 9. not to falsifie his oth that he sweared though it bee to his dammage. The Gibaonites although they were so execrable a people that for their great and horrible wic∣kednesses and abhominations they might be well esteemed for Heretikes, yet the Princes of Israell after they had sworne and giuen their faith vnto them, would in no wise re∣tract or goe against their oth, albeit therein they were a∣bused & deceiued by them, for feare of incurring the wtath of God, that suffereth not a periurer to go vnpunished. Vpon what ground or example of holy Scripture then may that doctrine of the counsell of Constance bee founded, the pur∣port whereof is, That a man ought not to keepe his faith to Heretiks? I omit to speake how these good fathers (by Here∣tikes) meant those men who fearing God, relied themselues vpon his word, and reiected the foolish and superstitious inuentions of men. And vnder what colour can the Popes vsurpe this authoritie, to quit and discharge
subiects of their oth wherwith they are bound to their supe∣riors? yet this was the impious audacity of Pope Zacharia, pope Boniface the eight, and pope Benedict de la Lune,Platina. who freed the Frenchmen from their dutie and obedience which they ought vnto their kings. In like manner disgorged Gre∣gory the seuenth his choller and spite against the Emperour Henry, by forbidding his subiects to be his subiects,Enguerran de Monstrelet. and to yeeld that obedience vnto him, which subiects were bound to doe. Howbeit if an oath be made either against God, or to the dammage and hurt of our neighbour (it being for that cause vnlawfull) it behooueth vs to know that we ought to reuoke it, least wee fall into the sinne of Saul and Herod.1. Sam 14. Marc. 6. Now what punishments God hath laid vpon periurers, these examples that follow shall make knowen vnto vs. Osee the last king of Israel beeing made (by Gods iust iudgement for his sinnes) subiect and tributary to Salmanazar king of Ashur, without regard to the bond wherewith he was bound,2. King 17. and to his faith which he had plighted, conspired and entred league with the king of Aegypt against him: but hee, discouering their sediti∣ons and priuie conspiracies, assembled his forces, spoiled his countrey, and bad them warre on all sides, laying siege to the chiefe citie of his kingdome, after three yeeres tooke it, togi∣ther with the forsworne king, whome he put in close prison and kept very straightly, leading him and his whole nation captiue into Assyria to end their daies in misery; of which e∣uill, as of all others that happened in that warre, the disloial∣ty and treason of Osee was the next and chiefest cause. Among the beadroll of sinnes which Sedechias the last king of Iuda is noted withall in holy scripture, periury is one of the count, for notwithstanding hee receiued his kingdome of Nabuchadnezzar, and had sworne fealty to him as to his soueraigne, yet brake hee his oath in rebelling against him, which was the very cause of his destruction:2. Chron. 36. for Nabuchad∣neZZar to be reuenged on his disloialty, sent a puissant army against Ierusalem, which tooke, spoiled, and burned it, and
ouertooke the periurer in his flight, and first made him a be∣holder of the slaughter of his owne children, and then had his owne eies bored out, and was caried in chaines to Baby∣lon, seruing for a spectacle to all posteritie of Gods wondrous iudgements vpon periurers. And thus both the kingdomes of Israel and Iuda were for breach and falsifying their oth, quite extinguished and razed out. Plutarch.The greatest deceiuer and most treacherous person one of them that euer Greece saw, was Lisander the Lacedemo∣nian, a busie body full of cunning, subtilty, and craft, and one that perfourmed the most of his acts of warre, more by fraud and stratagemes, then by any other meanes: this was he that said, that when the lyons skin (meaning Fortitude) would not serue, it was needfull then to sue vnto the foxes case (mea∣ning subtilty:) he made so litle reckening of forswearing him∣selfe, that he would often say, that children were to be couse∣ned wirh trifles, as dice and cockals, and old men with othes: but by his deceitfull trickes he was occasion of much euill, & diuers murders: but at last this fox making warre against the Thebanes, for that they had taken part with the Athenians against him, and giuen them succour and meanes for recoue∣ring their liberty, was taken in the trap and slaine at the foote of their walls. Liuie.Metius Suffetius, Generall of the Albanes, procured the Fidenates to enter war against the Romanes, contrary to his oth which he had sworne vnto them, and being called by the Romans to their succour and placed in an outwing to helpe if need were, whilst the rest were fighting, he droue away the time in ordering his men, and ranging them into squadrons, to see which part should haue the best, that hee might ioyne himselfe vnto that side. But Tullus the Romane king hauing obtained the victory, and seeing the cowardise, subtilty, and treason of this Albane, adiudged him to a most straunge and vile death answerable to his fact: for as hee had in his bodie a double heart swimming betweene two streames, and now ready to go this way now that, so was his body dismembred
and torne in pieces by foure horses, drawing foure contrarie waies, to serue for an example to all others to be more faith∣full and true obseruers of their othes then he was. In old time the Africanes and Carthaginians were gene∣rally noted for perfidie and falshood aboue other nations;Li. Decad. 3. lib. 1. the cause of which bruit, was principally that old subtill souldier Anniball, an old deceiuer and a notorious periurer, who by his crafts and cousenages which hee wrought without religi∣on or feare of God, raised vp that euill report. This subtill foxe hauing made warre in Italy sixteene yeeres, and all that while troubled and vexed the Romanes sore, after many vi∣ctories, wastings of countries, ruines, and sackings of cities, and cruell bloodshed, was at length ouercome by Scipio in his owne countrey, and perceiuing that his countrey men imputed the cause of their fall vnto him, and sought to make him odious to the Romanes by laying to his charge the breach of that league which was betwixt them, hee fled to Antiochus king of Siria, not so much for his own safeties sake, as to continue his warre against the Romans, which he knew Antiochus to be in hammering, because they came so neare vnto his frontiers, but hee found his hope frustrate: for king Antiochus for the small trust hee affied in him, and the daily suspition of his trechery, would not commit any charge of his army into his hand, although for valiantnesse and prowesse he was second to none in that age: It came to passe there∣fore, that assoone as Antiochus was ouerthrowen of the Ro∣manes, he was constrained to flie to Prusias king of Bithynia, that tooke him into his protection: but being as treacherous as himselfe, hee soone deuised a meanes to betray him to Quintius the generall of the Romane army, which when Anniball vnderstood, and seeing that all the passages for e∣uasion were closed vp, and that hee could not any way es∣cape, hee poisoned himselfe, and so miserably ended his treacherous life. And thus the deceit which hee practised towards others, fell at length vpon his owne pate to his vt∣ter destruction.
Albeit that periurers and forswearers were to the Aegyp∣tians very odious and abominable (as wee said before) yet a∣mong them there was one Ptolome,Iustine. who to bereaue his sister Arsinoe of her kingdome, stained himselfe with this villa∣nous spot, and thereby brought his purpose to passe: for pre∣tending and protesting great affection and loue vnto her in the way of mariage (for such incestuous mariages were there through a peruerse and damnable custome not vnlawfull) and auowing the same by solemne oath before her embassa∣dours, did notwithstanding soone make knowen the drift of his intent, which was to make himselfe king: for being arri∣ued in shew to consummate the marriage, at his first approch he caused his nephewes (her sonnes which she had by her former husband Lisimachus, and were come forth from their mother to giue him entertainment on the way) to be slaine, yea and least they should escape his hands, he pursued them euen to their mothers bosome, and there murdered them, and after (expelling her also from her kingdome) caught the crowne & raigned tyrant in her roome: all which mischiefes, hee committed by reason of the faithlesse oth which he had taken: and although that in such a case no oth ought to be of force to confirme so vnlawfull an alliance, (though it be pronounced & taken by the name and in the temple of their idols:) yet notwithstanding it being done with an euill con∣science, and to an euill purpose, hee that did it can be no lesse then a periurer. But for this and other vices it came to passe, that ere long hee was conquered by the Gaules, who taking him in battell slew him and cut off his head, and hauing faste∣ned it vpon a launce, caried it in signe of victory and triumph vp and downe the host. A most notable example of the punishment of periurie & falshood in Vladislaus king of Hungary and his army destroi∣ed by the Turkes, is set downe in Bonfinus his Hungarian hi∣story, after this manner. It fell out that the king of Hungary had so well bestirred himselfe against the Turkes, that Amu∣rathes was glad (vpon vnequall conditions and euen to his
owne hurt, and their good) to conclude a peace with him: wherein it was agreed, that certaine prouinces should be re∣stored to the Hungarians, which otherwise could not haue beene recouered but by great losse of men: this league bee∣ing made, and the articles thereof engrossed in both langua∣ges, with a solemne oth taken on both parties for the confir∣mation of the same: Behold the Cardinall of Florence Ad∣mirall of the nauie which lay vpon the sea Hellespont (now called S. Georges arme,It is so called by the French mē, but more cōmonly, The straights of Castill. which deuideth Turkie from Greece) sendeth letters to the king of Hungary to persuade him to disanull and repeale this new concorded peace: this practise likewise did Cardinall Iulian the Popes legate in Hungary with might and maine helpe forward: which two good pil∣lars of the Church inspired with one and the same spirit wrought togither so effectually with the king, that at their instance, he falsified his oth, broke the peace, & sent to Con∣stantinople to denounce warre afresh: and forthwith whilst their Embassadours were retiring their garrisons out of Msia, to bring them into their hands againe, and had sent fortie thousand crownes for the ransome of certaine great men which were prisoners, and had restored the realme of Rascia & al their captiues, according to the tenor of the late league, not knowing of this new breach, in the meane while (I say) hee set forward his armie towards the Turkes i all expedi∣tion. Now the Turkes secure and misdoubting nothing, were set vpon vnawares by the king, yet putting themselues in de∣fence, there grew a long and sharpe battell, till Amurathes perceiuing his side to decline and almost ouercome, pulled out of his bosome the articles of the foresaid peace, and lif∣ting vp his eies to heauen, vtrered these speeches; O Iesus Christ, these are the leagues that thy Christians haue made and confirmed by swearing by thy name, and yet haue bro∣ken them again: If thou beest a God as they say thou art, re∣uenge this iniury which is offered both thee and me, and pu∣nish those truce-breaking varlets. Hee had scarse ended these speeches, but the Christians battell and courage began to re∣bate:
Vdislaus himselfe was slaine by the Ianissaries, his horse being first hurt, his whole armie was discomfited, and all his people put to the sword, sauing a few that fled: amongst whome was the right reuerend Embassadour of the Pope, who assoone as hee had thrust in others ouer the eares, with∣drew himselfe (forsooth) far enough from blowes or danger. Then followed a horrible butchery of people, and a lamen∣table noise of poore soules ready to be slaughtered, for they spared none, but haled them miserably in pieces, and execu∣ted a iust and rigorous iudgement of God for that vile trea∣chery and periury which was committed. CHAP. XXX. More examples of the like subiect. BVt let vs adde a fewe more examples of fresh∣er memory as touching this vngodly periury: and first, not to ouerpasse king Philip of Ma∣cedonie, who neuer made reckoning of kee∣ping his othes, but swore and vnswore them at his pleasure, and for his commoditie: doubtlesse it was one of the chiefest causes why hee and his whole progenie came quickely to destruction (as testifieth Pausanias) for hee him∣selfe beeing sixe and fourty yeeres old,In Arcadcis. was slaine by one of his owne seruants; after which Olympias his wife made away two of his sonnes, Anideus, and another which hee had by Cleopatra Attalus his neece, whome shee sod to death in a cauldron: his daughter Thessalonicaes children likewise all perished: and lastly, Alexander after all his great victories, in the midst of his pompe, was poisoned at Babylon. De Consessori∣bus.Gregory Tours maketh mention of a wicked varlet in France among the people called Auerni, that forswearing himselfe in an vniust cause had his tongue so presently tied, that hee could not speake but roare, and so continued, till by his ear∣nest praiers and repentance, the Lord restored to him the vse of that vnruly member.
Thete were in old time certaine people of Italy called Aequi, whereof the memory remaineth onely at this day, for they were vtterly destroied by Q. Cincinnatus,Liu. lib. 3. these ha∣uing solemnly made a league of friendship with the Romans, and sworne vnto it with one consent, afterward chose Grac∣chus Cluilius for their captaine, and vnder his conduct spoi∣led the fields and territories of the Romans, contrary to their former league and oth. Whereupon the Romans sent Q. Fa∣bius, P. Voluminus, & A. Posthumius Embassadours to them, to complaine of their wrongs and demand satisfaction: but their captaine so little esteemed them, that he bad them de∣liuer their message to an oake standing thereby, whilst he in∣tended other businesse. Then one of the three turning him∣selfe towards the oake, spake on this manner: Thou hallowed oke, and whatsoeuer els belongeth to the gods in this place, heare and beare witnesse of this disloiall part, and fauour our iust com∣plaints, that with the assistance of the gods wee may be reuenged on this iniurie. This done, they returned home, and shortly after gathering a power of men, set vpon and ouercame that truce-breaking nation. In the yeere of Rome built 317, the Fidenates reuolted from the friendship and league of the Romanes to Toluminus the king of the Veyans, and adding crueltie to treason, killed foure of their Embassadours that came to know the cause of their defection: which disloialty the Romans not brooking, vndertooke war against them; and notwithstanding all their priuat and forraine strength, ouerthrew and slew them. In this battell it is said, that a Tribune of the souldiers seeing To∣luminus brauely galloping vp and downe and encouraging his souldiers, & the Romans trembling at his approch, said, Is this the breaker of leagues, & violatour of the law of nations? If there be any holines on earth, my sword shall sacrifice him to the soules of our slaine Embassadours; & therewithall set∣ting spurs to his horse, he vnhorst him, & fastening him to the earth with his speare, cut off his perfidious head: whereat his army dismaid, retired, & became a slaughter to the enemies.
Albertus Duke of Franconia hauing slaine Conrade the Earle of Lotharingia, brother to Lewes the fourth, then Em∣perour,Melant. Chron. lib. 4. and finding the Emperours wrath incensed against him for the same, betooke himselfe to a strong castle at Bam∣berg; from whence the Emperour neither by force nor pol∣licie, could remooue him for seuen yeres space, vntill Atto the bishop of Mentz by treachery deliuered him into his hands. This Atto vnder shew of friendship repaired to the castle and gaue his faith vnto the Earle, that if hee would come downe to parly with the Emperour, hee should safely returne into his hold: the Earle mistrusting no fraud, went out of the castle gates with the bishop towards the Emperor, but Atto (as it were suddenly remembring himselfe, when in∣deed it was his deuised plot) desireth to returne backe and dine ere he went, because it was somewhat late: so they doe, dine and returne: Now the Earle was no sooner come to the Emperour, but hee caused him to bee presently put to death, notwithstanding hee vrged the bishops promise and oath for his returne: for it was answered, that his oath was quit by re∣turning backe to dine, as he had promised. And thus the Earle was wickedly betraied, though iustly punished. As for Atto the subtill traitor, indeed he possessed himselfe by this means of the Earles lands, but withall, the iustice of God seazed vp∣on him, for within a while after hee was stroken with a thun∣derbolt, and as some say, carried into mount Aetna with this noise: Sic peccata lues, atque ruendo rues. Campofulgos. lib. 7. cap. 3.Cleomene king of Lacedemonia, making warre vpon the Argiues, surprised them by this subtilty: he tooke truce with them for seuen daies, and the third night whilst they lay se∣cure and vnwary in their truce, hee oppressed them with a great slaughter saying (to excuse his treachery, though no ex∣cuse could cleare him from the shame thereof) that the truce which hee made was for seuen daies only, without any men∣tion of nights: howbeit for all this, it prospered not so well with him as hee wished, for the Argiue women (their hus∣bands slaine) tooke armes like Amazones, Tolesilla beeing
their captainesse, and compassing the citie wals repelled Cle∣omenes, halfe amazed with the strangenesse of the fight, after which he was banished into Aegypt, and there miserably and desperately slew himselfe. The Pope of Rome with all his heard of bishops opposed himselfe against the Emperour Henry the fourth,Chron. Carionis. for he ba∣nished bim by excommunication from the society of the Ca∣tholike Church, discharged his subiects from the oth of feal∣tie, and sent a crowne of gold to Rodulph king of Sueuia to canonize him Emperour: the crowne had this inscription, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodulpho, that is, The rocke gaue vnto Peter, and Peter gaue vnto Rodulph the crowne: not∣withstanding Rodulph remembring his oth to the Emperour, & how vile a part it was to betray him whome he had sworne to obey and defend, at first refused the Popes offer: how∣beit by the persuasion of the bishops sophistry he was indu∣ced to vndertake the name and title of Cesar, and to op∣pugne the Emperour Henry by armes, euen by foure vniust battels, in the last of which Rodulph being ouercome, lost his right hand, and was sore wounded otherwise: wherfore be∣ing ready to die; when one brought vnto him his hand that was cut off in the battell, he in detestation of the popes vil∣lany burst forh into these termes (many bishops standing by) Behold here the hand wherewith I swore fealty to the Emperour, this will be an argument of my breach of faith before God, and of your traiterous impulsion thereunto. And thus hee deceased, iustly punished euen by his owne confession for his periurie. Howbeit for all this manifest example the pope and bishops continued to persecute the poore Emperour, yea and to stirre vp his owne sonnes, Conrade and Henry to fight against him; so hardened are their hearts against all iudgements. Narcissus bishop of Ierusalem,Euseb. lib. 6. c. 8 a man famous for his ver∣tues, & sharpe in reprooving and correcting vice, was accused by three wicked wretches, of vnchastity; and that falsly and malitiously: for to prooue their accusation true, they bound it with othes and curses on this wise: the first said, If I lie, I pray
God I may perish by fire: the second. If I speake ought but truth, I pray God I may be consumed by some filthy and cruell disease:Calumniatiō. Lib. 2. cap. 44. the third, If I accuse him falsly, I pray God I may be depriued of my sight and become blind. Thus although the ho∣nesty and chastitie of Narcissus was so well knowen to all the faithful, that they beleeued none of their othes, yet the good bishop partly mooued with griefe of this false accusation, and partly with desire of quietnesse from worldly affaires, for∣sooke his bishopricke, and liued in a desert for many yeeres. But his forsworne accusers by their death witnessed his inno∣cencie, which by their words they impugned: for the first his house being set on fire extraordinarily, perished in the flame with all his family and progenie: The second langui∣shed away with an irkesome disease that bespread his body all ouer: The third seeing the wofull ends of his companions, confessed all their villany, and lamenting his case and crime, persisted so long weeping, till both his eyes were put out. Thus God in his iust iudgement sent vpon ech of them their wishes, and thereby cleared his seruant from shame and op∣probry. Chron. Ernosti. Brotanss.Burghard, Archbishop of Magdeburg, though in regard of his place and profession, he ought to haue giuen good ex∣ample of honestie in himselfe, and punish periury in others, yet hee thrise broke his promise and oth with his owne citi∣zens, the Senate and people of Magdeburg: for first hee be∣sieged them with a power of men, & though they redeemed their liberty with a summe of money (he swearing not to be∣siege them any more) yet without respect of truth and credit hee returned a fresh to besiege: but his perfidie was soone ta∣med, for they tooke him prisoner at that assault: howbeit he so asswaged their angry minds with his humble and lowly in∣treaties & counterfait othes neuer to trouble them any more, but to cōtinue their steadfast friend, that they not only freed him from imprisonment, but restored him to all his dignities with solemnity: neuerthelesse the traiterous Archbishop re∣turning to his old vomit, got dispensation for his oth frō pope
Iohn the 23, and began a fresh to vexe, molest, and murder them whome he had sworne to maintaine: but it was the will of God that he should be once againe caught, and being in∣closed in prison, whilst his friends sought meanes to redeeme him, the Iailour beat him to death with a dore bar, or as some say, with an iron rod taken out of a window: and so at last, though long, his periury found it desert. The small successe that the Emperor Sigismond had in all his affaires (after the violation of his faith giuen to Iohn Hus,Theatr. histor. and Ierome of Prage at the councill of Constance, whome though with direct protestations and othes he promised safe conduct & returne, yet he adiudged to be burned) doth testi∣fie the odiousnesse of his sinne in the sight of God. But aboue all, this one example is most worthy the marking, of a fellow that hearing periurie condemned in a pulpit by a learned preacher, and how it neuer escaped vnpunished, said in a bra∣uery, I haue oft forsworne my selfe, and yet my right hand is not a whit shorter then my left: which words hee had scarse vttered, when such an inflammation arose in that hand, that he was constrained to go to the surgeon and cut it off, least it should infect his whole body; and so his right hand became shorter then his left, in recompence of his periury, which hee lightly esteemed of. In the yeere of our Lord 1055, Goodwine Earle of Kent sitting at the table with king Edward of England,Stow Chron. it happe∣ned that one of the cupbearers stumbled, and yet fell not; whereat Goodwine laughing said, That if one brother had not holpen another (meaning his legges) all the wine had beene spilt: with which words the king calling to mind his bro∣thers death which was slaine by Goodwine, answered, So should my brother Alphred haue holpen me, had not Good∣wine beene: then Goodwine fearing the kings new kindled dis∣pleasure, excused himselfe with many words, & at last (eating a morsell of bread) wished it might choke him if he were not guiltlesse of Alphreds blood: but he swore falsly as the iudge∣ment of God declared, for he was forthwith choaked in the
presence of the king, ere hee remooued one foote from that place, though there be some say he recouered life againe. Stow ChronLong time after this, in the reigne of Queene Elizabeth, there was in the city of London one Anne Aueri widdow, who forswore her selfe for a little mony that she should haue paid for six pound of tow at a shop in Woodstreet for which cause being suddenly surprized with the iustice of God, shee fell downe speechlesse forthwith, and cast vp at her mouth in great aboundance & with horrible stinke that matter which by natures course should haue bene voided downwards, and so died to the terrour of all periured and forsworne wretches. There are in Histories many more examples to be found of this hurtfull and pernicious sinne exercised by one nation to∣wards another, and one man towards another, in most pro∣fane and villanous sort, neither shaming to be accounted for∣sworne, nor consequently fearing to displease God and his maiestie. But forasmuch as when we come to speake of mur∣derers in the next booke, we shall haue occasion to speake of them more, or of such like, I will referre the handling thereof vnto that place; only this, let euery man learne by that which hath bene spoken, to be sound and fraudlesse, and to keepe his faith and promise towards all men, if for no other cause, yet for feare of God, who leaueth not this sinne vnpunished, nor holdeth them guiltlesse that thus take his name in vaine. CHAP. XXXI. Of Blasphemers. AS touching Blasphemie, it is a most grieuous and enormous sinne, and contrary to this third commandement, when a man is so wretched and miserable as to pronounce presumptuous speeches against God, whereby his name is slandered and euill spoken of, which sinne can not choose but be sharpely and seuerely punished: for if so be that God holdeth not
him guiltlesse that doth but take his name in vaine, must hee not needs abhorre him that blasphemeth his name? See how meritoriously that wicked and peruerse wretch that blasphe∣med and murdered (as it were) the name of God among the people of Israel in the desert, was punished: hee was taken,Leuit. 24. put in prison, and condemned, and speedily stoned to death by the whole multitude: and vpon that occasion (as euil man∣ners begat euermore good lawes) the Lord instituted a per∣petual law and decree, that euery one that should blaspheme and curse God, of what estate or degree soeuer, should be stoned to death in token of detestation: which sentence, if it might now a daies stand in force, there would not raigne so many miserable blasphemers & deniers of God as the world is now filled and infected with. It was also ordained by a new law of Iustinian,Cod. lib. 3. tit. 43. that blasphemies should be seuerely punish∣ed by the Iudges & magistrates of commonweales: but such is the corruption and misery of this age, that those men that ought to correct others for such speeches, are oftentimes worst themselues; & there are that thinke, that they can not be sufficiently feared and awed of men, except by horrible bannings & swearings they despite & maugre God: nay it is further come to that passe, that in some places to sweare and ban be the marks & ensignes of a Catholike, & they are best welcome that can blaspheme most. How much then is that good king S. Lewes of France to be commended,Nichol. Gil. vol. 1. Of French Chronicles. who especi∣ally discharged all his subiects from swearing & blaspheming within his realme, insomuch that when he heating aLord of Ien∣ville. noble man blaspheme God most cruelly, he caused him to be laid hold on, & his lips to be slit with an hor iron, saying, he must be content to endure that punishment, seeing he purposed to banish othes out of his kingdome. Now we call blasphemie (according to the scripture phrase) euery word that deroga∣teth either from the bountie, mercy, iustice, eternity, & so∣ueraigne power of God: of this sort was that blasphemous speech of one of king Iorams princes, who at the time of the great famine in Samaria, when it was besieged by the Sirians,
hearing Elizaeus the Prophet say, that the next morow there should be plenty of victuals, and good cheape, reiected this promise of God made by his Prophet,2. King. 7. saying that it was im∣possible; as if God were either a lyar, or not able to performe what he would: for this cause, this vnbeleeuing blasphemer receiued the same day a deserued punishment for his blas∣phemie, for hee was troden to death in the gate of the citie vnder the feet of the multitude that went out into the Siri∣ans camp forsaken and left desolate by them, through a feare which the Lord sent among them. 2. King. 19.Sennacherib king of Assyria, after he had obtained many vi∣ctories, & subdued much people vnder him, & also laid siege to Ierusalem, became so proud & arrogant, as by his seruants mouthes to reuile and blaspheme the liuing God, speaking no otherwise of him then of some strange idoll, and one that had no power to helpe and deliuer those that trusted in him; for which blasphemies he soone after felt a iust vengeāce of God vpon himselfe & his people: for although in mans eies he see∣med to be without the reach of danger, (seeing hee was not assailed but did assaile, & was guarded with so mighty an ar∣my that assured him to make him lord of Ierusalem in short space) yet the Lord ouerthrew his power, & destroied of his men in one night by the hand of his Angell 185 thousand men, so that he was faine to raise his siege, & returne into his own kingdome, where finally he was slain by his own sonnes, as he was worshipping on his knees in the temple of his God. In the time of the Machabees those men that were in the strong hold called Gazara,2. Mach. 10. fighting against the Iews, trusting to the strength of the place wherein they were, vttered forth most infamous speeches against God: but ere long, their blas∣phemous mouths were encountred by a cōdigne punishmēt, for the first day of the siege Machabeus put fire to the towne, & consumed the place (with the blasphemers in it) to ashes. Holofernes, when Achior aduanced the glory of the God of Israel,Iudith. 6.7. replied on this fashion: Since thou hast prophesied vnto vs that Israel shall be defended by their god, thou shalt prooue
that there is no God but Nabuchadonosor, when the sword of mine army shall passe through thy sides, and thou shalt fall among their slaine: but for this blasphemy the Lord cut him short, and preuented his cruell purpose by sudden death, and that by the hand of a woman, to his further shame. Nay this sinne is so odious in the sight of God, that he pu∣nisheth euen them that giue occasion therof vnto others, yea though they be his dearest children, as it appeareth by the words of the Prophet Nathan vnto king Dauid:2. King 12. Because of this deed (saith he) of murdering Vriah and defiling Bathshabe, thou hast made the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child that is borne vnto thee shall surely die. In the Empire of Iulian the Apostata, there were diuers great men that for the Emperors sake forsooke Christ & ab∣iured his religion:Theod. llb. 3. cap. 11, & 12. Contempt of holy things. Lib. 1. cap. 3, 4. amongst whom was one Iulian vncle to the Emperor & gouernor of the East; another Faelix, the Em∣perors treasurer: the first of which two, after he had spoiled all Christian Churches and temples, pissed against the table whereon the holy sacraments were vsed to be administred, in contempt, and stroke Euzoius on the eare for reproouing him for it: the other beholding the holy vessels that belonged to the Church, said, See what precious vessels Maries sonne is serued withall. After which blasphemie, the Lord plagued them most strangely; for Iulian fell into so strange a disease, that his entrails beeing rotten, hee voided his excrements at his mouth, because when they passed naturally, hee abused them to the dishonour of God. Foelix vomited blood so ex∣cessiuely night and day at his blasphemous mouth, that hee died forthwith. About the same time there liued a famous sophister & E∣picure called Libanius, who beeing at Antioch,Theatr. hist. demaunded blasphemously of a learned & godly schoolmaster, what the Carpenters sonne did, and how he occupied himselfe? Mary (quoth the schoolmaster, full of the spirit of God) the creator of this world (whome thou disdainfully callest the carpen∣ters sonne) is making a coffin for thee to carry thee to thy
graue, whereat the sophister iesting departed, and within few daies dying, was buried in a coffin, according to the prophe∣sie of that holy man. Vide lib. 1. c. 21. Heres. Philip. Chron. Abb. Vrusperg.The Emperour Heraclius sending Embassadours to Cosroe the king of Persia to entreat of peace, returned with this an∣swer, that he would neuer cease to trouble them with warre till he had constrained them to forsake their crucified Christ and to worship the Sunne. But ere long he bore the punish∣ment of his blasphemie, for what with a domesticall calami∣tie & a forraine ouerthrow by the hand of Heraclius, he came to a most wofull destruction. Michael that blasphemous Rabbine, that was accounted of the Iewes as their Prince and Messias,Fincelius de miraculis lib. 2. as he was on a time banketting with his companions, amongst other things this was chiefest sauce for their meat, to blaspheme Christ & his mother Mary, insomuch as he boasted of a victory alreadie gotten ouer the Christians God. But marke the issue; as hee descended downe the staires, his foot slipping, hee tumbled headlong & broke his neck: wherin his late victory proued a discomfiture & ouerthrow, to his eternal shame & confusion. Three soldiers (amongst the Tyrigetes a people of Sar∣matia) passing through a wood, there arose a tempest of thun∣der and lightning, which though commonly it maketh the greatest Atheists to tremble, yet one of them to shew his contempt of God and his iudgements, burst forth into blas∣phemie & despitings of God. But the Lord soone tamed his rebellious tongue: for he caused the wind to blow vp by the root a huge tree that fell vpon him & crushed him to pieces, the other escaping to testifie to the world of his destruction. No lesse notable is the example of a young gyrle, named Denis Benifield of twelue yeres of age,Acts and Mo∣numents of the Church. who going to schoole amongst other gyrles, when they fell to reason among them∣selues after their childish discretion about God, one among the rest said that he was a good old father; what hee? (said the foresaid Denyse) he is an old doting foole: which being told to her mistresse, shee purposed to correct her the next
day for it: but it chanced that the next day her mother sent her to London to the market, the wench greatly entreating her mother that shee might not goe, so that she escaped her mistrisses correction. But the Lord in vengeance met with her: for as she returned homeward, sodainly she was so stric∣ken dead all the one side of her being blacke, and buried at Hackney the same night. A terrible example (no doubt) both to old and young; what it is for children to blaspheme the Lord and God; and what it is for parents to suffer their yoong ones to grow vp in blindnesse without nurturing them in the feare of God, and reuerence of his maiesty, and ther∣fore worthy to be remembred of all. In the yeare 510 an Arrian bishop called Olimpius being at Carthage in the bathes reproched and blasphemed the holy and sacred trinitie, and that openly:Paul. Diacon. in the historie of Anastatius. Sabell. Aenead. 8. lib. 2. Anton. Panor. of the acts of Alphonsus Aeneas. Siluius of the acts of Alphonsus. but lightning fell downe from heauen vpon him three times, and he was burnt and consumed therewith. There was also in the time of Al∣phonsus king of Arragon and Sicily in an Isle towards Affri∣ca, a certaine Hermite called Antonius a monstrous and pro∣phane hypocrite, that had so wicked a heart to deuise, and so filthy a throat to belch out vile and iniurious speeches against Christ Iesus and the virgine Mary his mother: but hee was stricken with a most grieuous disease, euen to bee eaten and gnawne in peeces of wormes vntill he died. CHAP. XXXII. Of those that by cursing and denying God giue themselues to the Deuill. AS cōcerning those that are addicted to much cursing, and as if their throats were Hell it selfe, to despightings and reuilings against God (that is blessed for euer) and are so mad as to renounce him and giue themselues to the Deuill: truly they worthily deserue to
be forsakē of God, & giuē ouer to the deuil indeed, to go with him into euerlasting perditiō: which hath ben visibly experien∣ced in our time vpō certain wretched persons, which haue ben caried away by that wicked spirit to whō they gaue thēselues. Luther vpon the 15 chap. of the 1 Epist. to the Corinth.There was vpon a time in Germanie a certaine naughty-pack of a most wicked life, & so euill brought vp, that at eue∣rie word he spake almost, the euil was at the one end; if wal∣king he chanced to tread awry, or to stumble, presētly the de∣uil was in his mouth: wherof albeit he was many times repro∣ued by his neighbours, and exhorted to correct and amend so vile & detestable a vice, yet all was in vaine, continuing ther∣fore this euill and damnable custome, it happened that as he was vpō a time passing ouer a bridge, he fel down, & in his fal gaue these speeches, Hoist vp with a hundred deuils; which he had no sooner spokē, but the deuil whō he called for so oft was at his elbow to strangle him & carry him away with him. Wietus 3. book chap. 17. of the delusion of spirits.A certaine souldior trauailing through Marchia a country of Almaigne, and finding himselfe euill at ease in his iour∣ney, abode in an Inne till hee might recouer his health: and committed to the hostisses custodie certaine money which hee had about him. Now a while after being recouered of his sicknesse hee required his money againe, but she hauing con∣sulted with her husband denied the receit, and therefore the returne therof; and accused him of wrong in demanding that which she neuer receiued: the souldior on the other side fret∣ted amaine & accused her of cousenage; which stir when the good man of the house vnderstood (though priuy to al before) yet dissemblingly tooke his wiues part, and thrust the souldior out of dores: who being throughly chafed with that indignity, drew his sword & ran at the dore with the point therof: wher∣at the host begā to crie, theeues, theeues, saying that he wold haue entred his house by force, so that the poore souldior was taken & cast in prison, and by processe of law ready to be con∣demned to death but the very day wherin this hard sentence was to be pronounced & executed, the deuill entred into the prison & told the souldior that he was condemned to dy, how¦beit
neuertheles if he would giue himself body & soule vnto him, he would promise to deliuer him out of their hands: the prisoner answering, said that he had rather die being innocent & without cause, thē to be deliuered by that means: again the deuil replied, & propounded to him the great danger wherin he was, yea & vsed al cūning means possible to persuade him: but seeing that he lost his labor, he at length left his sute, and promised him both helpe & reuenge vpō his enemies, & that for nothing: aduising him moreouer when he came to iudge∣ment to plead not guilty, & to declare his innocency & their wrong & to entreat the iudge to grant him one in a blew cap that stood by to be his aduocate: (now this one in a blew cap was the deuill himself) the souldior accepting his offer being called to the bar, and endited there of fellony, presently desi∣red to haue his attorney who was there present to plead his cause: thē began the fine & crafty doctor of the laws to plead and defend his client very cunningly, affirming him to be fal∣sly accused, & consequently vniustly condemned, & that his host did withhold his money & had offered him violence: & to proue his assertion, hee reckoned vp euery circumstance in the action, yea the very place where they had hidden the mony. The host on the other side stood in denial very impu∣dētly, wishing the deuil might take him if he had it: then the subtile lawier in the blew cap, looking for no other vantage, left pleading, & fel to laying hold of the host, & carying him out of the sessions house hoisted him into the air so high, that he was neuer after seen nor heard of. And thus was the souldi∣or deliuered from the execution of law most strangely, to the astonishment of all the beholders that were eic witnes∣ses of that which happened to the forsworne & cursing host. In the year of our Lord 1551 at Megalopole neer Voild∣stat it happened in the time of the celebration of the feast of Pentecost, the people being set on drinking & caroussing,Iohn Wierus. that a woman in the cōpany cōmonly named the deuil in her othes: till that he being so often called on came of a sodain, & carried her through the gate aloft into the aire before thē
all, who ran out astonished to see whether hee would tran∣sport her, and found her a while hanging in the aire without the towne, and then falling downe vpon the ground dead. About the same time there liued in a citie of Sauoy one that was both a monstruous swearer, and also otherwise very vicious, who put many good men to much fruitlesse paines, that in regard of their charge emploied themselues often to admonish and reprooue his wicked behauiour, to the end he might amend it: but all in vain, they might as wel cast stones against the wind; for he would not so much as listen to their words, much lesse reforme his manners. Now it fell out that the pestilence being in the city, hee was infected with it, and therefore withdrew himselfe a part with his wife & another kinswoman into a garden which hee had: neither yet in this extremity did the ministers forsake him, but ceased not con∣tinually to exhort him to repentance, & to lay before his eies his faults and offences, to the end to bring him into the right way. But he was so farre from being touched or moued with these godly admonitiōs that he stroue rather to harden him∣selfe more and more in his sinnes. Therefore one day hasting forward his own mishap, as he was swearing & denying God, and giuing himselfe to the Deuill, and calling for him with vehemencie, behold euen the Deuill indeed snatched him vp soddainly, and heaued him into the aire, his wife and kins∣woman looking on, and seeing him flie ouer their heads, being thus swiftly transported, his cap tumbled from his head, and was found at Rosne, but himselfe no man could euer after set eie on. The Magistrate aduertised hereof, came to the place where he was taken to bee better enformed of the truth, ta∣king the witnesse of the two women touching that which they had seene. Here wee may see the strange and terrible e∣uents of Gods iust vengeance vpon such vile; caitifes which doubtlesse are made manifest to strike a feare and terror into the heart of euery swearer and denier of God, (the world be∣ing but too full at this day of such wretches) that are so inspi∣red with Sathan, that they cannot speak but they must name
him, euen him that is both an enemie to God & man, and like a roaring lion runneth and roueth to & fro to deuoure them: not seeking any thing but mans destruction And yet when a∣ny paine assaileth thē, or any trouble disquieteth their minds, or any danger threatneth to oppresse their bodies, desperate∣ly they cal vpon him for aid, whē indeed it were more need∣ful to commend themselues to God and to pray for his grace and assistance, hauing both a commandement so to doe, and a promise adioined, that hee will helpe vs in our necessitie, if we come vnto him by true & hearty praier. It is not therfore without iust cause that God hath propounded and laid open in this corrupt age a Theatre of his iudgements that euery man might be warned thereby. CHAP. XXXIII. More examples of Gods Iudgements vpon cursers. BVt before wee goe to the next comman∣dement we will adioine a few more ex∣amples of this diuellish cursing. Martin Luther hath left registred vnto vs a no∣table example showne vpon a Popish priest that was once a professour of the sincere religion,Ex colliquij Lutheri. and fell away voluntari∣ly vnto papisme, whereof Adam Budissina was the reporter: this man thundered out most bitter curses against Luther in the pulpit at a towne called Ruthnerwald: and amongst the rest, wished that if Luthers doctrine was true, a thunderbolt might strike him to death. Now three daies after, there arose a mighty tempest with thunder and lightning: whereat the cursed priest bearing in himselfe a guilty conscience for that he had vntruly and maliciously spoken, ran hastily into the church, and there fell to his praiers before the altar most de∣uoutly; but the vengeance of God found him out and his hipocrisie, so that he was stroken dead with the lightning, and
albeit they recouered life in him againe, yet as they led him homewards through the churchyard, another flash so set vp∣on him that it burnt him from the crowne of the head to the sole of his foot as blacke as a shoe, so that he died with a ma∣nifest marke of Gods vengeance vpon him. Homil. 26. in hist. passionis.Theodorus Beza reporteth vnto vs two notable histories of his owne knowledge of the seuerity of Gods iudgement vpon a curser and a periurer, the tenour whereof is this: I knew (saith he) in France a man of good parts, well instructed in religion, and a master of a family, who in his anger cursing and bidding the Deuill take one of his children, had present∣ly his wish, for the child was possessed immeadiately with a spirit: from which though by the feruent & continual praiers of the church he was at length released, yet ere hee had fully recouered his health he died. The like we read to haue hap∣pened to a woman whom her husband in anger deuoted with bitter curses to the deuill; for Satā assaulted her presently and robbed her of her wits, so that she could neuer be recouered. Discipulus de tempore, ser∣mon. 116. Periurie lib. 1. cap. 29.Another example (saith he) happened not far hence, euen in this countrie vpon a periurer that forswore himselfe, to the end to deceiue and preiudice another thereby: but hee had no sooner made an end of his false oth, but a greeuous apo∣plexie assailed him, so that without speaking any one word he died within few daies. Iob Fincelius lib. 3. de mirac.In the year of our Lord 1557 the day before good friday, at Forchennum a citie in the bishoprick of Bamburge, there was a certain crooked priest both in body & mind, through age & euil conditions, that could not go but on crutches, yet would needs be lifted into the pulpit to make a sermon, his text was out of the 11 chap. of the first epistle to the Corinthians tou∣ching the Lords supper: whereout taking occasion to defend the papisticall errors & the masse, he vsed these or such like blasphemous speeches: O Paul, Paul, if thy doctrin touching the receiuing the sacrament in both kinds be true, & if it be a wicked thing to receiue it otherwise, then would the deuill might take me: & (turning to the people) if the popes doctrin
concerning this point be not true, then am I the deuils bond∣slaue, neither do I fear to pawn my soule vpō it: these & many other blasphemous words he vsed, till the deuil came indeed transformed into the shape of a tall man black & terrible, sen∣ding before him such a fearful noise and such a wind, that the people supposed that the church would haue fallen on their heads; but he not able to hurt the rest, took away the old priest being his deuoted bondslaue, & caried him so far that he was neuer heard of: the bishop of Rugenstines brother hardly esca∣ped his hands, for he came back to fetch him, but he defēding himselfe with his sword wounded his own body, & very nar∣rowly escaped with his life. Beside after this there were many visions seen about the city, as armies of men ready to enter & surprise them, so that wel was he that could hide himself in a corner. At another time after the like noise was heard in the church whilst they were baptising an infant: & al this for the abominable cursing and blasphemie of the prophane priest. In the yeare of our Lord 1556 at S. Gallus in Heluetia,Iob. Fincelius lib. 2. de mirac. a certaine man that earned his liuing by making clean rough and foule linnen against the sunne, entring a tauerne tasted so much the grape that his wits were drowned, and his tongue so inspired that hee vomited out terrible curses against him∣selfe and others: among the rest he wished, if euer he went in∣to the fields to his old occupation, that the deuil might come & break his neck: but when sleep had conquered drink, & so∣briety restored his senses, he wēt again to his trade remēbring indeed his late wordes, but regarding them not: howbeit the deuill to shew his double diligence, attended on him at his appointed houre in the likenes of a big sworthy man, and as∣ked him if he remembred his promise and vow which he had made the day before, & if it were not lawful for him to break his necke? and withall stroke the poore man trembling with feare ouer the shoulders, that his feet and his hands presently dried vp, so that hee lay there not able to stirre, till by helpe of men he was caried home; the Lord not giuing the deuill so much power ouer him as hee wished himselfe: but yet
permitting him to plague him on this sort, for his amendment and our example. Albert Krantz, chron. , lib. 6.Henry Earle of Schwartburge through a corrup custome vsed commonly to wish he might be drowned in a priuie: and as he wished so it happened vnto him, for he was so serued, & murdered at S. Peters monasterie in Erford, in the year of our Lord, 1148. Cyriac. Span∣genb. in elegan∣tijs veteris A∣dami.The like befell a young courtier at Mansfield, whose cu∣stome was in any earnest asseueration to say the Deuill take me if it be not so: the Deuill indeed tooke him whilest hee slept and threw him out of a high window; where albeit by the good prouidence of God hee caught no great hurt, yet he learnt by experience to bridle his tongue from al such cur∣sed speeches, this being but a tast of Gods wrath that is to fall vpon such wretches as he. Theat. histor.At Oster a village in the Duchy of Megalopole, there chanced a most strange and fearefull example vpon a woman that gaue her selfe to the Deuill both body and soule, and v∣sed most horrible cursings and othes, both against her selfe and others: which detestable manner of behauiour, as at ma∣ny other times, so especially she shewed at a marriage in the foresaid village vpon S. Iohn Baptists day, the whole people exhorting her to leaue off that monstrous villany: but shee nothing bettered continued her course, till all the companie were set at dinner, and very merry. Then loe the Deuill ha∣uing got full possession of her, came in person and transported her into the aire before them all, with most terrible outcries and roarings, & in that sort carried her round about the town, that the inhabitants were ready to die with feare, and by and by tore her in foure peeces, leauing in four seuerall high waies a quarter, that all that came by might be witnesses of her pu∣nishment. And then returning to the marriage, threw her bowels vpon the table before the Maior of the towne with these words: Behold these dishes of meat belong to thee, whome the like destruction awaiteth, if thou doest not amend thy wicked life. The reporters of this hystorie were Iohn Herman the mi∣nister
of the said towne, with the Maior himselfe, and the whole inhabitants, being desirous to haue it knowne to the world for example sake. In Luthers conferences there is mention made of this story following:Luther. diuerse noble men were striuing together at a horse race, and in their course cried the deuil take the last. Now the last was a horse that broke loose, whom the deuill hoisted vp into the aire and took clean away. Which teacheth vs not to call for the deuill, for hee is readie alwaies about vs vncalled and vnlooked for: yea many legions of them compasse vs a∣bout, euen in our best actions to disturbe and peruert vs. A cettaine man not farre from Gorlitz prouided a sump∣tuous supper, & inuited many guests vnto it,Iob. Fincelius. who at the time appointed refusing to come, he in an anger cried, then let all the Deuils in hell come: neither was his wish friuolous; fot a number of those hellish fiends came forthwith, whome he not discerning from men, came to welcome and entertain, but as he tooke them by the hands and perceiued in steed of fingers clawes, all dismaied he ran out of the dores with his wife, and left none in the house but a young infant with a foole sitting by the fire; whome the deuils had no power to hurt, neither any man els, saue the goodly supper, which they made away withall, and so departed. It is notoriously knowne in Oundle a town in Northamp∣tonshire, amongst all that were acquainted with the partie, namely one Hacket, of vvhome more hath beene spoken be∣fore, hovv he vsed in his earnest talke euer to curse himselfe on this manner: If it be not true, then let a visible confusion come vpon me. Now hee wanted no his wish, for hee came to a vi∣sible confusion indeed, as hath ben declared more at large in the 20 chap. of this booke. At Witeberg before Martin Lu∣ther and diuerse other learned men, a woman whose daughter was possessed with a spirit, confessed that by her curse that plague was fallen vpon her, for being angry at a time she bad the deuil take her, & she had no sooner spoken the word but he tooke her indeed, & possessed her in most strange sort.
No whitlesse strange and horrible is that which happened at Neoburge in Germany to a son that was cursed of his mo∣ther in her anger with this curse,Theat. histor. shee praied God shee might neuer see him return aliue, for the same day the yoong man bathing himselfe in the water was drowned, and neuer retur∣ned to his mother aliue according to her vngodly wish. Theat. histor.But aboue all, this is most strange which happened in a Towne of Misina in the yeere of our Lord God 1552 the eleuenth of September, where a cholletick father seeing his sonne slacke about his businesse, wished he might neuer stirre from that place:Let not the strangenes of this example discredit the truth therof: seeing wee read how Lots wife was turned into a pillar of salt, Gen. 19. and Corah with his company swal∣lowed of the earth Num. 16 which are more strange than this. Acts and mo∣numents. pag. 2101. for it was no sooner said but done, his sonne stucke fast in the place, neither by any meanes possible could bee remoued, no not so much as to sit or bend his body: till by the praiers of the faithfull his paines were somewhat mi∣tigated, though not remitted: three yeare he continued stan∣ding with a post at his backe for his ease, and foure yeares sit∣ting, at the end whereof he died. Nothing weakened in his vnderstanding, but professing the faith, and not doubting of his saluation in Christ Iesus. When he was demanded at any time how he did: he answered most vsually, that hee was fa∣stened of God, and that it was not in man, but in Gods mercy for him to be released. Iohn Peter sonne in law to Alexander that cruel keeper of Newgate, being a most horrible swearer and blasphemer, v∣sed commonly to say, If it be not true, I pray God I may rot ere I die: and not in vaine, for he rotted away indeed, & so di∣ed most miserably. Hether we may ad a notable example of a certain yoong gallant that was a monstrous swearer, who riding in the com∣pany of diuerse gentlemen, began to swear and most horribly blaspheme the name of God: vnto whom one of the com∣pany with gentle words, said hee should one day answere for that: the yonker taking snuffe thereat, why said hee takest thou thought for mee?Acts and mo∣numents. pag. 2105. Take thought for thy winding sheet. Well (quoth the other) amend, for death giueth no warning; as soone commeth a lambes skinne to the market as an old
sheepes. Gods wounds (said he) care not thou for me, raging still on this manner worse and worse, till at length passing on their iourney they came riding ouer a great bridge, vpon which this gentleman swearer spurred his horse in such sort, that he sprang cleane ouer with the man on his backe, who as he was going cried, Horse and man and al to the deuill. This terrible storie bishop Ridley preached and vttered at Paules crosse: and one Haines a minister of Cornwall the reprehen∣der of this man was the reporter of it to Maister Fox out of whom I haue drawne it. Refraine then (wretches that you are) your diuellish tongues, leaue off to prouoke the wrath of God any longer against you: forbeare all wicked and cursed speeches, and acquaint your selues as well in word as deed to praise and glorifie God. CHAP. XXXIIII. Punishments for the contempt of the word and the Sacra∣ments: and abuse of holy things. NOw it is another kind of taking the name of God in vain, to despise his words and sacra∣ments; for like as among earthly princes it is accounted a crime no lesse then treason ei∣ther to abuse their pictures, to counterfeit or depraue their seales, to rent, pollute, or cor∣rupt their letter patents, or to vse vnreuerently their messen∣gers, or any thing that cōmeth frō them: So with the prince of heauen it is a sin of high degree, either to abuse his word pro∣phanely, which is the letter patents of our saluation: or handle the sacraments vnreuerētly, which are the seales of his mercy: or to despise his ministers, which are his messēgers vnto vs. And this he maketh known vnto vs not only by edicts & cōman∣demēts, but also by examples of his vēgeance on the heads of the offēders in this case: for the former look what Paul saith, That for the vnworthy receiuing of the Sacraments many
were weake and sicke among the Corinthians, & many slept, how much more then for the abusing & contemning the Sa∣craments?1. Cor. 11.29.30 And the prophet Dauid, That for casting the word of God behind them,Psal. 50.16.17. they should haue nothing to doe with his couenāt: how much more then for prophaning & deriding his word?Exod. 16.8. And Moses (when the people murmured against him, and Aaron saith that their murmurings were not against them which were but ministers, but against the Lord; how much more then is the Lord engaged, when they are scoffed at, derided, & set at naught? hence it is that the Lord denoun∣ceth a woe to him that addeth or taketh away frō the word: and calleth them dogs that abuse such precious pearles.Deut. 4.2. & 12.22. Apoc. 22.18. Prouerb. 30.6. Vide lib. 1. cap. 14. example of the Iews. But let vs come to the examples, wherin the grieuousnesse of this sin will lie more open then by any words can bee expressed. Denterius an Arrian bishop being at Bezantium, as he was a∣bout to baptise one Barbas after his blasphemous maner, say∣ing, I baptise thee in the name of the father through the son in the Holy-ghost. Which forme of words is contrary to the prescript rule of Christ, that bad his disciples to baptize al nations, In the name of the father the son and the Holy-ghost; the water sodenly vanished, so that he could not then bee baptised: wherefore Barbas all amased fled from thence to a church of purer religion, and there was entertained into the church by baptisme.Socrat. lib 7. cap. 17. Socrates in his Ecclesiasticall hysto∣rie reporteth the like accident to haue happened to a Iew who had beene oftentimes baptised, and came to Paulus a Nouatian bishop to receiue the sacrament againe: but the water as before vanished, and his villany being detected hee was banished the church. Opiat. Meltuit. lib. 2. contr. Parenianum. Cent. 4. cap. 6.Vrbanus Farmensis, and Foelix Iducensis, two Donatists by profession, rushing into Thipasa a Citty of Mauritania, commaunded the Eucharist to bee throwne amongst the dogges; but the dogges growing mad thereby, set vpon their owne maisters, and rent them with their teeth as being guiltie of despising the body of Christ: certainely a no∣ble iudgement to condemne the wicked behauiour of those
miscreants, who were so profane, as not onely to refuse the sa∣crament themselues,Vide lib. 1 ca. 17. but also to cast it to their dogs as if it were the vilest and contemptablest thing in the world. Theopompus a Philosopher being about to insert certaine things out of the writings of Moses into his prophane workes, and so to abuse the sacred word of God, was stroken with a frensie; and being warned of the cause therof in a dreame,Ioseph, antiq. lib. 12. cap. 2. by praiers made vnto God recouered his senses againe: this sto∣ry is recorded by Iosephus, as also another of Theodectes a Poet that mingled his Tragedies with the holy Scripture, and was therefore stroken with blindnesse vntill hee had re∣canted his impiety. In a towne of Germany called Itzsith there dwelt a cer∣taine husbandman that was a monstrous despiser and propha∣ner of the word of God and his sacraments:Luther in colo∣quijs. he vpon a time amidst his cups railed with most bitter tearmes vpon a mini∣ster of Gods word, after which going presently into the fields to ouerlooke his sheep, he neuer returned aliue, but was found there dead with his body all scorched and burnt as black as a coale, the Lord hauing giuen him ouer into the hands of the deuill to be thus vsed for his vile prophanesse and abusing his holy things. This D. Iustus Ionas in Luthers conferences re∣porteth to be most true. In the yeare of our Lord 1553 a certaine coblers seruant being brought vp among the professors of the reformed reli∣gion, and hauing receiued the sacrament in both kinds,Philip Melanc. after liuing vnder Poperie, receiued it after their fashion in one kind; but when hee returned to his old maister and was ad∣monished by him to goe againe to the communion as he was wont, then his sleepie conscience awaked, and hee fell into most horrible despaire, crying that hee was the deuils bond∣slaue, and therewithall threw himselfe headlong out of the window, so that with the fall his bowels gushed out of his mouth and he died most miserably. When the great persecution of the Christians was in Per∣sia vnder king Sapor in the yeare of our Lord 347,Sozomen lib. 2. cap. 31. there was
one Miles an holy bishop and constant Martyr, who prea∣ching,Vide lib. r. ca. 16. exhorting, & suffering all manner of torments for the truth of the gospel, could not conuert one soule of the whole citie (whereof he was bishop) to the faith, wherfore in hatred and detestation of it, he forewent it cleane: but after his de∣parture the Lord made them worthily rue their contempt of his word, for he sent the spirit of deuision betwixt king Sapor and thē, so that he came with an army of men & three hun∣dred Eliphants against it and quickly subuerted it, that the very appearence & memorial of a city was quite defaced and rooted out: for certainely this is a sure position, where Gods word is generally despised, & not regarded, nor profited by, there some notable destruction approcheth. Philip Melanc. in collectaneis Manlij.In a certain place there was acted a tragedie of the death and passion of Christ in shew, but indeed of themselues, for hee that plaied Christs part hanging vpon the crosse was wounded to death by him that should haue thrust his sword into a bladder full of blood tied to his side; who with his fall slew another that plaied one of the womens part that lamented vnder the crosse; his brother that was first slaine seeing this, slew the murderer, and was himselfe by order of iustice hanged therfore: so that this tragedie was concluded with four true, not counterfeit deaths, and that by the diuine prouidence of God, who can endure nothing lesse then such prophane and ridiculous handling of so serious and heauenly matters. In the Vniuersitie of Oxford the historie of Christ was also plaied, and cruelly punished: & that not many years since, for he that bore the person of Christ, the Lord stroke him with such a giddinesse of spirit & braine, that he became mad forthwith, crying when he was in his best humour, that God had laid this iudgement vpon him for playing Christ. Three other actors in the same play were hanged for rob∣bing, as by credible report is affirmed. Most lamentable was the iudgement of God vpon one Iohn Apowel (somtimes a seruingman) for mocking & iesting at the word of God: this Iohn Apowell hearing one William
Malden, reading certaine English praiers, mocked him after euery word with cōtrary gauds & flouting termes; insomuch that at last he was terribly afraid, so that his hair stood vpright on his head, and the next day was found besides his wits, cry∣ing night and day without ceasing, The deuill, the deuill,Acts and mo∣numents. pag. 2103. O the deuill of hell, now the deuill of hell, there he goeth, for it seemed to him as the other read Lord haue mercie vpon vs at the end of the praier that the deuill appeared vnto him, and by the permission of God depriued him of his vnderstanding: this is a terrible example for all those that bee mockers at the word of God to warne them (if they do not repent) least the vengeance of God fall vpon them in like manner. Thus wee see how seuerely the Lord punisheth all despisers and prophaners of his holy things, and thereby ought to learne to carrie a most dutifull regard and reuerence to them, as al∣so to note them for none of Gods flocke whosoeuer they be that deride or contemne any part of religion or the ministers of the same. CHAP. XXXV. Of those that prophane the Sabboth day. IN the fourth & last commandement of the first table it is said, Remember to keep holy the sabboth day: by which words it is ordained and enioined vs to seperate one day of seuen from al bodily and seruile labor, not to idle∣nes & loosenes, but to the worship of God, which is spirituall and whole∣some. Which holy ordināce whē one of the childrē of Israel in contempt broke, as they were in the wildernesse,Numb. 15. by gathe∣ring stickes vpon the sabboth, he was brought before Moses & Aaron & the whole congregation, & by them put in prison,
vntill such time as they knew the Lords determination con∣cerning him, knowing well that he was guiltie of a most grie∣uous crime: And at length by the Lords owne sentence to his seruant Moses, condemned to be stoned to death without the host, as was speedily executed: wherin the Lord made known vnto them both how vnpleasant & odious, the prophanation of his Sabboth was in his sight, and how seriously and care∣fully euery one ought to obserue and keepe the same. Now albeit that this strict obseruation of the sabboth was partly ceremoniall vnder the law, and that in Christ Iesus wee haue an accomplishment as of all other, so also of this ceremonie; hee being the true sabboth and assured repose of our soules: yet seeing wee still stand in need of some time for the instru∣ction and exercise of our faith, it is necessarie that we should haue at least one day in a weeke to occupie our selues in and about those holy and godly exercises which are required at our hands: and what day fitter for that purpose then sunday? Which was also ordained in the Apostles time for the same end, and called by them Des dominicus (that is) The day of our Lord: Because vpon that day he rose from the dead, to wit, the morrow after the Iewes sabboth being the first day of the weeke: to which sabboth it by cōmon consent of the church succeeded, to the end that a difference might be put betwixt Christians & Iews. Therfore it ought now religiously to be obserued, as it is also commanded in the ciuil law, with expresse prohibition not to abuse this day of holy rest in vn∣holy sports & pastimes,Cod. lib. 3. tit. 12. leg. 10. of euill example. Neuerthelesse in steed hereof, we see the euill emploiance, abuse, and disorder of it for the most part: for beside the false worship and plen∣tifull superstitions which raigne in so many places, all manner of disorder and dissolutenesse is in request & beareth sway in these daies: this is the day for tipling houses and tauernes to be fullest fraught with ruffians, and ribalds, and for villanous and dishonest speech, with lecherous and baudie songes to be most rise: this is the day when gourmandise and drunken∣nesse shew themselues most frollick, & othes & blasphemies
flie thickest and fastest: this is the day when dicing, dancing, whoring, and such noisome and dishonest demeanours, mu∣ster their bands and keep ranke togither: from whence fome out enuies, hatreds, displeasures, quarrels, debates, bloodshed∣dings and murders, as daily experience testifieth. All which things are euident signes of Gods heauy displeasure vpon the people where these abuses are permitted, and no difference made of that day wherin God would be serued, but is cōtra∣rily most dishonored by the ouerflow of wciked examples. And that it is a thing odious and condemned of God, these examples following will declare. Gregory Turonensis repor∣teth, that a husbandman who vpon the Lords day went to plow his field; as he cleansed his plowshare with an iron, the iron stucke so fast into his hand, that for two yeeres hee could not be deliuered from it, but carried it about continually to his exceeding great paine and shame.Discipulus de tempore ser. 117. Another profane fel∣low without any regard of God or his seruice, made no con∣science to conuey his corne out of the field on the Lords day in sermon time; but hee was well rewarded for his godlesse couetousnesse, for the same corne which with so much care he gathered togither, was consumed with fire from heauen, with the barne and all the graine that was in it. A certaine noble man vsed euery Lords day to go a hun∣ting in the sermon while,Theatr. hist. which impietie the Lord punished with this iudgement, he caused his wife to bring forth a child with a head like a dog, that seeing hee preferred his dogs be∣fore the seruice of God, he might haue one of his owne get∣ting to make much of. At Kimstat a town in France,Iob. Fincel. lib. 3. de mirac. there liued in the yere of our Lord 1559, a certaine couetous woman, who was so eager vp∣on the word and greedy of gaine, that she would neither fre∣quent the Church to heare the word of God her selfe, nor suffer any of her family to do it, but continually abode labou∣ring and toiling about drying and pilling flax, and doing other domesticall businesses: neither would shee be reclaimed by her neighbors who admonished and dehorted her from such
vntimely workes. One Sabbath day as they were thus busily occupied, fire seemed to issue among the flaxe without doing any hurt: the next Sabbath day it tooke fire indeed, but was quickly extinct: for all this shee continued obstinate in her prophanenesse euen the third Sabbath, when the flax againe taking fire, could not be quenched till it had burnt her & two of her children to death; for though they were recouered out of the fire aliue, yet the next day they all three died. And that which was most to be wondred at, a young infant in the cradle was taken out of the midst of the flame without any hurt. Thus God vseth to exercise his iudgements vpon the contemners of his commandements. Cent. 12. cap. 6.The Centuriators of Magdeburge, intreating of the man∣ners of Christians, made report out of another history, that a certaine husbandman (in Parochia Gemilacensi) grinding corne vpon the Lords day, the meale began to burne, Anno Dom. 1126: which though it might seeme to be a thing more casuall,Ecclesiast. hist. Cent. 12. ibid. yet they set it down as a iudgement of God vpō him for breaking the Sabbath. As also of that which they speake in the same place of one of the kings of Denmark, who when as he (contrary to the admonition of the priests, who desired him to defer it) would needs vpō the day of Pentecost make war with his enemy, died in the battell. But that may be bet∣ter known to vs all, which is written in the 2 book of Macha∣bes of Nicanor the Iewes enemy, who would needs set vpon them on the Sabbath, from which whē other the Iewes that were compelled to be with him could no way dissuade him, he was slaine in the battell, and most miserably but deserued∣ly handled, euen the parts of his body shamefully dismem∣bred, as in that history you may read more at large. Concil. Paris. lib. 1. cap. 50.Therfore in the councill at Paris euery one labouring to persuade vnto a more religious keeping of the Sabbath day, when they had iustly cōplained, that (as many other things) so also the obseruation of the Sabbath was greatly decaied through the abuse of Christian liberty; in that men too much followed the delights of the world, and their owne worldly
pleasures, both wicked and dangerous: they further adde, Multi nanque nostrum visu, multi etiam quorundam relatu di∣dicimus, &c. For many of vs haue bene eye witnesses, many haue intelligence of it by the relation of others, that some men vpon this day being about their husbandry, haue beene stricken with thunder, some haue beene maimed and made lame, some haue had their bodies (euen bones and all) burnt in a moment with visible fire, and haue consumed to ashes, and many other iudgements of God haue bene, and are dai∣ly: whereby it is declared, that God is offended with the dis∣honor of so high a day. And our time hath not wanted exam∣ples in this kind, whosoeuer hath obserued them, when some∣times in the faires vpon this day the wares haue swom in the streets; somtimes the scaffolds at plaies haue fallen downe, to the hurting & endangering of many, somtime one thing, som∣time another haue fallen out: and that which is most strange within these late yeres, a whole town hath bene twise burnt, for the breach of the Sabbath by the inhabitants. The iust report thereof, because I probably know not, I passe ouer here to set downe, vntill such time as I shall be better instructed. Famous and memorable also is that example which hap∣pened at London in the yeere 1583 at Paris garden, where, vpon the Sabbath day, were gathered togither (as accusto∣mably they vsed) great multitudes of prophane people to behold the fport of bearbaiting, without respect of the Lords day, or any exercise of religiō required therin: which profane impiety the Lord that he might chasten in some sort, & shew his dislike therof, he caused the scaffolds suddenly to breake, and the beholders to tumble headlong downe: so that to the number of eight persons men & women, were slain therwith, besides many others which were sore hurt & bruised to the shortning of their daies. Surely a friendly warning to such as more delight themselues with the cruelty of beasts & vaine sports, than with the works of mercy & religion, the fruits of a true faith, which ought to be the sabbath daies exercise. And thus much for the examples of the first table, wherof if some
seeme to exceed credit, by reason of the strangenes of them, yet let vs know, that nothing is impossible to God; and that he doth often worke miracles to controll the obstinate impi∣etie and rebellion of mortall men against his commaunde∣ments. Besides, there is not one example here mentioned, but it hath a credible or probable authour for the auoucher of it. Let vs now out of all this that hath beene spoken, ga∣ther vp this wholsome lesson, to loue God with all our heart and affection, to the end wee may worship him, inuocate his holy name, and repose all the confi∣dence of our saluation vpon him alone through Christ Iesus, seeking by pleasing and obey∣ing his will, to set forth his glorie, and render him due thankes for all his benefits. FINIS.
The second Booke. CHAP. I. Of rebellious and stubborne children towards their parents. WEe haue seene in the former booke what punishments they haue in∣curred, that either malitiously or otherwise haue transgressed and broken the commandements of the first Table: Now it follow∣eth to discouer the chastisements which God hath sent vpon the transgressours of the second Ta∣ble. And first concerning the first commandement thereof, which is, Honour thy father and mo∣ther, that thy daies may be prolonged in the land which the Lord thy God hath giuen thee. Cham, one of old Noahs sonnes,Gen. 9. was guilty of the breach of this commandement; who instead of perfourming that reuerence to his father which hee ought, (and that presently after the deluge, which being yet fresh in memory, might haue taught him to walke in the feare of God) came so short of his duty, that when he saw his naked∣nesse hee did not hide it, but mocked and iested at it: for which cause, hee was cursed both of his father and of God in the person of his youngest sonne Chaanan, and made a seruant to the seruants of his brethren;Num 33. Deut. 7. which curse was fulfilled in his posterity the Canaanites, who beeing forsaken of God,
were rooted vp and spued out of their land, because of their sinnes and abominations. Marueilous strange was the malice of Absolom to rebell so furiously against his father Dauid, as to wage warre against him:2. Sam. 15. which hee did with all his strongest endeauours, with∣out sparing any thing that might further his proceedings: in∣somuch that he grew to that outrage and madnesse through the wicked and pernicious counsell of Achitophel, that hee shamed not villanously to commit incest with his fathers concubines,2. Sam. 16. and pollute his bed euen before the eies of the multitude: by which meanes being become altogither odi∣ous and abominable,2. Sam. 18. he shortly after lost the battell, where∣in though himselfe receiued no hurt nor wound, yet was hee not therefore quit, but being pursued by Gods iust iudge∣ment, fell vnwittingly into the snare which he had deserued: for as hee rode along the forrest to saue himselfe from his fa∣thers armie, his mule carrying him vnder a thicke oake, left him hanging by the haire vpon a bow betwixt heauen and earth, vntill being found by Ioab hee was wounded to death with many blowes. Whereby euery man may plainly see, that God wanteth no meanes to punish sinners when it pleaseth him, but maketh the dumbe and senslesse creatures instruments of his vengeance: for hee that had escaped the brunt and daunger of the battell (and yet not hauing there∣fore escaped the hand of God) was by a bruit beast, brought vnder a senslesse tree which God had appointed to catch hold of him, as an executioner of his iust iudgement: which if wee consider, is as straunge and wonderfull an accident as may possible happen; and yet such an one as God himselfe prouided to punish this wicked, proud, and rebellious wretch withall: for seeing his outrage and villany was so great, as to rebell against his father, and so good and kind a father towards him as hee was, it was most iust that hee should en∣dure so vile a punishment. Beside, herein God would doubt∣lesse lay open to the eies of all the world, a fearefull specta∣cle of his iudgements against wicked and disobedient chil∣dren,
thereby to terrifie the most impudent and malicious wtetches that liue, from this horrible sinne. And for the same cause it was his pleasure, that that wicked and false Achito∣phel should fall into extreame ignominy and confusion for forsaking Dauid, and setting forward with counsell and pre∣sence young Absolom against his father; for which cause with despaire he hung himselfe. Now by this example it is easie to perceiue how vnpleasant this sinne is in Gods sight, and how much he would haue euery man to hate and detest it, see∣ing that nature her selfe teacheth and instructeth vs so farre, as to yeeld duty and obedience vnto those that begat, nou∣rished, and brought vs vp. Notwithstanding all this, yet is the world full of ill adui∣sed and ill nourtured youth, that are little lesse disobedient vnto their parents then Absolom was, as Adramalech and Sa∣rasar that slew their father Sennacherib as he was worshipping in the temple of Nisroth his god: but whereas they looked for the soueraignty, they lost the benefite of subiection, and were banished into Armenia, their brother Esarhaddon reig∣ning in their stead. Gregory of Tours maketh mention of one Crannius the sonne of Clotarius king of France,Greg. of Tours 4. booke. who hauing conspired trea∣cherously, and raised warre against his father, togither with the Earle of Britaine his supporter, were both vanquished and put to flight; but the Earle was slaine in the pursute: the Prince himselfe also (thinking to escape by sea, where lay prouided certaine shippes ready to receiue him) was in the midde way ouertaken togither with his wife and children, whome hee purposed to make partakers of his fortune, and were all togither (by the expresse commaundement of his father) shut vp in a little house, and there burned togither. In this wise did Clotarius reuenge the treacherie and rebel∣lion of his sonne after a more seuere, cruell, and fierce man∣ner then king Dauid did, who would haue saued his sonne Absoloms life, notwithstanstanding all his wickednes, & ma∣licious and furious rebellion: but this man contrariwise being
bereft of all fatherly affection, would vse no compassion tow∣ards his sonne, but commanded so cruell an execution to be perfourmed not only vpon him but vpon his daughter in law also and their children, perchance altogither innocent and guiltlesse of that crime. A very rare and strange example, see∣ing it is cōmonly seene, that grandfathers vse more to cherish and cocker their childrens children than their own. Therfore we must thinke, that it was the prouidence of God to leaue behind a notable example of his most iust and righteous se∣ueritie against disobedient and rebellious children, to the end to amaze and scare all others from enterprising the like. Philip Comi∣neus in the reign of Lewis the twelfth, chap. 63.Philip Comineus hath recorded the treacherous tragedy of a most wicked and cruel sunne called Adolphus (for the world waxeth euery day worse then other) that came in an euening suddenly to take his father the Duke of Gilderland prisoner euen as he was going to bed, and would not giue him so much liberty as to pull on his hose (for he was bare legged) but car∣ried him away in all hast, making him march on foot with∣out breeches fiue long Almaine miles in a most cold wea∣ther: and then clapt him vp in the bottome of a deepe tower, where there was no light saue by a little window, and there kept him close prisoner sixe moneths togither. After which cruell fact, he himselfe was taken prisoner in like manner, and carried bound to Namur, where hee lay a long time, vntill the Gaunts repriued him forth, and led him with them a∣gainst Tournay, where he was slaine: in the while of his im∣prisonment, his father yeelding vnto nature, disinherited him of all his goods, for his vile ingratitude and vnnatural cruelty, and left the succession of his dukedome to the Duke of Burgundy. In the yeere of our Lord 1461, in a village called Iuchi neere to Cambray,Enguerr. de Monstr. vol. 2. there dwelt a certaine man (or rather a beast) that in a great rage threw his owne mother out of his dores thrise in one day, and the thitd time told her in furie, that hee had rather see his house on fire and burnt to coales, then that she should abide there but one day longer. It hap∣pened
that the very same day according to his cursed speech his house was indeed fired, but how or whence no man could iudge: and the fire was so fierce that it consumed to ashes not onely that house, but also twelue other houses adioining, which was an euident figure of Gods iust iudgement in pu∣nishing so vile and vnnaturall a deed with fire: seeing he de∣serued at the least to loose his house for banishing her out of it, that had borne him in her belly, and nourished him with the milke of hir paps. In this place I may fitly insert two memorable examples of the same subiect,Alex. ab Alex. geneal. dier. lib. 4. cap. 14. gathered by an author of credit & fame sufficient to this effect. It is not long (saith he) since a friend of mine a man of a great spirit and worthy to bee beleeued, recounted to me a very strange accident which hee said hap∣pened to himselfe, and proued his saying by the testimony of many witnesses, which was this; that being vpon a time at Naples at a kinsmans and familiars house of his, hee heard by night the voice of a man crying in the street for aid, which caused him to rise and light a candle and run out to see what the matter was: being come out of the dores he perceiued a cruell and ougly shaped Deuill striuing with all his force to catch and get into his clouches a yoong man that stroue on the other side to defend himselfe, & for feare raised that out∣crie which hee had before heard: the yoong man seeing him ran to him forthwith, & catching fast hold by his clothes, and pitifully crying to God, would in no case let goe his hold vn∣till his cruell enemie forsooke him: and being brought into the house all dismaied and beside himselfe, would not let goe his hold vntill hee came to his sences againe out of that exceeding feare. The cause of which assault was, hee had led all his time a most wicked life, and had beene a contemner of God and a rebell against his parents, vsing vile railing and bitter speeches against them, in such sort that in stead of blessing they had laid a curse vpon him: and this is the first example. Concerning the second I will also set downe the Authors
owne words as followeth: of all the strange things (sayth he) that euer I heard report of, that which happened not long since at Rome is most worthy to be remembred, of a certain yoong man of Gabia borne of a base and poore familie, but endued with a a terrible and furious nature, and addicted to a loose & disordinate life. This gallant picking a quarrell with his owne father in his anger reuiled him with most grosse and reprochfull tearmes: In which mad fits, as one whol∣ly giuen ouer to the Deuill, hee purposely departed to Rome to practise some naughtie deuise against his father: but his ghostly father the Deuill met with him in the way vnder the shape of a cruell and ougly fellow with a thicke bushy beard and head hanging disorderly, and clothes al rent and tottered, who (as they walked together) enquired of him why hee was so sad. He answered that there had passed some bitter speeches betwixt his father and him, and now hee de∣uised to worke him some mischiefe. The deuill by & by like a crafty knaue soothed him vp and said; that he also vpon the like occasion went about the same practise, and desired that they might pursue both their voiage & enterprise together: it was soone agreed vpon betwixt them, being like to like as the Prouerbe goeth. Therefore being arriued at Rome, and lodged at the same Inne, one bed did serue them both, where whilest the yoong man securely & soundly slept, the old ma∣licious knaue watching his oportunity caught him by the throat to strangle him: whereat the poor wretch awoke, and cried for help to God, so that the wicked spirit was constrai∣ned to forsake him without performing his purpose, and to flie out at the chamber with such force & violēce, that the house roofe crackt & the tiles clattered downe abundantly. The host of the house being awaked with the noise, cried out to know what the matter was, & running into the chāber where this noise was with a candle in his hand, found the poor yoong man all alone betwixt dead and aliue, of whom (recouered) he learnt out the whole truth as hath beene told: but he af∣ter this terrible accident repented him of his wicked life, and
was touched with the sence of his greeuous sinne so nearely, that euer after hee led a more circumspect and honest life. Thus much we find written in that author. Henry the fift inspired with the furies of the Pope of Rome made war vpon his father Henry the fourth,Philip. Melanc. lib. 4. chron. vexing him with cruell & often battels, and not ceasing till he had spoiled him of his Empire, & till the bishop of Mentz had prowdly and insolently taken from him his emperiall ornaments euen in his presence: but the Lord in recompence of his vnnaturall dealing made him and his army a prey vnto his enemies the Saxons, and to flie before them, stirring vp also the Pope of Rome to be as greeuous a scourge vnto him, as he had beene before time to his father. Now as the ambition of a king∣dome was the cause of this mans ingratitude, so in the ex∣ample following pride and disdaine ruled, and therefore hee is so much the more to be condemned, by how much a king∣dome is a stronger cord to draw men to vice then a mans own affections. There was (saith Manlius) an old man crooked with age,In collectan. distressed with pouerty, and almost pined with hunger, that had a son rich, strong, & fat, of whom he entreated no gold or siluer or possessions, but food & sustenance for his belly, and clothes for his back, but could not obtaine it at his hands: for his prowd heart exalted with prosperity, thought it a shame & discredit to his house to be born of so poor & base a paren∣tage, & therefore not only denied him reliefe, but also disclai∣med him from being his father, & chased him away with bit∣ter and crabbed reproches. The poore old man thus cruelly handled let teares fall as witnesses of his giefe, and depar∣ted comfortlesse from his Tygre-minded sonne. But the Lord that gathereth vp the teares of the innocent, looked downe from heauen in iustice, and sent a furie into the sences and vnderstanding of this monstrous sonne, that as hee was void of nature and compassion, so he might be void of reason and discretion for euer after.
Another not so cruell and disdainefull as the former, yet cruell and disdainefull enough to plucke downe vengeance vpon his head,Manlius in col∣lectan. would not see his father beg indeed, nor yet abiure him as the other did; but yet vndertaking to keep him vsed him more like a slaue then a father, for what should bee too deare for him that gaue vs life? Yet euery good thing was too deare for this poore father. Vpon a time a daintie morsell of meat was vpon the bord to bee eaten, which as soone as he came in hee conuaied away, and foisted in cour∣ser vittailes in the roome. But marke what his dainties turned to: when the seruant went to fetch it againe, hee found in steed of meat,Fides fit apud Authorem. snakes; and of sauce, serpents; to the great ter∣ror of his conscience: but that which is more, one of the serpents leaped in his face, and catching hold by his lip hung there till his dying day, so that hee could neuer feed himselfe, but hee must feed the serpent withall. And this badge carried he about as a cognisance of an vnkind and vn∣gratefull sonne. Moreouer this is another iudgement of God, that cōmon∣ly as children deale with their parents, so doe their children deale with them: & this in the law of proportion is most iust, & in the order of punishing most vsuall: for the proofe wher∣of as experience daily teacheth so one example or two I wil subioine.Theat. histor. It is reported how a certaine vnkind & peruerse son beat his aged father vpon a time, and drew him by the haire of his head to the threshold: who when he was old was like∣wise beaten of his sonne, and drawne also by the haire of the head not to the threshold, but out of dores into the durt; and how he should say he was rightly serued, if he had left him at the threshold as he left his father, and not dragged him into the streets which he did not to his: thus did his owne mouth beare record of his impietie, & his own conscience condemn him before God and men. Guiliel. Lugdi.Another old man being persuaded by his sonne (that had married a young wife) with faire and sugred promises of kindnesses and contentments to surrender his goods
and lands vnto him, yeelded to his request, and found for a space all thinges to his desire:Discipulus de temp. but when his often coughing annoied his young and daintie wife, hee first remooued his lodging from a faire high chamber to a base vnder roome, and after shewed him many other vnkind and vnchildish parts: and lastly when the old man asked for clothes, hee bought foure elnes of clothes, two whereof he bestowed vpon him, and reserued the other two for himselfe. Now his yoong sonne marking this niggardise of his father towards his grandfather, hid the two elles of cloth, and being asked why hee hid them, (whether by ingeniousnesse of wit, or instinct of God) he answered to the end to reserue them for his father, against hee was old, to be a co∣uering for him. Which answere touched his father so neere, that euer after hee shewed himselfe more louing and obsequious to his father then hee did before. Two great faults, but soone and happily amended. Would it might bee an example to all children if not to mitigate, yet at least to learne them to feare how to deale roughly and crookedly with their parents, seeing that God punisheth sinne with sinne, and sinners in their owne kind, and measu∣reth the same measure to euerie man which they haue mea∣sured vnto others.George Lanter. de disciplina li∣berorum. The like wee read of another that proui∣ded a trough for his old decrepite vnmannerly father to eate his meat in: who being demanded of his sonne also to what vse that trough should serue, answered for his grandfather: What (quoth the child) and must wee haue the like for you when you are old? Which words so abashed him that hee threw it away forthwith. At Millan there was an obstinate and vngodly sonne that whē he was admonished by his mother of some fault which hee had committed, made a wrie mouth,Theat. histor. and pointed his fingers at her in scorne and derision. Whereat his mother bing angrie,Mandat. 3. Cursing. lib. 1. cap. 33. wished that he might make such a mouth vpon the gallows. Neither was it a vaine wish, for within few daies he was taken with a theft, and condemned by law to be han∣ged,
and being vpon the ladder was perceiued to wryth his mouth in griefe, after the same fashion which hee had done before to his mother in derision. Henry the second of that name king of England sonne of Geffrey Plantagenet and Maud the Empresse,Stow. chron. after hee had raigned twentie yeares, was content to admit his yoong sonne Henrie (married to Margaret the French kings daugh∣ter) into participation of his crowne, but he like an vnna∣turall sonne to requite his fathers loue, sought to dis∣possesse him of the whole; for by inciting the King of Fraunce and certaine other Nobles, hee tooke armes and raised deadly warre against his owne naturall father: betwixt whome diuerse strong battailes being fough∣ten, as well in England by the Deputies and friends of both parties, as also in Normandie, Poytou, Guyan, and Brittaine; the victorie alwaies enclined to the fa∣ther, so that the rebellious sonne with his allies were constrained to bend to his fathers will, and to desire peace, which hee gently granted, and forgaue his offence. How∣beit the Lord for his disobedience did not so lightly par∣don him, but because his hasty mind could not tarrie for the crowne till his fathers death, therefore the Lord cut him short of it altogether, causing him to die sixe yeares before his father, being yet but yoong, and like to liue long. Languet. chron.Lothair King of Soyssons in Fraunce committed the rule of the Prouince of Guyan to his eldest sonne Cramiris, who when (contrary to the mind of his father) he oppressed the people with exactions and was reclaimed home, hee like an vngratious and impious sonne, fled to his vncle Childebert, & prouoked him to war vpon his owne father, wherein he him∣selfe was by the iust vengeance of God, taken & burned with wife and children to death. Leuit. 20.Furthermore it is not (doubtles) but to a very good end e∣nacted in the law of God that he which curseth his father or mother shold dy the death, & that rebellious childrē & such
as be incorrigable, should at the instance and pursute of their owne parents by order of law be stoned to death. As chil∣dren by all these examples ought not onely to learne to feare to displease and reuile their parents, but also to fear and reue∣rence them, least that by disobedience they kindle the fire of Gods wrath against thē: so likewise on the other side parents are here aduertised to haue great care in bringing vp and in∣structing their children in the fear of God and obedience to his will; least for want of instruction and correction on their part, they themselues incurre a punishment of their carelesse negligence in the person of their children. And this is proo∣ued by experience of the men of Bethel,2. King. 2. of whose chil∣dren two and fortie were torne in peeces by beares, for that they had beene so euill taught as to mocke the ho∣ly Prophet Elizeus in calling him bald pate.1. Sam. 2.4 Heli like∣wise the high Priest was culpable of this fault, for hauing two wicked and peruerse sonnes, whome no feare of God could restraine, being discontent with that honourable portion of the sacrifices allotted them by God, like fa∣mished and insatiable wretches fell to share out more than was their due, and by force to rauen all that which by faire meanes they could not get: And that which is worse, to pollute the holy Tabernacle of God with their filthie Whoredomes,Contempt of holy things lib. 1. cap. 34. in such sort that the Religion of God grew in disgrace through their prophane dealings. And albeit that it may seeme that their father did his dutie in some sort when hee admonished and reprooued them: yet it is manifest by the reprehension of the man of God, that hee did no part of that at all, or if hee did, yet it was in so careles loose & cold maner, vsing more lenitie thē he ought, or lesse seueritie thē was necessary; that God turned their de∣structions (whē they were slain at the ouerthrow of Israel by the Philistims) to bee his punishment: for vnderstanding the doleful news of his sons death & the arks taking at once, he fel backwards from his stoole, and burst his neck, being old and heauy euen fourscore and eighteene yeares of age, not able
either to helpe or stay himselfe. Lib. 2. cap. 10. de in titut. christ. fami.Ludouicus Viues saith, that in his time a certaine woman in Flaunders did so much pamper and cocker vp two of her sonnes euen against her husbands will, that shee would not suffer them to want money or any thing which might fur∣nish their riotous life, both in drinking, banquetting & dicing; yea she would steale from her husband to minister vnto thē: but as soone as her husband was dead, shee was iustly pla∣gued in them both, for they fell from rioting to robbing, (which two vices are commonly linked together) and for the same one of thē was executed by the sword, & the other by the haltar, shee her selfe looking on as a witnesse of their de∣structions, whereof her conscience told her that her indul∣gence was the chiefest cause. Hether may wee referre that common and vulgar story, and I suppose verie true which is almost in euery childs mouth, of him that going to the gal∣lowes desired to speake with his mother in her eare ere hee died,Cyriac. Spang. and when she came vnto him, in stead of speaking bit off her eare with his teeth, exclaiming vpon her as the causer of his death, because shee did not chastise him in his youth for his faults, but by her flatteries established him in vice, which brought him to this wofull end: & herein she was doubly pu∣nished, both in her sons destruction & her own infamy, wher∣of shee carried about her a continuall marke. This ought to bee a warning to all parents to looke better to the educati∣on of their children, and to root out of them in time all e∣uill and corrupt manners, least of small sprigs they grow to branches, and of qualities to habites, and so either be hardly done of; or at least depraue the whole body & bring it to de∣struction: but aboue all to keepe them from idlenesse & vain pleasures, the discōmodity and mischiefe wherof, this present example wil declare: At a towne called Hannuel in Saxonie the Deuill transforming himselfe into the shape of a man,Iob Fincel. lib. de miracu. exercised many iugling trickes and pretty pastimes to delight yoong men and maids withall; and indeed to draw after him daily great companies, one day they followed him out of the
citie gates vnto a hill adioyning, where hee plaid a iuggling tricke in deed with them, for he carried them all away with him, so that they were after neuer heard of. This history is recorded in the annales of the forenamed city, and auouch∣ed to be most true, being a notable and fearefull admonition to all parents to set their children to learning and instructi∣on, and to withdraw them from all such vaine and foolish pastimes. CHAP. II. Of those that rebell against their Superiours. NOw as it is a thing required by law and reason, that children beare that honour and reuerence to their naturall parents which is commanded: so it is as necessary by the same respect, that all sub∣iects perfourme that duty of ho∣nor & obedience to their Lords, Princes, and Kings, which is not derogatory to the glory of God: and the rather, because they are, as it were, their fathers, in supplying that duty towards their subiects which fathers owe their children: as namely in maintaining their peace & tran∣quility in earthly things, and keeping them vnder the disci∣pline of Gods Church, to which two ends they were ordai∣ned.Rom. 13. For this cause the scripture biddeth euery man to be sub∣iect to the higher powers, not so much to auoid the punish∣ment which might befall the contrary, as because it is agree∣able to the will of God. And in another place, To honour the king; and, To giue vnto Caesar that which is Caesars,1. Pet. 2. Matth. 22. Exod. 22. as vnto God that which is Gods. So also in Moses law we are forbidden to detract from or speake euill of the magistrate, or to curse the ruler of the people. Yet for all this the children of Israel were not afraid ma∣ny times to commit this sinne, but then especially when they
charged Moses with conspiring the murder of those rebels that (vnder Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, captaines of that en∣terprise) set themselues against him and Aaron;Num. 16. whome not hee, but God for their pride and stubbornnesse, had rooted out and destroied: and thus they backbited and slaundered Moses, and mutined against him being their soueraigne ma∣gistrate and conductour, that so meekely and iustly had brought them ought of Aegypt, euen by the speciall com∣mission of almighty God. But the fury of Gods displeasure was so stirred vp against them for this their fact, that they were scourged with a most grieuous plague, whereof died a∣bout foure thousand and seuen hundred persons. In the time of king Dauids flight from Absolom, who pur∣sued him to bereaue him of his kingdome,2. Sam. 16. there was one Se∣mei a Ieminite, that in his wicked and peruerse humour, in stead of seruice due vnto his soueraigne, especially in that ex∣tremitie, not only presented not himselfe vnto him as a sub∣iect;Mandat. 3. Cursers, lib. 1. cap. 33. but as a railer, cursed him with most reprochfull termes, as of murderer, and wicked man, and also threw stones at him and his followers in most despightfull maner: for which his malicious and rebellious act, though whilst Dauid liued, he was not once called in question: yet was he not exempted from punishment therefore: for in the end his wickednesse fel vpon his owne head, and destruction ouertooke him by de∣sert of another fault,1. King. 2. at the commandement of Salomon. 2. Sam. 20.The punishment of Shiba the sonne of Bichri tarried not all so long, who hauing also with a proud and audacious heart stirred vp the greatest part of Israel to rebell against Dauid then when he thought to haue beene most at quiet, enioyed not long his disloiall enterprise, for being speedily pursued by Dauids seruants, and besieged in the citie Abell, his head was cut off by the citizens, and throwen ouer the wall as a iust re∣ward for his rebellious act. But let vs passe ouer these sacred histories & come to pro∣phane, yet probable and more neare examples. When Ca∣millus besieged the Phalischi,Liu. lib. 5. a people in Hitruria, neare to
mount Floscon, a schoolmaster of the citie, who had the rule ouer the chiefe mens sonnes, both touching instruction and gouernance, led them out of the city gates one day in shew to walke, but indeed to betray them into Camillus hands: which vnfaithfull dealing Camillus did not only mislike, but detest & refuse, thinking it an vnhonest part by such sinister meanes to bring euen his enemies in subiection: And therefore repro∣uing the trustlesse schoolmaster, & binding his hands behind his backe, he gaue euery one of his schollers a rod with com∣mandement to whip him backe vnto their parents, whom he had pretended so to deceiue. A most noble act in Camillus (would we could find the like amongst Christians) & a most deserued punishment of the schoolemaster (would no traitor might be serued better.) Neither might that worthy Roman repent his deed, for the Phalischi in admiration and loue of this notable iustice, freely yeelded themselues and their ci∣tie to him which otherwise in long time and without great effusion of blood he could not haue atchieued. Did Tarpeia the daughter of Sp. Tarpeius speed any better when shee betraied the tower whereof her father was the ouerseer, to Tatius king of the Sabines,Liu. lib. 1. who at that season besieged Rome, vpon condition of a summe of gold, or as o∣ther writers say, of all that the souldiers wore on theit left hands? No verily, for the Sabines (assoone as they had attai∣ned their purpose) ouerwhelmed her with their left hand gifts, to wit, their shields, and not their rings and bracelets which shee hoped: to the end to leaue an example to the posterity, how no promise nor oth ought to be of force to traitours to keepe them from punishment. Neither did those noble young men of Rome,Tit. Liu. amongst whome were the consull Brutus sonnes, come to any better issue, when they conspired to receiue king Tarquinius into the city by night, who by the vertue and valour of their father was worthily expulsed: for their secret and wicked counsell being bewraied to the Consuls Iunius and Pub. Valerius, by Vindicio a bondslaue, they were apprehended, hauing letters
about them written to Tarquinius to the same effect: and be∣ing condemned, were first shamefully scourged with roddes, and after executed to death. Thucyd. lib. 1.Pausanius king of Sparta, hauing conspited with the Per∣sians against his owne countrey, and as it were, offered vio∣lence to his owne bowels, fled into the sanctuarie of Pallas for reliefe,Aelian. lib. 9. when hee saw the Ephori to go about to call him in question for his treason. Now whereas it was religion to take him from thence by violence, they agreed to shut him vp there continually, and so to pine him to death. Which when his mother vnderstood, shee was the first person that brought a stone to stoppe vp the dores to hinder him from getting forth, and therein shewed a notable example of god∣ly cruelty to her child, and cruell pietie to her countrey: ap∣proouing that saying of Aristippus, who beeing demaunded why hee neglected his sonne being borne of his body? an∣swered, Doe wee not cast from vs lice and flegme which are also bredde of our bodies? insinuating, that they which haue nothing to commend them to their parents, but gene∣ration, are not to be esteemed as children; much lesse they that degenerate. When Brennus captaine of the Gaules, brother to Beli∣nus and sonne to Molnutius king of Britaine, besieged Ephe∣sus, a deuilish woman enticed with the iewels which Bren∣nus wore about him, betraied the citie into his hands. But Brennus detesting this abominable couetousnesse, when hee entred the city so loaded her with gold, that he couered and oppressed her therewith. In like manner, Heradamon deliuered vp to the Emperor Aurelian his owne natiue citie Tiana, in hope to saue his owne life by betraying his countrey. But it fell out quite contrary to his expectation, for though Caesar had sworne not to leaue a dogge aliue within the wals, because they shut their gates against him; and also his souldiers were instant and vrgent vpon his promise:Eras. in Apoph. lib. 6. yet he spared the city and destroi∣ed the traitour, and quit himselfe of his promise by hanging
vp euery dogge in the citie contrary to his owne intent, and his armies expectation; yet agreeable to his words, & most correspondent to equitie and true fortitude. In the yeere of our Lord 1270, the bishop of Colonea pra∣ctising to spoile the citie of her priuiledges, and reduce it vn∣der his owne iurisdiction: Hermanus Grinu consull and chiefe magistrate, withstood his power and authoritie with all his force, so that hee could not bring his purpose about. Where∣fore two Canons belonging to the Bishop, sought to vnder∣mine this their enemy by pollicie, and to take him out of the way: for which end they inuited him in very kind manner to dinner, but when he was come, they brought him into a yong lyons denne (which they kept in honour of the bishop) and vnawares shut the dores vpon him, bidding him shift for him∣selfe, thinking that it was impossible for him to scape out aliue. But the Consull perceiuing in what great danger hee was, wrapped his cloake about his left arme, and thrusting it into the mouth of the hungry lyon, killed him with his right hand, and so by the wonderfull prouidence of God, escaped without hurt. But the two traiterous Canons he caught right soone, and hung them at their cathedrall Church gate, to their owne confusion and terror of all traitors. It was a noble saying and worthy the marking, of Augu∣stus Caesar to Rhaemitalches king of Thracia, who hauing for∣saken Anthony to take part with Augustus, boasted very in∣solently of his deserts towards him: then Caesar dissembling his folly, dranke to another king, and said, I loue treason, but I can not commend nor trust a traitour. The same also in ef∣fect, Philip of Macedony and Iulius Caesar were wont to say, That they loued a traitour at the first, but when he had fini∣shed his treason, they hated him more then any other: signi∣fying, that traitours deserued no retribution of thankes, see∣ing their office was accepted for a time, yet they themselues could neuer be counted lesse than naughty and disloiall per∣sons: for no honest man euer betraied his countrey or his friend: and what greater punishment can there be than this?
But for manifest proofe hereof, let this one example serue in stead of many, namely of Theodoricke king of Francia, and Ir∣minfride king of Thuringia,Albert. Crantz. who being profest foes, and ha∣uing fought many cruell battailes, at length the latter was conquered of the former, by the luckie assistance of the Sax∣ons. This Irminfride thus subdued, sued for pardon and re∣lease at the conquerours hand, but he was so farre from pity∣ing his estate, that hee corrupted one Iringus a noble man, and Irminfrides subiect, to murder his master, which he per∣fourmed kneeling before Theodoricke, running him through with his sword at his backe: which traiterous deed, assoone as it was finished, Theodoricke though the setter of it, yet hee could not abide the actour, but bad him be packing, for who could put trust in him that had betraied his owne master. At which words Iringus (mad with anger and rage) ran at Theo∣doricke also with purpose to haue slaine him too; but his hand missing the marke, returned his sword into his owne bowels, so that he fell downe dead vpon his masters carkasse. What more notable and wonderfull iudgement could happen? sure∣ly it is an example worthy to be written in golden letters, & to be read and remembred of euery one, to teach men allegi∣ance and obedience to their princes and superiors, least more sudden destruction than this fall vpon them. Tit. Liuius.After the death of Ieronimus king of Siracusa, Androno∣dorus and Themistius prouoked by their wiues descending of the blood roiall, affected an vsurpation of the crowne, and wrought much hurt to the common wealth: but their practi∣ses being discouered, the Pretours (by the consent of the Se∣niours) slew them both in the market place, as rotten mem∣bers of their common body, and therefore fit to be cut off. And when they vnderstood how their wiues Damarata and Harmonia were breeders and incensers of this mischiefe, they sent to kill them also: yea and Heraclia, Harmonia her sister, guiltlesse and witlesse of the crime (for no other cause, but because shee was sister vnto her) was pluckt from the altar, and slaine in the tumult with two of her daughters that were
virgins. And thus is treason plagued not only in traitors them∣selues, but also in those that are linked vnto them in friend∣ship and affinity. The glory and reputation of Fabritius, the Romane is e∣ternized by that noble act of his,Cic. offic. lib. 9. in sending bound to Pyrrhus a traitour that offered to poison him. For albeit that Pyr∣rhus was a sworne enemy to the Romane Empire, and also made warre vpon it, yet would not Fabritius treacherously seeke his destruction, but sent backe the traitour vnto him to be punished at his discretion. What notable treasons did Hadrian the fourth, Pope of Rome, practise against the Emperor Fredericke Barbarossa, yet all was still frustrate; for the Lord protected the Empe∣rour, and punished the traitour with a sudden and straunge death; for he was choked with a fly which went downe his throat, and stopped his breath, and could by no meanes be pulled out till it made an end of him. Besides, many others that went abour the same practise, were brought to notable destructions: as that counterfait foole whome the Italians set on to murder Fredericke in his chamber, which had beene perfourmed, had he not leaped out of a window into a riuer, and so saued his life: for the foole being taken, was throwne headlong out of the same window, and broke his necke. As also an Arabian doctor, a grand poisoner, who going about to infect with poison his bridle, his saddle, his spurs, and stirrops, that assoone as hee should but touch them, he might be poi∣soned, was discouered and hanged for his labour. In the yeere of our Lord 1364,Albert. Crantz. when as the Emperour Charles the 4, and Philip duke of Austria, were readie to ioine battaile in the field, Charles distrusting his owne power, vn∣dermined his foe by subtilty on this fashion: he sent for three of duke Philips captains priuily, & perswaded them with pro∣mises of rewards to worke some means to terrifie the duke & dissuade him from that battell, which they performed with all diligence: for they told the duke that they had stolne into the Emperors tents by night, & viewed his power, which they
found to exceed his by three parts, and therefore counselled him not to trie the hazard of the battell, but to saue his soul∣diers liues by flight, which if they tarried, they were sure to loose. Wherewithall the Duke mistrusting no fraud sore af∣frighted, tooke the next occasion of flight, & returned home with dishonour. Now when these three traitours came to the Emperour for their compacted rewards, he caused them to be paid in counterfait mony, not equiualing the summe of their bargaine by the twentieth part, which though at first they discerned not, yet afterwards finding how they were cousened, they returned to require their due, and complaine of their wrong. But the Emperor looking sternly vpon them, answered, That counterfait mony was good enough for their counterfait seruice, and that if they tarried long, they should haue a due reward of their treason. CHAP. III. More examples of the same subiect. WHen Manuel the Emperour of Constantino∣ple lay about Antioch with an army prepa∣red against the Turke,Otto Frisingen∣sis de rebus Fre∣der. prin. lib. 1. cap. 47. one of his chiefest officers, namely his Chancellour, put in practise this notable piece of treason a∣gainst him: he waged three desperate yong men with an infinite summe of mony to kill him on a day ap∣pointed, and then with a band of souldiers determined to pos∣sesse himselfe of the crowne, and of the city, and to slay all that any way crossed his purpose. But the treason being dis∣couered secretly to the Empresse, shee acquainted her lord with it, who tooke the three traitours and put them all to cruell deaths: and as for the Chancellour, he first bored out his eyes, and plucking his tongue through his throat, tor∣mented him to death with a rigorous and most miserable pu∣nishment.
When the Turke besieged Alba Graca certaine souldi∣ors conspired to betray the citie into his hands,Bonfius. lib 3. Decad. 5. for hee had promised them large rewards so to doe, howbeit it succee∣ded not with them, for they were detected and apprehended by Paulus Kynisius gouernour of Hungarie, who constrained thē to eat one anothers flesh, seething euery day one to feed the other withall, but hee that was last was faine to deuour his owne body. Scr bonianus a Captaine of the Romanes in Dalma∣tia, rebelled against the Emperour Claudius,Lanquet. chron. and named himselfe Emperour in the rmy; but his rebellion was mira∣culously punished, for though the whole army fauoured him verie much: yet they could not by any meanes spread their banners, or remoue their standerds out of their places as long as hee was called by the name of Emperour, with which miracle being mooued they turned their loues into hatred, and their liking into loathing, so that whome late∣ly they saluted as Emperour, him now they murdered as a traitor. To rehearse all the English traitors that haue conspired against their kings from the conquest vnto this day,Lanquet. it is a thing vnnecessarie, and almost impossible. Howbeit that their destructions may appeare more euidently, and the cutse of God vpon traitors bee made more manifest, I will briefly reckon vp a catalogue of the cheifest of them. In the yeare 1275 Lewline Prince of Wales rebelled against King Edward the first, and after much adoe, was taken by Sir Roger Mortimer, and his head set vpon the tower of London. In like sort was Dauid Lewlines brother serued. Ries & Madok escaped no better measure in stirring the Welch∣me vp to rebellion. No more did the Scots, who hauing of their owne accord committed the gouernment of their king∣dome to king Edward, after the death of Alexander (who broke his necke by a fall from an horse, and left no issue male) and sworn feaulty vnto him: yet dispensed with their oth by the Popes commission, and Frenchmens incitement, and
rebelled diuerse times against King Edward: for hee o∣uercame them sundrie times, and made slaughter of their men slaying at one time 32000, and taking diuerse of their Nobles prisoners. In like manner they rebelled against King Edward the third, who made three voiages into that land in the space of foure yeares, and at euerie time ouercame and discomfited them, in so much that well neare all the nobilitie of Scotland, with infinite number of the common people were slaine. Thus they rebelled in Hen∣ry the sixts time, and also Henrie the eights, and diuerse o∣ther kings raignes, euer when our English forces were busied about forraine warres inuading the land on the other side most traiterously. And thus it is to bee feared they will euer doe, except they degenerate from their old natures: and therefore it ought to bee a Caueat to vs how wee trust them in any extremity, but neuerthelesse they euer yet were whip∣ped for their treason, as the histories of our English Chroni∣cles doe sufficiently record. nquet.In the raigne of king Henry the fourth there rebelled at one time against him, Sir Iohn Holland D. of Excester, with the Dukes of Aumarle, Surrey, Salisburie, and Gloucester: and at another time Sir Thomas Percie Earle of Worcester, and Henry Percie sonne to the Earle of Northumberland: at another, Sir Richard Scroope Archbishop of Yorke, and diuerse others of the house of the Lord Moubray: at another time Sir Henry Percie the father, Earle of Northumberland, & the Lord Bardolph. And lastly Ryce ap Dee and Owen Glendour two Welchmen: all which were either slaine, as Sir Hendry Per∣cie the yoonger; or beheaded, as the rest of these noble re∣bels; or starued to death as Owen Glendour was in the moun∣tains of Wales after he had deuoured his owne flesh. In the raigne of Henry the fift, Sir Richard Earle of Cam∣bridge, Sir Richard Scroope treasurer of England, and Sir Tho∣mas Gray were beheaded for treason. No lesse was the perfidious and vngratefull trecherie of Humfrey Banister an Englishman towards the duke of Buckin∣gham
his Lord & maister, whom the said duke had tenderly brought vp, & exalted to great promotion. For when as the duke being driuen into extremity, by reason of the seperation of his army which he had mustered together against king Ri∣chard the vsurper, fled to the same Banister as his trustiest friend to be kept in secret vntill hee could find oportunity to escape. This false traitor vpon hope of a thousand pounds which was promised to him that could bring forth the duke, betraied him into the hāds of Iohn Mitton sheriefe of Shrop∣shire, who conueied him to the citie of Salisbury, where king Richard kept his houshold: where he was soon after put to death. But as for vngrateful Banister, the vengeāce of God pursued him to his vtter ignominy: for presently after, his el∣dest son became mad & died in a bores stie: his eldest daugh∣ter was sodainly stricken with a foule leprie: his second sonne marueilously deformed of his lims, and lame: his yoongest sonne drowned in a puddle: And he himself in his old age ar∣raigned and found guiltie of a murder, and by his clergie sa∣ued. And as for his thousand pounds, king Richard gaue him not a farthing: saying that hee which would bee vntrue to so good a master, must needs be false to all other. To passe ouer the time of the residue of the kings, wherein many examples of treasons & punishmēts vpon them are ex∣tant, & to come nearer vnto our own age, let vs consider the wonderfull prouidence of God in discouering the notorious treasons which haue ben pretēded so often & so many against our soueraign now liuing Queen Elizabeth, & protecting her so fatherly from the dint of them all. First therefore to begin with the chiefest, the Earle of Northumberlād & Westmer∣land in the eleuenth year of her raign began a rebelliō in the North, pretending their purpose to bee sometimes to defend the Queens person & gouernment from the inuasion of stran∣gers, and sometimes for conscience sake to seeke reforma∣tion of religion: vnder colour whereof they got together an army of men to the number of sixe thousand souldiors: against whom marched the Earle of Sussex leiutenant of the
North, and the Earle of Warwick sent by the Queen to his aid: whose approch stroke such a terror into their hearts, that the two Earles with diuerse of the Archrebels fled by night into Scotland, leauing the rest of their compa∣nie a prey vnto their enemies, whereof threescore and sixe or thereabout, were hanged at Durham. As for the Earles, one of them (to wit) of Northumberland, was after taken in Scotland and beheaded at Yorke. Westmerland fled into a∣nother countrie, and left his house and family destroied and vndone by his folly. A while after this what befell to Iohn Throgmorton, Thomas Brooke, George Redman, and diuerse other Gentlemen at Nor∣wich, who pretended a rebellion vnder the colour of suppres∣sing strangers, were they not discouered by one of their owne conspiracy Thomas Ket, and executed at Norwich for their paines? The same end came Francis Throgmorton to, whose trecheries as they were abominable, & touching the Queens owne person, so they were disclosed not without the especial prouidence of God. But aboue all that vile and vngratefull Traitor Wil∣liam Parry vpon whome the Queene had poured plenti∣fully her liberalitie, deserueth to bee had in euerlasting re∣membrance to his shame: whose Treasons being discoue∣red hee paied the tribute of his life in recompence thereof. What shall I say of the Earle of Arundell, and a second Earle of Northumberland? Did not the iustice of God ap∣peare in both their endes, when being attainted for Trea∣son, the one slew himselfe in prison, and the other died by course of nature in prison also? Notorious was the con∣spiracie of those Arch-traitors. Ballard, Babington, Sauadge, and Tylney, &c. yet the Lord brought them downe, and made them spectacles to the world, of his iustice. Euen so that notorious villaine doctor Lopus (the Queens Phisitian) who a long time had not onely beene an intelligencer to the Pope and King of Spaine, of our English counsailes, but also had poysoned many Noblemen, and went about also to
poyson the Queene her selfe, was he not surprised in his tre∣cherie and brought to suddaine destruction? In summe the Lord hath preserued her maiestie not onely from these but many other secret and priuie foes, and that most mira∣culously and contrarie to all reason, and hath spread his winges ouer her to defend her from all her enemies: the consideration whereof as it ought to stirre vp in euerie one a thankfull heart to acknowledge his mercies, and a fearefull care not to displease him that is so gratious vnto vs: so it ought also to incite euerie one of vs to pray incessantly for her further preseruation, as being the soule of our soules, and life of our liues: for surely if the Lord de∣priue vs of her life, our sinnes are the cause, and our smart will be the effect thereof. Moreouer there is yet another kind of treason, and ano∣ther rancke of traitors as pernicious as any of the former, and as odious before God and man. Such are they which either vpon priuate quarrels, or receiued iniuries, or hope of gaine, or any other silly respect, forsake their countries, & take part with the enemies to fight against it: or they that in time of necessity refuse to fight or dare not fight in defence of it: the former sort are called fugitiues, and the latter cowards. As touching the first they haue beene alwaies in detestation in well gouerned pollicies, and also euermore seuerely puni∣shed. The Aeginates punished them with the losse of their right hand thumbes, to the end they might no more handle a speare or a sword but an oare. The Mitylenians with losse of their liues. The inhabitants of Samos marked them in the face with the picture of an oule: and the Romanes punished them after diuerse fashions: Fabius Maximus caused all those that had fled from the Romane succours to the enemy to loose their hands. Africanus the former, though gentle & mild by nature, yet in this respect he borrowed from forraine cruelty, for hauing conquered Carthage & got into his power all those Romane rebels that tooke part against his coun∣try, hee hung the Romanes as traitors to their countrie;Valerius maxi∣mus. and
mitigated the punishment of the Latines, as but perfidious confederates. Africanus the latter when hee had subdued the Punicke Nation hee threw all fugitiues amongst wild beasts to be deuoured. Lucius Paulus after the conquest of the king of Persia, com∣mitted these fellows to the mercie of Eliphantes. Generally there is no Nation vnder the sunne which holdeth them not in execration; and therfore our English fugitiues, who vnder cloke of religion not onely abandon their countrie, their kin∣dred and their Prince, but also conspire the vndoing & swear the destruction of them: are they not worthie to be handled like traitors and to haue their quarters spectacles of perfidie? The bridge and gates of London beare witnesse of the wo∣full ends that these Iesuits come vnto. As touching cowards (I meane such as preferring their liues or liberty or any other by-respects before their countries welfare, & either dare not or wil not stand stoutly in defence of it in time of war and danger) they deserue no lesse punish∣ment then the former, seeing that as they are open oppug∣ners, so these are close vnderminers of the good thereof. And therefore the Romans did sharply chasten them in their go∣uernment, as may appear by diuerse examples of the same: as first they were noted with this ignominy, neuer to eat their meat but standing; & hereunto they were sworne: Nay they were in such hatefull account amongst them,Alex. ab Alex. that when An∣niball offered the Senat 8000 captiues to be redeemed, they refused his offer, saying that they were not worthy to bee re∣deemed, that had rather bee taken basely then die honestly & valiantly: the same Senat dealt more fauourably with the captiues which king Pirrhus tooke, for they redeemed them but with this disgrace, degrading them from their honors and places, vntill by a double spoile they had won their reputati∣on againe. L. Calpurnius Piso handled Titius the captaine of his horsemen in Sicilia (one who being ouercharged with enemies deliuered his weapons vnto them) on this maner,Valerius Max. lib. 2. cap. 2. he caused him to go barefooted before the army wearing a gar∣ment
without seames, hee forbad him society with any saue such as were noted with the same fault, and from a Generall ouer horsemen, he debased him to a common souldior. How did the same Senat correct the cowardise of Caius Vatienus (who to the end to priuiledge himselfe from the Italick war, cut off all the fingers of his left hand) euen they proscribed his goods, and cast him into perpetuall prison, that that life which he refused to hazard in defence of his countrie, hee might consume in bondage and fetters. Fulgosius saith,Lib. 2. cap. . that among the Germanes it was so vnho∣nourable a part to loose but a shield in the war, that whosoe∣uer had happened to doe so, was suspended both from the place of common councill, and from the temples of religion: insomuch that many (as he reporteth) killed themselues to auoid the shame. The people called Daci punished cowards on this sort, they suffered them not to sleepe but with their heads to the beds feetward, & besides by the law they made them slaues and subiects to their owne wiues: what viler dis∣grace could there be then this?Plu. Agefilaus And yet the Lacedemonians plagued them more shamefully, for with them it was a dis∣credit to marrie in the stock of a coward, any man might strike them lawfully: and in their attire they went with their clothes rent, and their beards halfe shauen. Thus are all kind of traitors continually punished of the Lord by one means or other, and therefore let vs learne to shun treason as the vilest and the detestablest thing in the world. CHAP. IIII. Of such as haue murdered their rulers or Princes. ZImri captaine of halfe the chariots of E∣lah King of Israel, conspired against his Lord,All this whole chapter in re∣gard of mur∣der belongeth to the sixt commande∣mnt. 1. Kng 16. as hee was in Tirza drinking till hee was drunke in the house of Arza his steward, and came vpon him suddainely and smote
him till hee died, and possessed the kingdome in his roome. Howbeit herein he was the Lords rod to punish the house of Baasha, yet when the punishment was past, the Lord threw the rod into the fire; for he inioied the crown but seuen daies: For all Israell detesting his fact made Omri king ouer them, who besieged him in Tirza, and droue him inro that extre∣mity that hee went into the pallace of the kings house, and burnt himselfe and the house with fire. 2. Kin. 12.21.Iozachar the sonne of Shimeah, and Iehozabod the sonne of Shomer came to no better end for murdering Iehoash King of Iuda: for Amaziah his sonne after the kingdome was con∣firmed vnto him, caused them both to bee put to death. But their children hee slew not,2. King. 14.5. according to that which is writ∣ten in the book of the law, The fathers shal not be put to death for the children, nor the children for the fathers, but euerie man shall beare his owne sinne. 2. King. 15.Neither did Shallum that slue Zacharia king of Israel, pros∣per any better, for he raigned but one month in Samaria, whē Menahim the sonne of Gadi rebelled against him, and slew him as he had done his maister. Amon the sonne of Manasseh was slaine by his owne ser∣uants, but the Lord stirred vp the people of the land to re∣uenge his death, & to kill all them that had conspired against their king. But to let passe the holy histories of the sacred scripture, wherein euer after any treason, the Holy-ghost presently set∣teth down the punishment of traitors, as it were of purpose to signifie how the Lord hateth all such rebels that rose vp a∣gainst his owne ordinance. Let vs consider a little the conse∣quents of these in prophane yet credible authors, and applie them vnto our purpose. Ilian. lib. 1.Archelaus King of Macedonia had a mignion cal∣led Cratenas, whome he loued most entirely, but he againe required him not with loue, but with hatred, and stretched all his wits to enstall himselfe in his kingdome, by deposing and murthering him: which though he accomplished, yet his
deserts were cut short by the vengeance of God: for he con∣tinued not many daies in his roialtie, but he was serued with the same sauce, that he had made Archelaus before him to tast of: euen betraied and murdered as he well deserued. Ludouicus Sfortia to the end to inuest himselfe with the dukedome of Millain, spared not to shed the innocent blood of his two nephewes; the sonnes of Galeachus, togither with their tutors, and one Francis Calaber a worthy and excellent man. But the Lord so disposed of his purposes, that he (in stead of obtaining the kingdome) was taken prisoner by the king of France, so that neither hee nor any of his offspring enioyed that which he so much affected. When Numerianus was to succeed Carus his father in the Empire,Phil. Melanct. chron. lib. 3. Arrius Axer his father in law to the end to translate the Empire vnto himselfe, entred a conspiracie and slew his sonne in law, that nothing mistrusted his disloialty: But the Pretorian army vnderstanding the matter, discharged Arrius and elected Dioclesian in his roome, who laying hold vpon his competitor, laid an action of treason to his charge, and put him to death in the sight of the multitude. Theodericke and Fredericke conspired against their owne brother Thurismund king of the Visigothes,Chron. Sigebert. to the intent to succeed him in his kingdome: And albeit that nature reclai∣med them from the act, yet they slew him without all com∣passion. But after thirteene yeres raigne the same Theodericke was requited by his other brethren with the same measure that hee before met to his brother Thurismund. And so though vengeance slept a while, yet at length it wakened. Aelias Antonius Gordianus, the third Emperour of Rome,Phil. Melanct. chron. Aventin. lib. 2. though so excellent a young prince that hee deserued to be called the Loue, and Iewell of the world, yet was hee slaine by one promoted by himselfe to high honour, called Philip Arabs, when hee was but two and twentie yeere old: after whose decease this Philip got himselfe elected Emperour by the band, & confirmed by the Senat.Ingratitude punished. All which notwithstan∣ding, after fiue yeeres Decius rebelled, and his owne souldiers
conspired against him, so that both he at Verona, and his sonne at Rome, were slaine by them about one time. Aentin. lib. 2.After the death of Constantine the Great, his three sonnes deuiding the Empire betwixt them, succeeded their father. Constantine the eldest had for his share Spaine, France, the Alpes, and England. Constance the second, held Italy, Afri∣ca, Graecia, and Illiricum. Constantine the younger, was king and Emperour of the East. But ambition suffered them not to enioy quietly these their possessions: for when the eldest be∣ing more proud and seditious thn the other, not content with his alotted portion, made warre vpon his brother Con∣stance his prouinces, and stroue to enter Italy, hee was slaine in a battell by Aquileia, when he was but fiue and twentie yeere old: by which meanes, all the prouinces which were his, fell to Constance, and therewithall such a drowsinesse and epicurisme for want of a stirrer vp after his brothers death, that he fell into the gout, and neglected the gouernment of the Empire. Wherfore in Auspurge and in Rhetia they cre∣ated a new Emperour, one Magnentius, whose life before-time Constance had saued from the souldiers,Notable in∣gratitude pu∣nished. and therefore his treachery was the greater. This Magnentius depriued and slew Constance, but was ouercome by Constantine the third brother in Illiricum, yet in such sort, that the conquerour could not greatly brag, for he lost an infinite company of his men, and yet missed of his chiefe purpose, the taking of Mag∣nentius, for he escaped to Lyons, and there massacring all that he mistrusted, at last growing (I suppose) in suspition with his owne heart, slue himselfe also. And so his traiterous, ingrate∣full, and ambitious murder was reuenged with his own hands. Ritius. lib. 1. regib. Hispan.Victericus betraied Luyba king of Spaine, and succeeded in his place; seuen yeeres after, another traitor slew him, & suc∣ceeded also in his place. Mauritius the Emperour was mur∣dered by Phocas togither with his wife & fiue of his children, he seating himselfe Emperor in his Rome: Howbeit traitours and murderers can neuer come to happy ends; for as hee had slaine Mauritius, so Priscus, Heraclianus, and Phorius, three
of his chiefest captaines, conspiring against him, with three seuerall armies gaue him such an alarme at once at his owne dores, that they soone quailed his courage; and after much mangling of his body, cut him shorter by the head and the kingdome at one blow. In the time of Edward the second and Edward the third in England,Lanquet. one Sir Roger Mortimer committed many villanous outrages in shedding much blood, and at last king Edward himselfe lying at Barkley castle; to the end that he might (as it was supposed) enioy Isabell his wife, with whom he had ve∣ry suspitious familiarity. After this, hee vniustly accused Ed∣mond Earle of Kent of treason, and caused him to be put to death therefore: and lastly, he conspired against king Edward the third, as it was suspected, for which cause he was worthi∣ly and deseruedly beheaded. Among this ranke of murderers of kings we may fitly place also Richard the third vsurper of the crowne of England,Stow. and diuers others which he vsed as instruments to bring his dete∣stable purpose to effect: as namely, Sir Iames Tirrell knight, a man for natures gifts worthy to haue serued a much better prince then this Richard, if he had well serued God, and bene indued with as much truth & honestie as he had strength & wit: also Miles Forest, & Iohn Dighton, two villains fleshed in murders: but to come to the fact. It was on this sort: When Richard the vsurper had enioined Robert Brackenbury to this peece of seruice of murdering the yo g king Edward the fift his nephew in the tower, with his brother the duke of York, and saw it refused by him, hee committed the charge of the murder to Sir Iames Tirrel, who hasting to the tower by the kings commission receiued the keies into his own hands, and by the help of those two butchers, Dighton & Forest, smothe∣red the two princes in their bed, & buried them at the staires feet: which being done, Sir Iames node back to king Richard, who gaue him great thanks, & as some say, made him knight for his labor. All which things on euery part wel pondered, it appeareth that God neuer gaue the world a notabler exāple,
both of the vnconstancie of worldly weale, and also of the wretched end which ensueth such despitefull crueltie: for first to begin with the ministers, Miles Forest rotted away peecemeale at S. Martins: Sir Iames Tirrell died at the tow∣er hill beheaded for treason: king Richard himselfe (as it is declared elsewhere) was slaine in the field, hacked and hew∣ed of his enemies, carried on horsebacke dead, his haire in de∣spight torne and tugged like a dog: besides the inward tor∣ments of his guilty conscience were more then all the rest, for it is most certenly reported, that after this abominable deed done, he neuer had quiet in his mind: when hee went abroad, his eie whirled about, his body was priuily fenced, his hand euer vpon his dagger, his countenance and manner like one alwaies ready to strike, his sleepe short and vnquiet, full of fearefull dreames, insomuch that he would often sud∣denly start vp and leape out of his bed, and runne about the chamber: his restlesse conscience was so continually tossed and tumbled with the tedious impression of that abominable murder. CHAP. V. Of such as rebelled against their superiours, because of subsidies and taxes imposed vpon them. AS it is not lawfull for children ro rebel against their parents, though they be cruell and vnnaturall, so also it is as vnlawfull for subiects to with∣stand their princes and gouernours, though they be somewhat grieuous and burdensome vnto them: which wee affirme, not to the end that it should be licensed to them to exercise all manner of rigour and vnmeasurable oppression vpon their subiects (as shall be declared in the 35 chapter of this booke more at large) but wee intreat only here of their duties which are in subiection
to the power of other men, whose authoritie they ought in no wise to resist, vnlesse they oppose themselues against the ordinance of God. Therfore this position is true by the word of God, that no subiect ought by force to shake off the yoke of subiection and obedience due vnto his prince, or exempt himselfe from any taxe or contribution which by publike au∣thoritie is imposed: Giue (saith the Apostle) tribute to whome tribute belongeth, custome to whome custome pertaineth, feare to whome feare is due, and honour to whom honour is owing. And generally in all actions wherein the commodities of this life (though with some oppression and grieuance) and not the religion and seruice of God, nor the conscience about the same is called into question, wee ought with all patience to endure whatsoeuer burden or charge is laid vpon vs, without moouing any troubles or shewing any discontentments for the same: for they that haue otherwise behaued themselues, these examples following will shew how well they haue bene appaied for their misdemeanours. In the yeere of our Lord 1304,Nich. Gil. vol. 1. after that Guy Earle of Flaunders hauing rebelled against Philip the Faire his soue∣raigne, was by strength of armes reduced into subiection, and constrained to deliuer himselfe and his two sonnes prisoners into his hands: the Flemmings made an insurrection against the kings part, because of a certaine taxe which he had set vp∣on their ships that arriued at certaine hauens: and vpon this occasion, great warre, diuers battels, and sundry ouerthrowes on each side grew, but so, that at last the king remained con∣querour; and the Flemmings (for a reward of their rebellion) lost in the last battell sixe and thirty thousand men that were slaine, beside a great number that were taken prisoners. Two yeeres after this Flemish stirre,The same au∣thour. there arose a great commotion and hurlyburly of the rascall and basest sort of people at Paris, because of the alteration of their coines: who being not satisfied with the pillage and spoilage of their hou∣ses, whome they supposed to be either causes of the said alte∣ration, or by counsell or other meanes any furtherers there∣unto,
came in great troupes before the kings pallace at his lodging in the temple with such an hideous noise and out∣rage, that all that day after, neither the king nor any of his officers durst once stirre ouer the threshold: nay they grew to that ouerflow of pride and insolencie, that the victuals which were prouided for the kings diet, and carried to him, were by them shamefully throwed vnder feet in the durt, & trampled vpon in despight and disdaine. But three or foure daies after this tumult was appeased, many of them for their paines were hanged before their owne dores, and in the citie gates, to the number of eight and twenty persons. In the raigne of Charles the sixt, the Parisians (by reason of a certaine taxe which hee minded to lay vpon them) ban∣ded themselues and conspired togither against him: they de∣termined once (saith Froissard) to haue beaten downe Loure and Saint Vincents castle,Vol. 2. cap. 120. & all the houses of defence about Paris, that they might not be offensiue to them. But the king (though young in yeeres) handled them so ripely and hand∣somly,Cap. 129. that hauing taken away from them their armour, the city gates and chaines of the streets, & locked vp their wea∣pons in S. Vincents castle; hee dealt with them as pleased him.Cap. 130. And thus their pride being quashed, many of them were executed and put to death. As also for the like rebelli∣on were at Troyes,Nic. Gil. vol. 2. Orlean, Chalon, Sens, and Rhemes. About the same time the Flandrians, and especially the inhabitants of Gaunt wrought much trouble against Lewys the Earle of Flanders,Froiss. vol. 2. cap. 97. for diuers taxes and tributes which hee had laid vpō them, which they in no respect would yeeld vn∣to. The matter came to be decided by blows, & much blood was shed, & many losses endured on both sides, as a means ap∣pointed of God to chastise as well the one as the other. The Gaunts being no more in number then fiue or sixe thousand men,Cap. 98. ouerthrew the Earls army, consisting of forty thousand, and in pursuite of their victory tooke Bruges, whither the Earle was gone for safety; & lying in a poore womans house, was constrained (in the habit of a begger) to flie the citie.
And thus hee fared till king Charles the sixt sent an army of men to his succour,Cap. 125, 126. (for he was his subiect) by whose support he ouercame those rebels in a battaile foughten at Rose Be, to the number of forty thousand: & the body of their chief∣taine Philip Arteuill slaine in the throng hee caused to bee hanged on a tree.Nic. Gil. vol. 2. And this was the end of that cruell Trage∣dy, the countrie being brought againe into the obedience of their old Lord. A while before this,Froiss. vol. r. cap. 182. whilest king Iohn was held prisoner in England, there arose a great cōmotion of the cōmon people in France against the nobilitie and gentilitie of the realme, that oppressed them: this tumult began but with an hundred men that were gathered togither in the countrey of Beauvoisin, but that small handfull grewe right quickly to an armefull, euen to nine thousand, that ranged and robbed throughout al Brie, along by the riuer Marne to Laonoise, and all about Soissons, armed with great bats shod with iron: an headlesse crue without gouernour, fully purposing to bring to ruine the whole nobility. In this disorder they wrought much mischief, broke vp many houses and castles, murdered many Lords; so that diuerse Ladies and knights, as the Dutchesses of Nor∣mandy, Orleance, were faine to flee for safegard to Meaux: whither when these rebels would needes pursue them, they were there ouerthrowen, killed and hanged by troupes. In the yere of our Lord 1525,Sleid. lib. 4. there were certaine husband∣men of Souabey that began to stand in resistance against the Earle of Lupsfen, by reason of certaine burdens which they complained themselues to be ouerlaid with by them: their neighbors seeing this, enterprised the like against their lords: And so vpon this small beginning (by a certaine contagion) there grew vp a most dangerous and fearfull commotion, that spread it selfe almost ouer all Almaine: the sedition thus in∣creasing in all quarters, and the swaines being now full fortie thousand strong, making their owne liberty and the Gospels a cloake to couer their treason and rebellion, and a pre∣tence of their vndertaking armes (to the wonderfull griefe
of all that feared God) did not only fight with the Romane Catholikes, but with all other without respect, as well in So∣uabe as in Franconia: they destroied the greater part of the nobility, sacked and burnt many castles and fortresses, to the number of two hundred, and put to death the Earle of Hel∣festin, making him passe through their pikes. But at length their strength was broken, they discomfited and torne in pie∣ces with a most horrible massacre of more than eighteene thousand of them. During this sedition, there were slaine on each side fifty thousand men. The captaine of the Souabian swaines called Geismer hauing betaken himselfe to flight, got ouer the mountaines to Padua, where by treason hee was made away. In the yeere of our Lord 1517, in the Marquesdome of the Vandales, the like insurrection and rebellion was of the comminaltie; especially the baser sort against the nobilitie, spirituall and temporall, by whom they were oppressed with intollerable exactions: their army was numbred to stand of ninety thousand men all clownes and husbandmen, that con∣spired togither to redresse and refourme their owne grieuan∣ces, without any respect of ciuill magistrate, or feare of Al∣mightie God. This rascality of swaines raged and tyranized euery where, burning and beating downe the castles and houses of noble men, and making their ruines euen with the ground: Nay they handled the noble men themselues as many as they could attaine vnto, not contumeliously only, but rigorously and cruelly; for they tormented them to death, and carried their heads vpon speares in token of vi∣ctory. Thus they swaied a while vncontrolled, for the Empe∣rour Maximilian winked at their riots, as beeing acquainted with what iniuries they had bene ouercharged: but when he perceiued that the rude multitude did not limit their fury within reason, but let it runne too lauish to the damnifying as well the innocent as the guilty, hee made out a certaine small troupe of mercenary souldiers togither with a band of horse∣men to suppresse them, who comming to a city were presently
so inuironed with such a multitude of these swaines that like locusts ouerspread the earth, that they thought it impossible to escape with their liues; wherefore feare and extremitie made thē to rush out to battel with thē. But see how the Lord prospereth a good cause, for all their weake number in com∣parison of their enemies, yet such a feare possessed their ene∣mies hearts, that they fled like troupes of sheepe, and were slaine liee dogs before them: insomuch that they that esca∣ped the sword, were either hanged by flockes on trees, or ro∣sted on spits by fires, or otherwise tormented to death. And this end befell that wicked rebellious rout, which wrought such mischiefe in that countrey with their monstrous villa∣nies, that the traces and steppes thereof remaine at this day to be seene. In the yeere of our Lord 1381,Stow Chron. Richard the second being king, the commons of England (and especially of Kent and Essex) by meanes of a taxe that was set vpon them, suddenly rebelled and assembled togither on Blackheath, to the num∣ber of 60000 or more: which rebellious rout, had none but base and ignoble fellowes for their captaines, as Wat Tilour, Iacke Straw, Tom Miller, but yet they caused much trouble and disquietnesse in the realme, and chiefly about the citie of London, where they committed much villanie in destroying many goodly places; as the Sauoy, and others: and being in Smithfield vsed themselues very proudly and vnreuerently towards the king: but by the manhood and wisdome of Wil∣liam Walworth Maior of London, (who arrested their chiefe captaine in the midst of them) that rude company was dis∣comfited, and the ringleaders of them worthily punished. In like manner in the raigne of Henry the seuenth,Stow Chron. a great commotiō was stirred vp in England by the commons of the North, by reason of a certaine taxe which was leuied of the tenth penny of all mens lands & good within the land; in the which, the Earle of Northumberland was slaine: But their rash attempt was soone broken, and Chamberlaine their cap∣taine with diuers others hanged at Yorke for the same. How∣beit
their example scared not the Cornish men frō rebelling vpon the like occasion of a taxe, vnder the conduct of the lord Audley; vntill by wofull experience they felt the same scourge: for the king met them vpon blacke heath, and dis∣comfiting their troupes, tooke their captains and ringleaders, and put them to most worthy and sharpe death. Thus we may see the vnhappie issue of all such seditious reuoltings, and thereby gather how vnpleasant they are in the sight of God. Let all people therefore learne by these ex∣periences to submit themselues in the feare of God to the higher powers, whether they be lords, kings, princes, or any other that are set ouer them. CHAP. VI. Of Murderers. AS touching Murder, which is (by the second commaundement of the second table) for∣bidden in these words,Exod. 21. Thou shalt not kill: the Lord denounceth this iudgement vpon it, that he which striketh a man that hee dieth, shall die the death. And this is correspon∣dent to that edict which he gaue to Noah presently after the vniuersall flood, to suppresse that generall crueltie which had taken root from the beginning in Cain and his posterity, being carefull for mans life,Gen. 9. saying, That hee will require the blood of man, at the hands of either man or beast that killeth him: adding moreouer, That whosoeuer sheddeth mans blood, by man also his blood shall be shed, seeing that God created him after his owne image: which he would not haue to be basely accounted of, but deare and pretious vnto vs.Exod. 21. If then the bruit and vnreaso∣nable creatures are not exempted from the sentence of death pronounced in the law, if they chance to kill a man: How much more punishable then is man, endued with will & rea∣son, when maliciously and aduisedly he taketh away the life
of his neighbour? But the hainousnes & greatnes of this sinne is most liuely expressed by that ordinance of God set downe in the 21 of Deuteronomie, where it is enioyned, That if a man be found slaine in the field,Deut. 21. and it be not knowen who it was that slue him, then the Elders and Iudges of the next towne assembling togither, should offer vp an expiatorie sa∣crifice by the hands of the priests, to demand pardon for that cruell murder, that the guilt of innocent blood might not be imputed vnto them. And if by ouersight or negligence with∣out any malice, hatred, or pretence, one killed another, yet was he not exempted from all punishment,Num. 35. but suffered to fly to the citie of refuge to be kept, and as it were, inclosed vntill his innocencie were made manifest, or at the least vntill the death of the high priest. From this (it may seeme) arose the custome of Painyms in the like case, which was, that if a man vnwillingly had committed murder, hee did presently auoid the countrey, and go vnto some man of power and au∣thority of a straunge nation, and present himselfe at his gate, sitting with his face couered humbly, intreating pardon and reconciliation for his murder: and for one whole yeere hee might not returne into his owne counrrey. On this manner was the sonne of a certaine king of Phrygia entertained in king Craesus court,Herod. lib. 1. who vnaduisedly had slaine his owne bro∣ther. Whereby it is manifest, how odious and execrable in all ages, and all places, and all people, this homicide and murder hath beene: insomuch that men did shun their very meeting and companie, and abandon them out of their tem∣ples and publicke assemblies, as people excommunicate and prophane. And yet for all this, mankind (for the most part) like sauagde beasts hath by the instigation of that wicked spirit, (who was a murderer from the beginning) bene too too addicted to this kind of cruelty, not being afraid to offer vio∣lence to nature, and shed innocent blood. Such was the fran∣ticke & peruerse crueltie of the second man Cain,Gen. 4. when with∣out any occasion, but only through enuy he slew his only bro∣ther Abel, and that traiterously: which deed, albeit it was
done in secret and without the view of men, yet it could not shun the piercing eie of God, who reprooued him for it, say∣ing, That the blood of Abell cried for vengeance from the earth. And although this cursed and wicked murderer receiued not immediatly a condigne punishment answerable to his crime, (God to the end to spare mans blood, vsing vndeserued fa∣uour towards him) yet escaped he not scotfree, for he was pur∣sued with a continuall torment and sting of conscience, togi∣ther with such an incessant feare, that he became a vagabond and a runnagate vpon the earth: and seeing himselfe brought into so miserable an estate, he fell to complaining that the pu∣nishment was greater then he was able to beare. Thus God permitted this wretch to draw out his life in such anguish, that for a greater punishment he might pine away the rest of his daies without comfort. A man may find in this world ma∣ny such brother-murdering Cains, who for no occasion sticke not to cut their throats, whom (for the bond of common na∣ture wherein all men are linked togither as branches of one root) they ought to acknowledge for their brethrē & friends: vpon whome, the heauie hand of God hath not beene more slacke to punish either by one means or other, then it was vp∣on their eldest brother Cain. But seeing the number of them is so great, and it is not so conuenienr to heap vp here so huge a multitude togither, it shall suffice only to recount the most famous and notablest of them, as of those that haue ben men of note and reputation in the world, or that through an am∣bitious desire of raigning, haue by armes sought to atchieue their purposes: for these for the most part are the greatest murderers and butchers of all, that through their wicked af∣fections, worldly pomp, or desire of reuenge, haue no remorse of making the blood of men runne like riuers vpon the earth, making no more account of the life of a man, then of a fly or a worme. Iudg. 9.Such an one was Abimelech, one of the sonnes of Gedeon, who to the end to vsurpe the regiment of the people, (which his father before him refused) got togither a rout of rascall &
vile fellowes, by whose aid comming to his fathers house, hee slew seuenty of his brethren, euen all except Ioathan the yon∣gest that stole away and hid himselfe. After which massacre, hee raigned in iollitie three yeeres, and at the end thereof was cut short by God, togither with the Sichemites his pro∣uokers and maintainers, who were also guiltie of all the inno∣cent blood which hee had shed: for God sent the spirit of di∣uision betwixt them, so that the Sichemites began to des∣pise him, and rebell against him; but they had the worst end of the staffe, and were ouercome by him: who pursuing the victory, tooke their citie by force, and put them all to the edge of the sword. And after hee had thus destroied their citie, put fire also to the castle, wherein he consumed neere about a thousand persons of men and women, that were reti∣red thither to saue their liues. And thus God brought vpon them the mischiefe which they had consented and put their hands vnto: For as they had lent him aid and furtherance to the shedding of his breethrens blood, so was their own blood with their wiues and childrens shed by him: yet this tyrant not content therewith, made warre also with the inhabitants of Tebez, and tooke their city, and would haue forced the tower also wherein the citizens had inclosed themselues, but as he approched to the wall, a woman threw downe a peece of a milstone vpon his head, wherewith finding himselfe hurt to death, he commanded one of his souldiers to kill him out∣right. And thus this wicked murderer that had shedde the blood of many men, yea of his owne brethren, had his braines knockt out by a woman, and died a most desperate death. The bloody treacherie of Baana and Rechab,2. Sam. 4. chiefe cap∣taines of Ishbosheth, Sauls sonne, in conspiring against and murdering their master whilst hee slept, abode not long vn∣punished; for hauing cut off his head, they presented it for a present to king Dauid, hoping to gratifie the king,Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3, & 4. and to re∣ceiue some recompence for their paines. But Dauid beeing of an vpright and true kingly heart, could nor endure such vile treachery, though against the person of his enemie; but
entertained them as most vile traitours and master murde∣rers, commaunding first their hands and feet to be cut off, which they had especially imploied as instruments about that villany, and afterwards caused them to be slaine, and then hanged for an example to all others that should attempt the like. For the like cause was Ioab (generall of king Dauids host) for killing Abner traiterously, (who forsaking Ishbosheth, had yeelded himselfe to the king) cursed of Dauid with all his house,Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3. with a most grieuous and terrible curse. And yet not∣withstanding a while after he came againe to that passe, as to murder Amasa one of Dauids chiefe captaines, making shew to salute and imbrace him.2. Sam. 20. For which cruell deed, albeit that in Dauids time he receiued no punishment, yet it ouertooke him at last, and the same kind of crueltie which hee had so traiterously and villanously committed towards others, fell vpon his owne head, being himselfe also killed as he had kil∣led others; which happened in king Salomons raigne, who ex∣ecuting the charge and commandement of his father, put to death this murderer in the tabernacle of God,1. King. 2. and by the al∣tar, whither he was fled as a place priuiledged for safety. CHAP. VII. A suit of Examples like vnto the former. LEauing the Scripture, wee find in other writers notable examples of this subiect:Herod. lib. 1. As first of Astyages king of the Medes, who so much swarued from humanitie, that hee gaue in straight charge that young Cyrus his owne daughters sonne now ready to be borne, should be made away by some sinister practise; to auoid by that meanes, the danger which by a dreame was signified vnto him. Notwith∣standing the yong infant finding friends to preserue him aliue,
and growing vp by meanes of the peeres fauor, (to whom his grandfather by his cruell dealings, was become odious) ob∣tained the crowne out of his hands, and dispossessing him, seated himselfe in his roome. This Cirus was that mighty and awfull king of Persia, whome God vsed as an instrument for the deliuery of his people out of the captiuity of Babylon, as he foretold by the Prophet Isaiah, who yet (following kind) made cruell war in many places for the space of thirty yeres: and therfore it was necessary that he should tast some fruits of his insatiable and bloodthirstie desire, as hee indeed did: for after many great victories and conquests ouer diuers cuntries atchieued,Oros. lib. 2. going about to assaile Scithia also, hee and his army togither were surprised, ouercome, and slaine, to the number of two hun∣dred thousand persons: and for his shame receiued this dis∣grace at a womans hand, who triumphing in her victory, threw his head into a sacke full of blood, with these tearmes, Now glut thy selfe with blood which thou hast thirsted after so long time Cambyses, Cyrus sonne, was also so bloody and cruel a man,Herod. lib. 3. that one day he shot a noble mans sonne to the heart with an arrow, for being admonished by his father of his drunkennes, to which he was very much giuen, which he did in indignati∣on, and to shew that hee was not yet so drunken but he knew how to draw his bow. Hee caused his owne brother to be murdered priuily, for feare hee should raigne after him; and slew his sister for reproouing him for that deed. In his voiage to Aethiopia when his armie was brought into so great penury of victuals that they were glad to feed vpon horse flesh, hee was so cruel and barbarous, that after their horses were spent, hee caused them to eate one another: But at his returne from Aegypt, the Susians his chiefe citizens welcomed him home with rebellion: and at last as hee was riding, it so chan∣ced, that his sword fell out of the scabberd, and himselfe vp∣on the point of it, so that it pierced him through, and so hee died.
After that Xerxes by his ouerbold enterprise had distubed the greatest part of the world,Diodor. lib. 11. passed the sea, & trauersed ma∣ny countries to the end to assaile Greece with innumerable forces, he was ouercome both by sea & by land, and compel∣led priuily to retire into his countrie with shame & discredit: where he had not long beene, but Artabanus the captaine of his guard killed him in his pallace by night: who also after that & many other mischiefes committed by him, was him∣selfe cruelly murdered. The thirtie gouernours which the Lacedemonians set o∣uer the Athenians by compulsion, were such cruell Tyrants, oppressors, and bloodsuckers of the people, that they made a∣way a great part of them, vntil they were chased away them∣selues violently: and then being secretly dogged & pursued were all killed one after another. Pirrhus King of Epire that raigned not long after Alex∣ander the great, was naturally disposed to such a quicknesse & heat of courage, that he could neuer be quiet but whē he was either doing some mischiefe to another, or when another was doing some vnto him: euer deuising some new practise of molestation for pastimes sake. This his wild and dangerous disposition began first to shew it selfe in the death of Neopto∣lemus who was conioined King with him, whom hauing bid∣den to supper in his lodging vnder pretence of sacrifice to his gods, he deceitfully slew: preuenting by that meanes Neopto∣lemus pretended purpose of poisoning him when occasion should serue. After this he conquered Macedonia by armes, and came into Italie to make warre with the Romanes in the behalfe of the Tarentines, and gaue them battaile in the field, and slew fifteene thousand of them in one day: he took their campe, reuoked many cities from their alliance, & spoiled much of their country euen to the wals of Rome: and all this in a trice without breathing. Againe by Ascoly he en∣countred them the second time, where there was a great o∣uerthrow of ech side of fifteen thousand mē: But the Romans had the worst & took their heeles. Whē he was intreated by
the Sicilian Embassadours to lend them aid to expulse the Carthaginians out of their isle, hee yeelded presently and chased them out. Being recalled by the Tarentines into Ita∣ly for their succour, hee was conquered by the Romans after he had made war vpon them six yeares. At his returne to E∣pire he reentred by violence Macedonia, tooke many places, ouercame the army of king Antigonus that resisted him, and had all the whole Realme rendered into his hand. Being in∣treated by Cleominus to make warre vpon Sparta, to the end to reinstall him in his kingdome which hee was depriued of: forthwith he mustered his forces, besieged the city, and spoi∣led and wasted all the whole country. Afterwards there be∣ing a sedition raised in the city Argos betweene two of the chiefest citizens, one of the which sent vnto him for aid, hee (what issue soeuer was like to ensue, whether victorie or van∣quishment) could not abide in peace from disquieting others and himselfe, but must needes goe to take part in that sediti∣on; but to his cost euen to his destruction. For first in his way hee found an euill-fauoured welcome by an Ambush placed of purpose to interrupt his iourney, amongst whom he lost his sonne: which mishap nothing dismaied him, nor abated any whit of his purpose or courage from pursuing this iourney to Argos, though the citizens themselues intreated him to re∣tire, and though he had no businesse there saue only to looke ouer the towne: being arriued by night, & finding a gate left open for him to enter by, by the means of him that had sent for him to his aid, hee put his souldiors in, and possessed him∣selfe of the towne incontinently. But the city being aided by Antigonus and the king of Sparta, charged and pressed him so sore, that he sought meanes to retire out of the same, but could not. At which time being about ro strike a yoong man of the citie that had done him some hurt, his mother being aloft vpon the roofe of an house, perceiuing his intent threw downe a tile with both her handes vpon his head, and hat him such a knocke vpon the necke through default of his ar∣mour, that it so brused his ioints that hee fell into a suddaine
sound, & lost his sight, his raines falling out of his hand, & he himselfe tumbling frō his saddle vpō the ground, which whē some of the souldiors perceiued they drew him out of the gate, & there to make an end of the tragedy cut off his head. The cruelty of the Ephori was maruellous strange, when being vnwilling once to heare the equality of lands and pos∣sessions to be named,Plutarch. which Agis their king for the good of the Common-wealth (according to the ancient custome and ordinance of Licurgus) sought to restore: they rose vp against him & cast him in prison, and there without any processe or form of law strāgled him to death with his mother & grand∣father. But it cost them very deare: for Cleomenes who was ioint king with Agis albeit he had consented to the weauing of that web himselfe, to the end hee might raigne alone, yet ceased hee not to prosecute reuenge vpon them, which hee did not only by his daily & vsual practises openly, but also pri∣uily, for taking them once at auantage, being at supper all to∣gither, he caused his men to kill thē sodainly as they sat: And thus was the good king Agis reuenged. But this last murde∣rer which was soullied and polluted with so much blood, he went not long vnpunished for his misdeeds: for soone after Antigonus king of Macedonia gaue him a great ouerthrow in a battaile, wherein hee lost Sparta his chiefe citie, and fled into Aegypt for succour: where after small abode, vp∣on an accusation laid against him, he was cast into prison, and though he scaped out with his company by cunning & craft, yet as he walked vp & down Alexandria in armour, in hope that through his seditious practises the citizens would take his part, & helpe to restore him to his liberty; when he per∣ceiued it was nothing so, but that euery man forsooke him, & that there was no hope left of recouerie, he commanded his men to kill one another as they did: In which desperate furie and rage he himselfe was slaine, and his body being found was commanded by king Ptolomy to be hanged on a gibbet, and his mother, wiues and children that came with him into Aegypt to bee put to death. And this was the tragicall end of Cleomenes king of Sparta.
Alexander the tyrant of Pheres neuer ceased to marke & spie out al occasions of war against the people of Thessaly,Plutarch. to the end to bring thē generally in subiectiō vnder his dominiō: he was a most bloody & cruel minded mā, hauing neither re∣gard of reason or iustice in any action. In his cruelty he buried some aliue, others he clothed in beares & bores skins & then set dogs at their tailes to rent thē in peeces, others he vsed in way of pastime to strike through with darts and arrows. And one day as the inhabitāts of a certain city were assembled to∣gither in counsel, he caused his guard to inclose thē vp sodain∣ly & to kil them all euen to the very infants. He slew also his owne vncle, and crowned the speare wherewith he did that deed with garlands of flowers, and sacrificed vnto him being dead as to a god. Now albeit this cruell Tygre was guarded continually with troopes of souldiors that kept night & day watch about his body wheresoeuer hee lay, and with a most ougly & terrible dog vnacquainted with any sauing himselfe, his wife, and one seruant that gaue him his meat, tied to his chāber dore, yet could he not escape the euill chance, which by his wiues meanes fell vpon him: for shee taking away the staires of his chamber, let in three of her owne brethren pro∣uided to murder him as they did: for finding him asleep, one took him fast by the heeles, the other by the haire wringing his head behind him, and the third thrust him through with his sword, shee all this while giuing them light to dispatch their businesse. The citizens of Pheres when they had drawn his carcasse about their streets, & trampled vpon it their bel∣lies full, threw it to the dogs to bee deuoured: so odious was his very remembrance among them. Iugurth, son to Manastabal brother to Micipsa,Salust. king of Nu∣midia, by birth a bastard for he was born of a cōcubine, yet by nature & disposition so valiant & full of courage that he was not only beloued of al men, but also dearly esteemed of by Micipsa, that he adopted him ioint heir with his sons Adhor∣bal & Hiempsal to his crowne, kindly admonishing him in way of intreaty to continue the vnion of loue & concord without
breach betweene them, which he promised to performe. But Micipsa was no sooner deceased, but he by & by not content with a portion of the kingdome, ambitiously sought for the whole. For which cause he found means first to dispatch Hi∣empsall out of his way by the hands of his guard, who in his lodging by night cut his throat, and then by battaile hauing vanquished Adherbal his other brother, obtained the sole re∣giment without controlment. Besides hee corrupted so by bribes the Senators of Rome that had soueraigne authority in and ouer his kingdome, that in stead of punishment which his murder cried for, he was by the decree of the Senat allot∣ted to the one halfe of the kingdome. Wherevpon being growne yet more presumptuous, hee made excursions and ri∣ots vpon Adherbals territories, and did him thereby much in∣iurie: and from thence falling to open war put him to flight, and pursued him to a citie where hee besieged him so long till hee was constrained to yeeld himselfe. And then hauing gotten him within his power, put him to the cruellest death he could deuise: which villanous deed gaue iust cause to the Romanes of that warre which they vndertooke against him, wherein he was discomfited: and seeing himselfe vtterly lost, fled to his sonne in law Bochus king of Mauritania, to seeke supply of succour, who receiuing him into safegard prooued a false guard vnto him, and deliuered him into the hands of his enemies, and so was he carried in triumph to Rome by Mari∣us fast bound: & being come to Rome, cast into perpetual pri∣son, where first his gowne was torne off his back by violence: next a ring of gold pluckt off his eare lap and all: and lastly himselfe starke naked throwne into a deep ditch, where com∣bating with famine six daies, the seuenth miserably ended his wretched life, according to the merits of his misdeeds. Orosi∣us saith he was strangled in prison.Oros. Sabel. Treason. lib. 2. cap. 3. Methridates king of Parthia put to death the king of Cap∣padocia to get his kingdome, and after vnder pretence of parlying with one of his sons, slew him also: for which cause the Romanes tooke vp the quarrell, and made warre vpon
him, by means whereof much losse and inconuenience grew vnto him as well by sea as by land. After his first ouerthrow, where one of his sisters was taken prisoner, and when he saw himselfe in so desperate a case that no hope of helpe was left, he slew two other of his sisters with two of his wiues, hauing before this war giuen his fourth sister (who also was his wife) a dram of poison to make vp the tragedie. Afterward beeing vanquished in the night by Pompey the Romane, and put to flight with onely three of his company, as hee went about to gather a new supply of forces, behold tidings was brought him of the reuolt of many of his Prouinces and countries, and of the deliuering vp of the rest of his daughters into Pompeis hand, and of the treason of his yoong sonne Phar∣nax the gallantest of his sonnes, and whome hee purposed to make his successour, who had ioined himselfe to his enemie, which troubled and astonished him more then all the rest: so that his courage being quite dashed, and all hope of bette∣ring his estate extinguished, his other two daughters he poy∣soned with his owne handes, and sought to practise the same experiment vpon himselfe, but that his body was too strong for the poison and killed the operation thereof by strength of nature: but that which poyson could not effect, his owne sword performed. Though Pompey the great was neuer any of the most no∣torious offenders in Rome,Pltarch. yet did this staine of cruelty am∣bition and desire of rule cleaue vnto him: for first he ioining himselfe to Silla dealt most cruelly & vnnaturally with Car∣bo, whom after familiar conference in shew of friendship, hee caused sodainly to be slaine without shew of mercie. And with Quintius Valerius a wise and well lettered man, with whome walking but two or three turnes, hee committed to a cruel and vnexpected slaughter. He executed seuere punish∣ment vpon the enemies of Silla, sepecially those that were most of note and reputation, and vnmercifully put Brutus to death that had rendered himselfe vnto his mercie. It was he that deuised that new combate of prisoners and wild beasts,
to make the people sport withall, a most inhumane and bloo∣die pastime to see humane and manly bodies torne and dis∣membred by brute and sencelesse creatures: which if we will beleeue Plutarch, was the only cause of his destruction. Now after so many braue & gallant victories, so many magnificent triumphs: as the taking of king Hiarbas, the ouerthrow of Do∣mitius, the conquest of Africa, the pacifying of Spaine, and the ouerwelding of the commotions that were therein, the clearing of the sea coasts from Pyrates, the victory ouer Me∣thridates, the subduing of the Arabians, the reducing of Siria into a prouince, the cōquest of Iudea, Pontus, Armenia, Cap∣padocia, & Paphlagonia: I say after all these worthy deeds of armes and mighty victories, he was shamefully ouercome by Iulius Caesar in that ciuil war, wherin it was generally thought that hee had vndertaken the better cause in maintaining the authority of the Senat, & defēding the liberty of the people, as he pretended to do: being thus put to flight, & making to∣wards Aegypt, in hope the king (for that before time hee had ben his tutor) would protect & furnish him, that he might re∣couer himselfe again: he found himself fo far deceiued of his expectation, that in stead thereof the kings people cut him short of his purpose, & of his head both at once, sending it for a token to Caesar to gratifie him withall. Neuerthelesse, for all this his murderers & betraiers, as the yong king, & all others that were causers of his death were iustly punished for their cruelty, by the hands of him whom they thought to gratifie; for as Cleopatra the kings sister threw her selfe downe at Cae∣sars feet to intreat her portion of the kingdome, and he being willing also to shew her that fauor, was by that meanes gotten into the kings pallace: forthwith the murderers of Pompey be∣set the pallace, & went about to bring him into the same snare that they had caught Pompey in. But Caesar after that he had sustained their greatest brunt, frustrated their purposes & re∣couered his forces into his hands, assailed them with such va∣lor & prowesse on al sides that in short space he ouercame this wicked & traiterous nation. Amongst the slain the dead body
of this young and euill aduised king was found ouerborn with durt.Flor. lib. 4. Theodotus the kings schoolemaster (by whose instigati∣on and aduise both Pompey was slaine, and this war vnderta∣ken) being escaped & fled towards Asia for his safety, found euen there sufficient instruments both to abridge his iourney, & shortē his life. As for the rest of that murdering felowship, they ended their liues some here some there, in (that merciles element) the sea, and by (that boisterous element) the wind, which though senslesse, yet could not suffer them to escape vnpunished. Although that Iulius Caesar (concerning whom more occa∣sion of speech will be giuen in the 39 chapter) did tyranously vsurpe the key of the Romane common-wealth,Plutarch. & intruded himselfe into the Empire against the lawes, customs, and au∣thority of the people and Senat: yet was it accounted a most traiterous and cruell part to massacre & kill him in the Senat, as he sate in his seat misdoubting no mishap, as the sequele of their seuerall ends which were actors in this tragedy did de∣clare:Treason. lib. 2. cap 3, & 4. Plutarch. for the vengeance of God was so manifestly displaied vpon them, that not one of the conspirators escaped, but was pursued by sea and land so eagerly, till there was not one left of that wicked cre whome reuenge had not ouertaken. Cas∣sius being discomfited in the battell of Philippos, supposing that Brutus had beene also in the same case, vsed the same sword against himselfe (a marueilous thing) wherwith before he had smitten Caesar. Brutus also a few daies after,Eutrop. when a fearfull vision had appeared twice vnto him by night, vnder∣standing therby that his time of life was but short, though he had the better of his enemies the day before, yet threw him∣selfe desperately into the greatest danger of the battel, for his speedier dispatch, but hee was reserued to a more shamefull end; for seeing his men slaine before him, he retired hastily a∣part from view of men, & setting his sword to his breast, threw himselfe vpon it, piercing him through the body, and so en∣ded his life. And thus was Caesars death reuenged by Octa∣uius and Anthony, who remained conquerours after all that
bloodie crew was brought to naught: betwixt whome also ere long burst out a most cruell deuision, which grew vnto a furious and cruell battaile by sea, wherein Anthony was ouer∣come, and sent flying into Aegypt, and there taught his owne hands to be his murderers. And such was the end of his life, who had beene an actor in that pernicious office of the Tri∣umuirship, and a causer of the deaths of many men. And for asmuch as Cleopatra was the first motiue and setter on of An∣thony to this warre, it was good reason that shee should par∣take some of that punishment which they both deserued: as she did, for being surprised by her enemies, to the intent she might not be carried in triumph to Rome, she caused an aspe to bite her to death. Marke here the pitifull Tragedies that following one another in the necke were so linckt together, that drawing and holding ech other, they drew with them a world of miseries to a most woful end: a most transparent and cleare glasse wherein the visages of Gods heauy iudgements vpon all murderers are apparently deciphered. CHAP. VIII. Other examples like vnto the former. AFter that the Empire of Rome decli∣ning after the death of Theodosius, was almost at the last cast, ready to yeeld vp the ghost:Procopius. and that Theo∣dorick king of the Gothes had vsur∣ped the dominion of Italy vnder the Emperour Zeno, he put to death two great personages Senators & chiefe citizens of Rome, to wit Simmachus and Boetius, onely for se∣cret surmise which he had, without probabilty, that they two should weaue some slie web for his destruction. After which cruell deed as he was one day at supper, a fishes head of great bignesse being serued into the table, purposing to bee verie
merry, sodainly the vengeance of God assailed, amazed, op∣pressed, & pursued him so freshly, that without intermission or breathing it sent his body a sencelesse trunk into the graue in a most strange & maruelous maner: for he was conceited (as himselfe reported) that the fishes head was the head of Sim∣machus whom hee had but lately slaine, which grinned vpon him & seemed to face him with an ouerthwart threatning & angrie eie: wherewith hee was so scarred, that forthwith hee rose from the table, and was possessed with such an exceeding trembling & icie chilnesse that ran through all his ioints, that he was constrained to take his chamber & go to bed, where soone after with griefe & fretting & displeasure he died. He committed also another most cruell and traiterous part vpon Odoacer, whom inuiting to a banquet, he deceitfully welcom∣med with a messe of swords in stead of other victuals, to kill him withall, that hee might sway the Empire alone both of the Gothes and Romans without check. It was not without cause that Attila was called the scourge of God:Iornand. Greg. de Tours. for with an army of 500 thousand mē he wasted and spoiled al fields, cities, & villages, that he passed by, putting al to fire and sword without shewing mercie to any: on this manner hee went spoiling through France, and there at one time gaue battaile to the vnited forces of the Romans, Vice-Gothes, Frenchmen, Sarmatians, Burgundians, Saxons, and Almaignes: after that he entred Italy, tooke by way of force Aquilea, sacked and destroied Millan, with many other ci∣ties, and in a word spoiled all the countrie: in fine being returned beyond Almaigne, hauing married a wife of ex∣cellent beautie, though he was well wiued before, hee died on his marriage night sodainly in his bed: for hauing well ca∣roused the day before, hee fell into so dead asleepe, that ly∣ing vpon his backe without respect, the blood which was of∣ten wont to issue at his nosethrils finding those cōduites stop∣ped by his vpright lying, descended into his throat & stopped his wind. And so that bloody tyrant that had shed the blood of so many people, was himselfe by the effusion of his owne
blood murdered and stifled to death. Ithilbald king of Gothia at the instigation of his wife put to death very vnaduisedly one of the chiefe peeres of his realm, after which murder as he sat banquetting one day with his princes, enuironed with his guard & other attendants, ha∣uing his hand in the dish and the meat betweene his fingers, one sodainly reached him such a blow with a sword that it cut off his head, so that it almost tumbled vpon the table, to the great astonishment of all that were present. Greg. of Tours. lib. 3. histor.Sigismund king of Burgundy suffered himselfe to bee ca∣ried away with such an extreame passion of choler, prouoked by a false and malicious accusation of his se∣cond wife, that hee caused one of his sonnes which hee had by his former wife to bee strangled in his bed, be∣cause hee was induced to thinke that hee went about to make himselfe king: which deed being blowne abroad, Clodomire sonne to Clodoee and Clotild king of Fraunce and cousin German to Sigismund,Refer this properly to lib. 2. cap. 11. came with an armie for to reuenge this cruell and vnnaturall part, his mother set∣ting forward and inciting him thereunto, in regard of the iniurie which Sigismunds father had done to her father and mother one of whome hee slew, and drowned the other. As they were readie to ioine battaile, Sigismunds souldiours forsooke him, so that hee was taken and presently put to death, and his sonnes which hee had by his second wife were taken also and carried captiue to Orleance, & there drowned in a well. Thus was the execrable murder of Sigismund & his wife punished in their owne children. As for Cleodomire though hee went conquerour from this battaile, yet was hee encountred with another desastrous misfortune: for as hee marched forward with his forces to fight with Sigismunds brother, he was by him ouercome and slain: and for a further disgrace, his dismembred head fastened on the top of a pike carried about to the enterview of all men. Hee left behind him three yoong sonnes whom his owne brethren and their vncles Clotaire and Childebert notwithstanding their yong &
tender yeares tooke from their grandmother Clotildes cu∣stodie, that brought them vp, as if they would enstall them into some part of their fathers kingdome: but most wicked∣ly and cruelly to the end to possesse their goods, lands, & sig∣niories, bereft them al of their liues, saue one that saued him∣selfe in a monestarie. In this strange & monstrous act Clotaire shewed himselfe more then barbarous, when hee would not take pitty vpon the youngest of the two, being but seuen yeare old, who hearing his brother (of the age of tenne yeares) crying pittifully at his slaughter, threw himselfe at his vncle Childeberts feet with teares desiring him to saue his life, wherewith Childebert being greatly affected, entreated his brother with weeping eies to haue pitty vp∣on him, and spare the life of this poore infant; but al his war∣nings and entreaties could not hinder the sauadge beast from performing this cruell murder vpon this poor child, as he had done vpon the other. The Emperour Phocas attained by this bloody means the emperiall dignity,Nicephor. lib. 18. cap. 58. euen by the slaughter of his Lord & mai∣ster Mauricius, whom as he fled in disguised attire, for feare of a treason pretended against him, hee being beforetime the leiutenant general of his army, pursued so maliciously & hote∣ly, that he ouertook him in his flight, & for his further griefe, first put all his childrē seuerally to death before his face, that euery one of thē might be a seuerall death vpon him before he died, and then slew him also. This murderer was hee that first exalted to so high a point the popish horn, whē at the re∣quest of Boniface, he ordained that the bishop of Rome shold haue preheminence & authority oueral other bishops: which he did to the end that the stain & blame of his most execrable murder might be either quite blotted out, or at least wincked at. Vnder his regencie the forces of the Empire grew wonde∣rously into decay: France, Spaine, Almaigne and Lumbardy reuolted from the Empire: and at last himselfe being pursu∣ed by his sonne in law Priscus with the Senators, vvas ta∣ken, and hauing his handes and feet cut off, was togither
with the whole race of his ofspring put to a most cruel death, because of his cruell and tyrannous life. Among all the strange examples of Gods iudgements that euer were declared in this world, that one that befell a king of Poleland called Popiell for his murders, is for the strange∣nesse thereof most worthy to bee had in memory: hee raig∣ned in the year of our Lord 1346, this man among other of his particular kinds of cursings and swearing whereof he was no niggard, vsed ordinarily this oth: If it bee not true would rats might deuour me,Munst. Cosmog. Mandat. 3. Cursing. lib. 1. cap. 32. prophecying thereby his owne destru∣ction; for hee was deuoured euen by the same means which hee so often wished for, as the sequele of his historie will de∣clare. The father of this Popiell feeling himselfe neare death resigned the gouernment of his kingdome to two of his bre∣thren, men exceedingly reuerenced of all men for the va∣lor and vertue which appeared in them. He being deceased and Popiell being growne vp to ripe and lawfull yeares, when hee saw himselfe in full libertie without all bridle of gouern∣ment to doe what he listed, he began to giue the full swindge to his lawlesse and vnruly desires, in such sort that within few daies he became so shamelesse, that there was no kind of vice which appeared not in his behauior, euen to the wor∣king of the death of his owne vncles, for all their faithfull dealing towards him, which hee by poyson brought to passe. Which being done he caused himself forthwith to be crow∣ned with garlands of flowers and to bee perfumed with pre∣tious ointments: and to the end the better to solemnize his entrie to the crowne, commanded a sumptuous and pompous banket to be prepared, wherevnto all the princes and lords of his kingdome were inuited. Now as they were about to giue the onset vpon the delicate cheare, behold an army of rats sallying out of the dead and putrified bodies of his vncles set vpon him, his wife, and children, amid their dainties to gnaw them with their sharp teeth, insomuch that his guard with all their weapons & strength were not able to chase them away, but being weary with resisting their daily & mightie assaults,
gaue ouer the battaile: wherfore counsell was giuen to make great coale fires round about them, that the rats by that meanes might bee kept off, not knowing that no pollicy or power of man was able to withstand the vnchangeable de∣cree of God: for, for all their huge forces they ceased not to run through the midst of them and to assault with their teeth this cruell murderer. Then they gaue him counsaile to put himselfe, his wife, & children into a boat and thrust it into the middest of a lake, thinking that by reason of the waters the rats would not approch vnto thē: But alasse in vain, for they swum through the waters amaine & gnawing the boat, made such chinckes into the sides thereof that the water began to run in, which being perceiued of the boatmen, amazed them sore, and made them make post hast vnto the shore, where he was no sooner arriued, but a fresh muster of rats vniting their forces with the former, encountred him so sore, that they did him more scath then all the rest. Wherevpon all his guard and others that were there present for his defence, per∣ceiuing it to be a iudgement of Gods vengeance vpon him, abandoned and forsooke him at once: who seeing himselfe destitute of succour and forsaken on all sides, flew into a high tower in Chousuitze, whether also they pursued him, and cli∣ming euen vp to the highest roome where he was, first eat vp his wife and children (shee being guilty of his vncles death) and lastly gnew and deuoured him to the very bones. After the same sort was an Archbishop of Mentz, called Hatto,Munsteer Cos∣mographie. punished in the year 940 vnder the raigne of the Em∣perour Otho the great, for the extreame cruelty which he v∣sed towards certaine poore beggers, whom in time of famine he assembled together into a great barne, not to releeue their wants as he might & ought, but to rid their liues, as he ought not, but did: for hee set on fire the barne wherein they were, and consumed them all aliue comparing them to rats & mise that deuoured good corne, but serued to no other good vse.Mandat. 8. Auarice and vnmerciful∣nesse. But God that had regard and respect vnto those poor wret∣ches, took their cause into his hand, to quit this prowd prelate
with iust reuenge for his outrage committed against thē: sen∣ding towards him an army of rats & mise to lay siege against him with the engines of their teeth on all sides: which when this cursed wretch perceiued, he remoued into a tower that standeth in the midst of Rhine not far from Bing, whether he presumed this host of rats could not pursue him: but he was deceiued for they swum ouer Rhine thick & threefold, & got into his tower with such strange fury, that in very short space they had consumed him to nothing. In memorial wherof, this tower was euer after called the tower of rats. And this was the tragedy of that bloody archbutcher that compared poor Christian soules to brutish & base creatures, and therfore be∣came himselfe a prey vnto them, as Popiel king of Poleland did before him. In whose strange exāples the beams of Gods iustice shine forth after an extraordinary & wonderfull maner to the terror & feare of all men: when by the means of small creatures he made roome for his vengeāce, to make entrance vpon these execrable creature murderers, notwithstanding al mans deuises & impediments of nature; for the natiue opera∣tion of the elements was restrained frō hindering the passage of them, armed & inspired with an inuincible & supernatural courage to feare neither fire, water, nor weapon, till they had finished his command that sent them. And thus in old time did frogs, flies, grashoppers and lice make warre with Pharoa at the command of him that hath all the world at his beck. After this Archbishop in the same ranke of murderers we find registred many Popes, of all whome the notorious and markable are these two, Innocent the fourth and Boniface the eight, who deserued rather to be called Nocents & Malefaces than Innocents & Boniface, for their wicked & peruerse liues: for as touching the first of them, from the time that hee was first installed in the Papacy, he alwaies bent his horns against the Emperor Fredericke, & fought with him with an army not of men, but of excommunications & cursings as their manner is: & seeing that all his thundering buls and canons could not preuaile so far as hee desired, hee presently sought to bring to
passe that by treason which by force he could not: for hee so enchanted certain of his houshold seruants with foule bribes and faire words,Hieron. Marius. that when by reason of his short draught the poison which he ministred could not hurt him, hee got thē to strangle him to death. Moreouer he was chiefe sower of that war betwixt Henry, Lantgraue of Thuring, whom he created king of the Romans, & Conrade, Fredericks son, wherein hee reaped a crop of discomfitures & ouerthrows: after which he was found slain in his bed, his body being full of black marks, as if he had ben beaten to death with cudgels. Concerning Boniface,Baleus. after he had by subtle & crafty means made his predecessor dismisse himselfe of his Papacy and en∣thronized himselfe therein, hee put him to death in prison: and afterward made war vpon the Gibilines and committed much crueltie: wherefore also he died mad as we heard be∣fore. But touching the murderers of Popes and their punish∣ments for the same, wee shall see more in the 43 chapter fol∣lowing, whether the examples of them are referred that ex∣ceeding in all kind of wickednesse cannot bee rightly placed in the treatise of any particular commandement. CHAP. XIX. Other memorable examples of the same subiect. IF wee descend from antiquities to hi∣stories of later & fresher memory, we shall find many things worthy report and credit, as that which happened in the year 1405 betwixt two gentlemen of Henault,Eguerron. de monstr. vol. 1. the one of which accused the other for killing a near kinsman of his, which the other vtterly and sted∣fastly denied: wheron duke William county of Henault, offe∣red thē the cōbat in the city of Quesney to decide the cōtro∣uersie
by, when as by law it could not be ended: wherevnto they being come & hauing broken their speares in two, & in∣countred valiantly with their swords, at length hee that was charged with & indeed guilty of the murder, was ouercome of the other, and made to confesse with his mouth in opē au∣dience the truth of the fact: Wherefore the County adiud∣ged him in the same place to bee beheaded, which was spee∣dily executed, and the conqueror honourably conducted to his lodging. Now albeit this maner of deciding controuersies be not approued of God, yet we must not thinke it happened at aladuentures, but rather that the issue therof came of the Lord of hosts, that by this means gaue place to the execution of his most high & soueraign iustice, by manifesting the mur∣derer, & bringing him to that punishmēt which he deserued. Eguerron. de monstr. vol. 1.About this very time there was a most cruel & outragious riot practised & performed vpō Lewis duke of Orleance, bro∣ther to Charles the sixt, by the complot & deuise of Iohn duke of Burgundy, who (as he was naturally haughty & ambitious) went about to vsurpe the gouernmēt of the realm of France, for that the king by reason of weaknesse of his braine was not able to manage the affairs therof, so that great trouble & vn∣ciuil wars were growne vp by that occasion in euery corner of the realme. As therfore he affected and gaped after the rule, so he thought no means dishonest to attain vnto it, and ther∣fore his first enterprise was to take out of the way the kings brother who stood betwixt him and home. Hauing therfore prouided fit champions for his purpose, hee found oportunity one night to cause him to come out of his lodging late by counterfait tokens from the king, as if hee had sent for him a∣bout some matters of importance: and being in the way to S. Pauls hostle, where the kings lodging was in Paris, the poore prince suspecting nothing was sodainly set vpō with eighteen roisters at once, with such fury & violence, that in very short space they left him dead vpō the pauement by the gate Bar∣bet, his braines lying scattered about the street. After this de∣testable and odious act committed and detected, the cruell
Burgundian was so farre from shaming, that he vaunted and boasted at it, as if he had atchieued the most valorous and honourable exploit in the world (so farre did his impudencie outstretch the bond of reason.) Neuerthelesse to cast some counterfait colour vpon this rough practise, he vsed the con∣science and fidelitie of three famous diuines of Paris, who o∣penly in publicke assemblies approoued of this murder, say∣ing, That he had greatly offended, if hee had left it vndone. About this deuise hee emploied especially M. Iohn Petit a Sorbonist doctor, whose rashnes and brasen-facednes was so great, as in the counsell house of the king, stoutly to auerre, that that which was done in the death of the duke of Orle∣ance, was a vertuous and commendable action, and the au∣thour of it to be void of fault, and therefore ought to be void of punishment. The preface which this braue oratour vsed was, That he was bounden in duty to the duke of Burgundy, in regard of a goodly pension which he had receiued at his hands, and for that cause he had prepared his poore tongue in token of gratitude to defend his cause. Hee might better haue said thus, That seeing his tongue was poore and mise∣rable, and he himselfe a senslesse creature, therfore he ought not to allow or defend so obstinately such a detestable and traiterous murder committed vpon a Duke of Orleance, and the same the kings brother, in such vile sort; and that if hee should do otherwise, he should approoue of that which God and man apparantly condemned, yea the very Turkes and greatest Painyms vnder heauen; & that he should iustify the wicked & condemne the innocent, which is an abomination before God; & should put darknes in stead of light, and call that which is euill, good (for which the Prophet Esai in his 1 chapter denounceth the iudgemēts of God against false pro∣phets) & should follow the steps of Balaam, which let out his tongue to hire for the wages of iniquity: but none of these sup∣poses came once into his mind. But to returne to our history: The duke of Burgundy hauing the tongues of these braue doctors at his commaundement, and the Parisians who bore
themselues partially in this quarrel) generally fauourers of his side, came to Paris in armes, to iustifie himselfe as he preten∣ded, and stroke such a dreadfull awe of himselfe into all mens minds, that notwithstanding all the earnest pursuit of the Duchesse the widow of Orleance for iustice, he escaped vn∣punished, vntill God (by other meanes) tooke vengeance vp∣on him: which happened after a while, after that those his complices of Paris (being become lords and rulers of the city) had committed many horrible and cruell murders, as of the Constable and Chancellour, two head officers of the realme, whose bodies fast bound togither they drew naked through the streets from place to place in most despitefull maner: for the Daulphin escaping their hands by night, and safeguarded in his castle, after that hee heard of the seasure of the citie, found meanes to assemble certaine forces, and marched to Montereaufautyon with twenty thousand men, of purpose to be reuenged on the Duke for all his braue & riotous demea∣nors: hither vnder colour of parling & deuising new means to pacifie these old ciuill troubles, he enticed the duke, & being come, at his very first arrtuall, as he was bowing his knee in re∣uerence to him, he caused him to be slaine: And on this man∣ner was the duke of Orleance death quitted, & the euill and cruelty shewed towards him, returned vpon the murderers owne necke; for as hee slew him treacherously & cowardly, so was hee also treacherously and cowardly slaine, and iustly requited with the same measure that he before had measu∣red to another:Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3. notwithstanding herein the Daulphin was not free from a grieuous crime of disloialtie & truth breach, in working his death without shame of either faith-breach, or periury, and that in his owne presence, whom he had so often with protestation of assurance and safety, requested to come vnto him. Neither did hee escape vnpunished for it; for after his fathers decease, hee was in danger of loosing the crowne, and all for this cause. For Philip duke of Burgundy taking his fathers reuēge into his hands, by his cunning deuises wrought meanes to displace him from the succession of the kingdome,
by according a marriage betwixt the king of England and his sister, to whome he in fauour agreed to giue his kingdome in reuersion after his owne decease. Now assoone as the king of England was seased vpon the gouernment of Fraunce, the Daulphin was presently summoned to the marble table to giue answer for the death of the old duke: whither, when he made none appearance, they presently banished him the realme, and pronounced him to be vnworthy to be succee∣der to the noble crowne: which truly was a very grieuous chastisement, and such an one, as brought with it a heape of many mischiefes and discomfitures which happened in the warre betwixt England and him, for the recouery of his king∣dome. Peter, sonne to Alphonsus king of Castill,Froiss. lib. r. hist. was a most bloo∣die and cruell tyrant, for first hee put to death his owne wife, the daughter of Peter duke of Burbone, and sister to the Queene of France: Next he slue the mother of his bastard brother Henry, togither with many Lords and Barons of the realme, for which he was hated not only of all his subiects, but also of his neighbour and adioyning cuntries: which ha∣tred mooued the aforesaid Henry to aspire vnto the crowne: which, what with the Popes aduouch, who legitimated him, and the helpe of certaine French forces, and the support of the nobility of Castill, he soone atchieued. Peter thus aban∣doned, put his safest-guard in his heeles, and fled to Bordeaux towards the Prince of Wales, of whome he receiued such good entertainment, that with his aid he soone reentred his lost dominions, and by maine battell chased his bastard bro∣ther out of the confines thereof: But being reinstalled, whilst his cruelties ceased not to multiply on euery side, behold, Henry (with a new supply out of France) began to assaile him afresh, and put him once againe to his shifts: but all that hee could doe, could not shift him out of Henries hands, who pur∣sued him so hotly, that with his owne hands he soone rid him out of all troubles, and afterwards peaceably enioyed the kingdome of Castill.
CHAP. X. Of diuers other murderers, and their seuerall punishments. MAximinus from a shepheard in Thracia, grew to be an Emperor in Rome by these degrees: his exceeding strength and swiftnes in running commended him so to Seuerus then Emperour, that he made him of his guard; from that hee arose to be a Tribune, and at last to be an Emperour: which place he was no sooner in posses∣sion of, but immoderate crueltie (all this while buried) began to shew it selfe: for he made hauocke of all the nobilitie, and put to death those that hee suspected to be acquainted with his estate: insomuch as some called him Cyclops, some Busiris, others Anteus, for his cruelty. Wherfore the Senat of Rome seeing his indignity, proclaimed him an enemy to their com∣monwealth, and made it lawfull for any man to procure his death: which being knowen, his souldiers lying at the siege of Aquileia mooued with hatred, entred his tent at noone day, and slew him and his sonne togither. Iustinian the younger (no lesse hatefull to his subiects for his cruelty than Maximinus) was deposed from the Empire by conspiracie, and hauing his nosthrils slit, exiled to Cher∣sona, Leontius succeeding in his place. Howbeit ere long hee recouered his crowne and scepter, and returned to Constan∣tinople, exercising more cruelty at his returne, then euer hee had done before him: for he not only put to death Leontius and Tiberius, but also all that any way fauoured their parts. It is said of him, that he neuer w his mangled nose, but he caused one of them to be executed to death. At last he was
slaine by Philippicus to verifie the word of the Lord, That he which striketh with the sword, shall perish with the sword. Albonius king of Lumbardy, drinking vpon a time to his wife Rosimund in a cup made of her fathers skull (whome he in battaile had slaine) so displeased her therewith, that shee (attributing more to naturall affection then vnity of marri∣age) decreed with her selfe to hazard life and kingdome, to be reuenged vpon this grieuous iniury; wherefore shee thus practised: A knight called Hemichild was enamoured with one of her maids; him she brought into a secret darke place by pollicie, in shew to enioy his loue, but indeed to be at her commaund, for shee supplied his loues place: and then dis∣couering her selfe, put it to his choise either to kill her hus∣band, or to be accused by her of this villany. Hemichild chose the former, and in deed murdered his lord in his bed; and after the deed done, fled with her to Rauenna. But marke how the Lord requited this murder, euen most strangely; for they both which had beene linkt togither in the fact, were linkt togither also in the punishment; and as they had beene ioynt instruments of anothers destruction, so he made them mutuall instruments of their owne: for Rosimund thinking to poison him too, made him drinke halfe her medicine; but he feeling the poison in his veines, staied in the midway, and made her sup vp the other halfe for her part, so they died both togither. The Electors of the Empire disagreeing in suffrages,Munst. cosn. Philip. Melan. lib. 5. A∣dolphus duke of Nassauia, & Albertus duke of Austria, tooke vpon them the regiment and managing of the state: where∣upon grewe grieuous warres in all Germany, and dissention betweene the two statemen, so that Adolphus was slaine by the duke of Austria in battaile by the city of Spire: whose death was thus notably reuenged. All that tooke part a∣gainst him, or that were accessary to the murder, perished most strangely, Albert Earle of Hagerloch was slaine, Otto of Ochsensteme hanged, the bishop of Mentz died suddenly of an apoplexie in his sellar, the bishop of Stratsbrough was
butchered by a butcher: the Earle of Leimingen died of a phrensie, the duke of Austria himselfe was slaine by his ne∣phew Iohn, from whome he had taken the gouernment of Sueuia, because of his vnthriftinesse: generally they all came to destruction, so grieuous is the crie of innocent blood, a∣gainst those that are guiltie thereof. After the death of Woldimirus king of Rhythenia, his son Berisus succeeded in the kingdome,Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3. who though hee was a vertuous and religious prince, yet could not his vertue or re∣ligion priuiledge him from the malice of his brother Suado∣polcus, who gaping and itching for the crowne, slue his bro∣ther this good prince as he was sleeping in his chamber, togi∣ther with his Esquire that attended vpon him:Chron. Pol. lib. 2. cap. 10. and not con∣tent herewith, but adding murder to murder, he assaulted an∣other of his brethren by the same impiety, and brought him to the same end. Whereupon the last brother Iorslaus (to be reuenged on this villany) set vpon him with an army of men, and killing his complices, droue him to flie to Crachus king of Polonia for succour: who furnishing him with a new army, sent him backe against his brother, in which battell (his suc∣cesse being equall to his former) he lost his men, and himselfe escaping the sword, died in his flight to Polonia, and was bu∣ried in a base and ignoble sepulchre, fit enough for so base & ignoble a wretch. And that we may see how hatefull and vn∣godly a thing it is, to be either a protectour or a sauer of any murderer: marke the iudgement of God that fell vpon this king of Polonia, though not in his owne person, yet in his po∣sterity;Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3. for he being dead, his eldest sonne and heire Crachus was murdered by his younger brother Lechus as they were hunting, so disguised and torne, that euery man imputed his death not to Lechus (whose eies dropt crocadiles teares) but to some sauadge and cruell beast: Howbeit ere long (his trea∣chery being discouered, and disseised of his kingdome) hee died with extreame griefe and horrour of conscience. And thus wee see that Crachus his kingdome came to desolation for maintaining a murderer.
Iohn the high priest of Ierusalem, sonne and successour to Iudas, had a brother tearmed Iesus, to whome Bagoses the lieuetenant of Antaxerxes army, promised the priesthood,Ioseph aniq. Iudaic. l. r 1. c, 7 meaning in deed to depose Iohn and install him in his roome: vpon which occasion, this Iesus growing insolent, spared not to reuile his brother, & that in the temple with immodest & opprobrious speeches, so that his anger being prouoked,Profanatiō of holy things, lib. 1. cap. 34. hee slue him in his rage; a most impious part for the high priest to pollute the holy temple with blood, & that of his owne bro∣ther, and so impious, that the Lord in iustice could not choose but punish the whole natiō for it most seuerely. For this cause Bagoses imposed a tribute vpon them, euen a most grieuous tribute, that for euery lambe they offered vpon the altar, they should pay fifty groats to the king of Persia, besides the pro∣phanation of their temple with the vncircumcised Persians, who entred into it at their pleasures, and so polluted the san∣ctuary and holy things of God: this punishment continued vpon them seuen yeeres, and all for this one murder. Gerhardus Earle of Holsatia, after he had conquered the Danes in many and sundry battailes,Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3. was traiterously slaine in the city Kanderhusen, by one Nicolaus Iacobus a rich Baron, so that whome the open enemie feared in the field, him the priuie subtill foe murdered in his chamber. But the traitour and murderer albeit he fled to the castle Schaldenburg, and got a band of soldiers to defend himselfe, yet he was surprised by the Earls sonnes, who tormenting him as became a traitor to be tormented, at last rent his body into foure quarters, and so his murder and treason was condignly punished. Aboue all, the execution of Gods vengeance is most nota∣bly manifested in the punishment and detection of one Par∣thenius an homicide, treasurer to Theodobert king of France,Greg. of Tours, lib. 3. cap. 36. who hauing traiterously slaine an especiall friend of his called Ausanius, with his wife Papianilla, when no man suspected or accused him thereof, hee detected and accused himselfe after this strange manner: As hee slept in his bed, suddenly hee roared out most pitifully, crying for helpe or else hee
perished: and being demanded what he ailed, he halfe asleep answered, That his friend Ausanius and his wife whome hee had slaine long agoe, summoned him to Iudgement before God: vpon which confession he was apprehended, and after due examination, stoned to death. Thus though all witnesses faile, yet a murderers owne conscience will bewray him. Pipin, and Martellus his sonne, kings of France, enuying prosperity and ease,Casp. hed. lib. 6. cap. 17. fell into diuers monstrous sinnes: as to for∣sake their wiues and follow whores, which filthinesse when the Bishop of Tungria reprooued, Dodo the harlots brother murdered him for his labour: but he was presently taken with the vengeance of God; euen a lousie and most filthie disease, with the griefe and stinke whereof being mooued, he threw himselfe into the riuer Mosa, and there was drowned. How manifest and euident was the vengeance of God vp∣on the murderers of Theodoricke hishop of Treuerse:Martian. Scotus. Con∣rade the author of it died suddenly, the souldier that helped to throw him downe from the rocke,Hermanus con∣tractus. was choaked as he was at supper: two other seruants that laid too their hands to this murder, slew themselues most desperately. About the yeere of our Lord 700, Geilian the wife of Gos∣bert prince of Wurtiburg,Casp. Hed. lib. 6. cap. 10. being reprooued by Kilianus for incest, (for she married her husbands brother) wrought such meanes, that both hee and his brethren were depriued of their liues: but the Lord gaue her vp to Satan in vengeance, so that she was presently possessed with him, and so continu∣ed till her dying day. A certaine woman of Millaine in Italy hung a young boy, and after deuoured him instead of meat, when as she wanted none other victuals: and when shee was examined about the crime, shee confessed that a spirit persuaded her to doe it, tel∣ling her that after it, she should attaine vnto whatsoeuer she desired: for which murder, shee was tormented to death by a lingring and grieuous punishment: This, Arlunus reporteth to haue happened in his time. And surely howsoeuer openly the deuill sheweth not himselfe, yet hee is the moouer and
persuader of all murders, and commonly the detector. For hee delighteth in mens bloods and their destruction as in no∣thing more. At Winsheime in Germanie a certaine theefe after many obberies & murders committed by him vpon trauailers and women with child, went to the shambles before Easter and bought three calues heads, which when he put into a wallet they seemed to the standers by to be mens heads.Theat. histor. Though strange yet not incredi∣ble: since God can as well turne calues heads into mens, as a rod into a serpent, or wa∣ter into blood Whereof being attached & searched by the officers, and found so in∣deed, hee being examined how hee came by them, answered and proued by witnesses that he bought calues heads, & how they were transformed hee knew not. Whereat the Senat a∣mazed not supposing this miracle to arise of naught, cast the partie into prison, and tortured him to confesse the villany whereof the Lord would haue him detected, as hee did in∣deed, and was worthely punished for the same: and then the heads recouered their old shapes. Another theefe at Tu∣bing betraied his murder & robbery by his own sighes,8. Mandat. lib. 2, cap. 35. which were so incessant in griefe not of his fact, but of his small boo∣tie, that being but asked the question, he confessed the crime and vnderwent worthy punishment. Another murderer in Spaine was discouered by the trembling of his heart: for when many were suspected of the murder, and all renoun∣ced it, the iudge caused all their breasts to bee opened, and him in whom he saw most trembling of breast, hee condem∣ned, who also could not deny the fact, but presently confes∣sed the same. At Isenacum a certaine young man being in loue with a maid, & not hauing wherewith to maintain her, vsed this vn∣lawfull means, he vpon a night slew his host,8. Mandat. lib. 2. cap. 35. & throwing his body into the seller, tooke away all his money, and then ha∣sted away; but the terror of his owne conscience, and the iudgement of God so besotted him, that he could not stirre a foot vntill he was apprehēded. At the same time Martin Lu∣ther & Philip Melancton abode at Isenacum, & were eie wit∣nesses of this miraculous iudgement, who also dealt with the
murderer, that in most humble and penitent confession of his sins & comfort of soule he ended his life. By all these exāples we see how hard it is for a murderer to escape without his re∣ward. Nay rather then he shal go vnpunished sencelesse crea∣tures and his owne soule riseth to giue sentence against him. In the yeare of our Lord 1546 Iohn Diazius a Spaniard by birth, liuing a student and professor in Paris came first to Geneua, and then to Strasbrough, and there by the grace of Gods spirit saw his Sorbonicall errors and renoun∣ced them, betaking himselfe to the profession of the purer religion, and the company and acquaintance of godly men: amongst whome was Bucer that excellent man, who sent him also to Nurnburge to ouersee the printing of a booke which he was to publish.Sleid. lib. 17. Whilst Diazius liued at this Nurnburge (a citie scituate vpon the riuer Dimow) his brother a lawier, and iudge lateriall to the inquisition, by name Alphonsus came thither, and by all meanes possible endeuoured to dissuade him from his religon, and to reduce him againe to Poperie. But the good man persisted in the truth notwithstanding all his persuasions and threats: wherfore the subtile foxe tooke another course and faining himselfe to bee conuerted also to his religion, exhorted him to goe with him into Italy where he might doe much good, or at the least to August: but by the counsaile of Bucer and his friends hee was kept backe, o∣therwise willing to follow his brother. Wherefore Alphon∣sus departed & exhorteth him to constancy & perseuerance, giuing him also foureteeene crownes to defray his charges. Now the Wolfe had not ben three daies absent, when he hi∣red a rakehell and common butcher and with him flew again to Nurnburge in post hast: and comming to his brothers lod∣ging, deliuered him a letter which whilest he read, the villain his confederate cleft his head in peeces with an axe, leauing him dead vpon the floore, and so fled with all expedition. Howeit they were apprehended, yet quit by the Popes iu∣stice, so holy and sacred are the fruits of his holinesse, though not by the iustice of God, for within a while after hee hung
himselfe vpon his mules necke at Trent. Duke Abrogastes slew Valentinian the Emperour of the West, and aduanced Eugenius to the crowne of the Em∣pire: but a while after the same sword which had slaine his Lord and maister was by his owne hands turned into his own bowels. Mempricius the sonne of Madan the fourth king of En∣gland, then called Britaine after Brute,Lanquet. chron. had a brother called Manlius, betwixt whome was great strife for the soueraigne dominion: but to rid himselfe of all his trouble at once, hee slew his brother Manlius by treason, and after continued his raigne in tyranny and all vnlawfull lusts, the space of twentie yeares, but although vengeance all this while wincked, yet it slept not, for at the end of this space, as hee was hunting hee was deuoured of wild beasts. In the yeare of our Lord God 745 one Sigebert was au∣thorised king of the Saxons in Brittaine, a cruell and tyran∣nous Prince towards his subiects, and one that chaunged the ancient lawes and customes of his realme after his owne pleasure, and because a certaine Nobleman somewhat sharpely aduertised him of his euill conditions, he ma∣litiously caused him to bee put to death: but see how the Lord reuenged this murder, hee caused his Nobles to de∣priue him of his kingly authority, and at last as a desolate and forlorne person wandering alone in a wood, to bee slaine of a swine-heard, whose maister hee (being king) had wrongfully put to death. In the yeare of our Lord 678 Childerich king of Fraunce, caused a Nobleman of his Realme called Bolyde, to bee bound to a stake and there beaten to death without the pretence of any iust crime or accusation against him; for which cruelty his Lords and commons, being grieuously of∣fended conspired togither and slew him with his wife as they were in hunting. In the raigne of Edward the second and Edward the third
Sir Roger Mortimer committed many villanous outrages in sheading much humane blood, but hee was also iustlie re∣compenced in the end: first he murdered king Edward the second lying in Barkley castell, to the end hee might as it was supposed enioy Isabell his wife with whome hee had ve∣ry suspitious familiarity. Secondly, hee caused Edward the third to conclude a dishonourable peace with the Scots, by restoring to them all their ancient writings, charters, and pa∣tents, whereby the kings of Scotland had bound themselues to be feudaries to the kings of England. Thirdly, he accused Edmund Earle of Kent vncle to king Edward of treason, and caused him vniustly to be put to death. And lastly he conspi∣red against the king to worke his destruction, for which and diuerse other things that were laid to his charge he was wor∣thely and iustly beheaded. In the raigne of Henry the sixt, Humfry the good duke of Gloucester & faithfull protector of the king, by the meanes of certaine malicious persons, and especially the Marques of Suffolke (as it was suspected) was arrested, cast into hold, & strangled to death in the Abbey of Bury: for which cause the Marques was not only banished the land for the space of fiue yeares, but also banished out of his life for euer, for as he sailed towards France, he was met withall by a ship of warre, and there presently beheaded, and the dead corps cast vp at Douer, that England wherein hee had committed the crime might be a witnesse of his punishment. As the murder of a gentleman in Kent called maister Ar∣den of Feuersham was most execrable, so the wonderfull dis∣couerie thereof was exceeding rare: this Arden being some∣what aged had to wife a young woman no lesse faire then dishonest, who being in loue with one Mosby more then her husband, did not onely abuse his bed, but also conspired his death with this her companion: for togither they hired a notorious ruffian one Blacke Will to strangle him to death with a towell as hee was playing a game at tables: which though secretly done, yet by her own guiltie conscience and
some tokens of blood which appeared in the house was soon discouered and confessed. Wherfore she her selfe was burnt at Canterbury: Michael maister Ardens man was hanged in chaines at Feuersham: Mosby and his sister were hanged in Smithfield. Greene another partner in this bloody action was hanged in chaines in the high way against Feuersham. And Blacke Will the ruffian after his first escape was apprehended and burnt on a scaffold at Flushing in Zealand. And thus all the murderers had their deserued dewes in this life, and what they endured in the life to come (except they obtaine mercy by true repentance) it is easie to iudge. CHAP. XI. Of Paricides or parent murderers. IF all effusion of humane blood bee both hor∣rible to behold and repugnant to nature, then is the murdering of parents especially detestable, when a man is so possessed with the deuill, or transported with a hellish fury, that he lifteth vp his hand against his owne naturall father or mother to put thē to death: this is so mon∣strous and inormious an impiety that the greatest Barbarians euer haue had it in detestation: wherefore it is also expresse∣ly commanded in the law of God, that vvhosoeuer smiteth his father or mother in what sort soeuer, though not to death,Exod. 21. yet he shall die the death. If the disobedience, vnreuerence, and contempt of children towards their parents are by the iust iudgement of God most rigorously punished as hath ben declared before in the first commandement of the second ta∣ble) how much more then when violence is offered, & aboue all, when murder is cōmitted.Diodor. Sic. Thus the Aegyptians punished this sin: they put the cōmittants vpon a stack of thorns, and burnt thē aliue, hauing beaten their bodies before hand with sharp reeds made of purpose. Solon being demanded why hee
appointed no punishment in his lawes for Parricides; answe∣red that there was no necessity, thinking that the wide world could not affoord so wicked a wretch. It is said that Romulus for the same cause ordained no punishment in his Common-wealth for that crime, but called euery murderer a Parricide, the one being in his opinion a thing execrable, and the other impossible. And in truth there was not for 600 years space (ac∣cording to Plutarchs report) found in Rome any one that had cōmitted this execrable fact. The first Parricide that Rome saw, was Lucius Ostius, after the first Punick war; although o∣ther writers affirme that M. Malliolus was the first, and Lucius the second: howsoeuer it was they both vnderwent the pu∣nishment of the law Pompeia, which enacted that such offen∣dors should be thrust into a sack of lether, & an ape, a cock, a viper & a dog put in to accōpany them, & then to be thrown into the water, to the end that these beasts being enraged & animated one against another, might wreke their teene vpon them, & so depriue thē of life after a strange fashion, being de∣barred of the vse of aire, water, & earth, as vnworthy to parti∣cipate the very elements with their deaths, much lesse with their liues: which kind of punishmēt was after practised and confirmed by the constitution of Constantine the great. And albeit the regard of the punishmēt seemed terrible & the of∣fence it self much more monstrous, yet since that time there haue ben many so peruerse & exceedingly wicked, as to throw themselues headlong into that desperat gulfe. As Cleodorick son of Sigebert king of Austria,Greg. of Tours, lib 2. who being tickled with an vn∣satiable lust of raigne through the deceiuable persuasions of Cleodouius king of Fraunce slew his father Sigebert as he lay asleepe in his tent in a forrest at noone time of the day, who being weary with walking laid himselfe downe there to take his rest: but for all that, the wicked wretch was so farre from attaining his purpose, that it fell out cleane contrarie to his expectation, for after his fathers death, as hee was vewing his treasures and ransacking his coffers, one of Cleodouius fa∣ctors stroke him sodainly and murdered him, & so Cleodouius
seased both vpon the crowne and treasures. After the death of Hircanus,Ioseph. antiq. Aristobulus succeeded in the gouernmēt of Iudea, which whilest he stroue to reduce into a kingdome & to weare a crown, contrary to the custome of his predecessors, his mother & other brethren contending with him about the same he cast in prison, and took Antigonus his next brother to be his associate: but ere long (a good gratefull son) he famished her to death with hunger, that had fed him to life with her teates, euen his naturall mother: And after persuaded with false accusations caused his late best beloued Antigonus to be slain by an ambush, that lay by Stratos tower, because in the time of his sicknesse hee entered the temple with pompe: but the Lord called for quittance for the two bloosheads immediatly after the execution of them: for his brothers blood was scarse washed of the ground, ere in the ex∣tremity of his sicknesse he was carried into the same place, & there vomiting vp bloud at his mouth & nosthrils to be min∣gled with his brothers, he fell down starke dead, not without horrible tokens of trembling and despaire. Nero that vnnaturall Tyrant surpassed all that liued,Corn. Tacit. lib. 14. as in all other vices, so in this; for hee attempted thrise by poyson to make away his mother Agrippina: and when that could not preuaile by reason of her vsuall Antidots and preseruatiues, hee assaied diuerse other meanes: as first a de∣uise whereby shee should bee crushed to death as she slept,Sueton. cap. 33. a loosened beame that should fall vpon her; and secondly by shipwracke: both which when shee escaped, the one by dis∣couery, and the other by swimming: hee sent Anicetus the Centurion to slaughter hir with the sword: who with his companions breaking vp the gate of the city, where shee lay, rushed into her chamber, and there murdered her. It is written of her that when shee saw there was no reme∣dy but death, shee presented her belly vnto the murde∣rer, and desired him to kill her in that part which had most deserued it by bringing into the world so vile a monster: and of himt, hat he came to veiw the dead carcasse of his mother,
and handled the members thereof, commending this and discommending that, as his fancy led him, & in the mean time being thirstie, to call for drinke: so far was hee from all huma∣nitie and touch of nature; but he that spared not to embrew his handes in her blood that bred him, was constrained ere long to offer violence vnto his own life, which was most dear vnto him. Munst. Cosmog. lib. 3.Henry the son of Nicolotus duke of Herulia had two wic∣ked, cruell and vnkind sons, by the yonger of whom with the consent of the elder he was traiterously murdered, because he had married a third wise: for which cause Nicolotus their cousin Germane pursued them both with a iust reuenge: for he depriued them of their kingdome, and droue them into exile where they soone after perished. Phil. Melanct. chron. lib. 5. Munst. Cosmog. lib. 4.Selimus the tenth Emperour of the Turks was so vnnatu∣rall a child, that he feared not to dispossesse his father Baiaset of the crowne by treason: and next to bereaue him of his life by poyson: And not fatisfied therewith, euen to murder his two brethren, and to destroy the whole stocke of his own bloud. But when hee had raigned eight yeares, vengeance found him out, and being at his backe so corrupted and putri∣fied his reines, that the contagion spread it selfe ouer all his bodie: so that hee died a beast-like and irkesome death, and that in the same place where hee had before oppressed his father Baiaset with an army, to wit at Chiurle a citty of Thracia, in the yeare of our Lord 1520 the month of Sep∣tember. Casp. Hedian. lib. 6. cap. 29.Charles the younger by surname called Crassus, sonne to Lodouick the third, was possessed and tormented with a Deuill in the presence of his father, and the peeres of the realme; which hee openly confessed to haue iustly happe∣ned vnto him, because hee had pretended in his mind to haue conspired his fathers death and deposition: what then are they to expect that doe not pretend but performe this monstrous enterprise?
A certaine degenerate and cruel sonne longing and gaping after the inheritance of his father, which nothing but his life kept him from, wrought this meanes to accomplish his de∣sire: he accused his father of a most filthy and vnnameable crime, euen of committing filthinesse with a cow; knowing, that if he were conuicted thereof,Theat. hist. the law would cut off his life: and herein he wrought a double villany, in going about not onely to take away his life (which by the law of nature he ought to haue preserued) but also his good name, without respecting that the staine of a father redoundeth to his poste∣ritie,Mandat. 8. Calumniatiō, lib. 2. cap. and that children commonly doe not only inherit the possessions but also imitate the conditions of their parents: but all these supposes laid aside togither with all feare of God, he indicted him before the magistrate, of incest, & that vpon his owne knowledge: insomuch, that they brought the poore innocent man to the racke, to the end to make him confesse the crime, which albeit amidst his tortures he did, assoone as he was out he denied againe: howbeit his extor∣ted confession stood for euidence, and he was condemned to be burned with fire, as was speedily executed, and constantly endured by him, exclaiming still vpon the false accusation of his sonne, and his owne vnspotted innocencie, as by the issue that followed, most clearely appeared; for his sonne not long after, fell into a reprobate mind, and hanged himselfe: and the iudge that condemned him, with the witnesses that bare record of his forced confession, within one moneth died all after a most wretched and miserable sort: And thus it pleased God both to reuenge his death, and also to quit his reputation and innocency, from ignominy and discredit in this world. Manfred, prince of Tarentum,Phil Melanct. Chron. lib. 4. No better fruit to be ex∣pected of an bastard im bastard sonne to Fredericke the second, smothered his father to death with a pillow, be∣cause (as some say) he would not bestow the kingdom of Na∣ples vpon him: & not content herewith, he poisoned also the heires of Fredericke, to the end hee might attaine vnto the crowne, as Conrade his elder brother, and his nephew the
sonne of Henry the heire, which Henry died in prison; & now only Conradinus remained betwixt him and the kingdome, whome though he assailed to send after his father, yet was his intention frustrate, for the Pope thundered out his curses a∣gainst him, and instigated Charles duke of Angiers to make warre against him: wherein bastard and vnnaturall Manfred was discomfited and slaine, and cut short of his purpose, for which he had committed so many tragedies. Luther.Martin Luther was wont to report of his owne experi∣ence this wonderfull history of a locksmith, a young man, riotous and vicious, who to find fuell for his luxury, was so be∣witched, that he feared not to slay his owne father and mo∣ther with a hammer, to the end to gaine their mony and pos∣sessions: after which cruell deed, he presently went to a sho∣maker and bought him new shoes, leauing his old behind him, by the prouidence of God to be his accusers: for after an houre or two, the slaine bodies being found by the magi∣strate, and inquisition made for the murderer, no manner of suspition being had of him, hee seeming to take such griefe thereat. But the Lord that knoweth the secrets of the heart, discouered his hypocrisie, and made his owne shoes which he had left with the shoemaker rise vp to beare witnesse a∣gainst him: for the blood which ran from his fathers wounds besprinkled them so, that thereof grew the suspition, & from thence the examination, & very soone the confession, & last of all his worthy & lawfull execution. From hence wee may learne for a generall truth, that murder, neuer so secret, will euer by one means or other be discouered; the Lord will not suffer it to goe vnpunished, so abominable it is in his sight. Another sonne at Bosil, in the yere of our Lord God 1560, bought a quantitie of poison of an Apothecary,Casp. Hed. 4. part. chron. & ministred it to none but to his owne father, accounting him worthiest of so great a benefit: which, when it had effected his wish vp∣on him, the crime being detected, in stead of possessing his goods which he aimed at, hee possessed a vile and shamefull death: for he was drawne through the streets, burnt with hot
irons, and tormented nine houres in a wheele, till his life for∣sooke him. As it is repugnant to nature for children to deale thus cruelly with their parents, so it is more against nature for parents to murder their children: insomuch as naturall affe∣ction is of greater force in the descent, then in the ascent, & the loue that parents beare their children, is greater then that which children redound to their parents, because the child proceedeth from the father, and not the father from the child, as part of his fathers essence, and not the father of his: Can a man then hate his owne flesh, or be a rooter out of that which himselfe planted? It is rare: yet sometimes it commeth to passe. Howbeit as the offence is in a high de∣gree, so it is alwaies punished by some notable and high iudgement: as by these examples that follow, shall appeare. The ancient Ammonites had an idoll called Moloch, to the which they offered their children in sacrifice: this idoll (as the Iewes write) was of a great stature and hollow within, hauing seuen chambers in his hollownesse, whereof one was to receiue meate, another turtle doues, the third a sheepe, the fourth a ram, the fift a calfe, the sixt an oxe, and the se∣uenth a child: his hands were alwaies extended to receiue gifts, and when a child was offered, they were made fire hot to burne it to death; none must offer the child but the fa∣ther: & to drowne the cries of it, the Chemarims (for so were the priests of that idoll called) made a noise with bels, cym∣bals, and hornes: thus it is written that king Achab offered his son, yea & many of the children of Israel beside, as the Pro∣phet Dauid affirmeth: They offered (saith he) their sonnes and daughters to deuils, & shed innocent blod,Psal. 106, 37, 38. euen the blood of their children, whom they offered vnto the idols of Canaan, and their land was defiled with blood: this is the horrible crime. Now mark the iudgemēt touching the Canaanites; the land spued them out for their abominations, Achab with his posterity was accursed, himselfe being slaine by his enemies, and the crowne taken from his posterity, not one being left of his off∣spring to pisse against the wal: according to the saying of Elias:
as for the Iewes, the Prophet Dauid in the same place decla∣reth their punishment, when he saith, That the wrath of the Lord was kindled,Vers. 40. and he abhorred his inheritance, and gaue them into the hands of the heathen, that they that hated them were lords ouer them. In the yeere of our Lord 1551, in a towne of Hassia cal∣led Weidenhasten,Iob. Fincel. llb. 1. de mirac. the 20 day of Nouember, a cruell mo∣ther inspired with Satan, shut vp all her dores, and began to murder her foure children on this manner: shee snatcht vp a sharpe axe, and first set vpon her eldest sonne, being but eight yeeres old, searching him out with a candle behind a hogs-head where he hid himselfe, and presently (notwithstanding his pitifull praiers and complaints) claue his head in two pee∣ces, and chopped off both his armes: next shee killed her daughter of fiue yeeres old, after the same manner: another little boy of three yeeres of age (seeing his mothers madnes) hid himselfe (poore infant) behind the gate, whome assoone as the tygre espied, she drew out by the haire of the head into the floore, and there cut off his head: the youngest lay crying in the cradle but halfe a yeere old, him shee (without all compassion) pluckt out, and murdered in like sort. These murders being finished, the deuill incarnate (for certen no womanly nature was left in her) to take punishment of her selfe for the same, cut her owne throat; and albeit shee surui∣ued nine daies, and confessing her fault, died with teares and repenrance, yet we see how it pleased God to arme her own hands against her selfe, as the fittest executioners of his ven∣geance. Theatr. hist.The like tragicall accident, we read to haue happened at Cutzenborff, a city in Silesia, in the yeere 1536, to a woman and her three children, who hauing slaine them all in her husbands absence, killed her selfe in like maner also to make vp the tragedie. Concerning stepmothers, it is a world to read, how many horrible murders they haue vsually practised vpō their chil∣dren in law, to the end to bring the inheritance to their owne
brood, or at least to reuenge some iniury supposed to be done vnto them: of which, one or two examples I will subnect, as a tast out of many hundred, leauing the residue to the iudge∣ment and reading of the learned. Constantius, the sonne of Heraclius, hauing raigned Empe∣rour but one yeere, was poisoned by his stepmother Martina,Zonoras. tom. 3. to the end to install her owne sonne Heraclon in the crowne; but for this cruell part becomming odious to the Senat, they so much hated to haue her or her sonne raigne ouer them, that in stead thereof, they cut off her tongue and his nose, and so banished them the city. Fausta the wife of Constantine the Great, fell in loue with Constantine her sonne in law, begotten vpon a concubine,Zonoras. 3. Annal. Sex. Aur. whom when she could not persuade vnto her lust, shee accu∣sed vnto the Emperour, as a sollicitour of her chastitie; for which cause hee was condemned to die: but after the truth was knowen, Constantinus put her into a hote bath, and suffe∣red her not to come forth vntill the heat had choaked her, reuenging vpon her head, his sonnes death, and her owne vn∣chastitie. CHAP. XII. Of Subiect Murderers. SEing then they that take away their neigh∣bours liues, doe not escape vnpunished, (as by the former examples it appeareth) it must needs folow, that if they to whom the sword of iustice is committed by God to represse wrongs and chastise vices, doe giue ouer themselues to cruelties, and to kill and slay those whome they ought in duty to protect and defend, must receiue a greater measure of punishment, ac∣cording to the measure and quality of their offence. Such an one was Saul the first king of Israel, who albeit he ought to
haue bene sufficiently instructed out of the law of God in his duty in this behalfe: yet was hee so cruell and bloody min∣ded, as contrary to all iustice, to put to death Abimelech the high priest, with fourescore and fiue other priests of the fa∣mily of his father,1. Sam. 22. onely for receiuing Dauid into his house: small, or rather no offence. And yet not satisfied herewith, h vomited out his rage also against the whol city of the priests▪ and put to the mercilesse sword both man, woman, and child, without sparing any. Hee slew many of the Gibeonites, who though they were reliques of the Amorites that first in∣habited that lād, yet because they were receiued into league of amity by a solemne oth, and permitted of long continuance to dwell amongst them, should not haue bene awarded as e∣nemies, nor handled after so cruell a fashion. Thus therefore he tyranizing and playing the butcher amongst his own sub∣iects (for which cause his house was called the house of slaughter) & practising many other foul enormities, he was at the last ouercome of the Philistims, & sore wounded: which when he saw, fearing to fall aliue into his enemies hands, and not finding any of his owne men that would lay their hands vpon him, desperately slew himselfe. The same day three of his sonnes, and they that followed him of his owne houshold were all slaine. The Philistims the next day finding his dead body despoiled among the carcasses, beheaded it, and caried the head in triumph to the temple of their god, and hung vp the trunke in disgrace in one of their cities, to be seene, lookt vpon, and pointed at. And yet for all this was not the fire of Gods wrath quenched: for in king Dauids time, there arose a famine that lasted three yeeres, the cause whereof was de∣clared by God to be the murder which Saul committed vp∣on the Gibeonites:2. Sam. 21. wherefore Dauid deliuered Sauls seuen sonnes into the Gibeonites hands that were left, who put them to the most shamefull death that is, euen to hanging. Amongst all the sinnes of king Achab and Iezabel which were many and great,1. King. 21. the murder of Naboth standeth in the forefront, for though hee had committed no such crime as
might any way deserue death: yet by the subtill and wicked deuise of Iezabel, foolish and credulous consent of Achab, and false accusation of the two suborned witnesses, he was cruelly stoned to death: but his innocent blood was punished first in Achab, who not long after the warre which hee made with the king of Siria, receiued so deadly a wound, that hee died thereof, the dogges licking vp his blood in the same place where Naboths blood was licked,2. King. 9. according to the foretelling of Elias the Prophet. And secondly of Iezabel, whome her owne seruants at the commandement of Iehu (whome God had made executour of his wrath) threw headlong out of an high window vnto the ground, so that the walls were died with her blood, and the horses trampled her vnder their feet, and dogs deuoured her flesh, till of all her dainty body, there remained nothing sauing only her scull, feet, and palme of her hands. Ioram sonne of Iehosaphat king of Iudah, being after his fathers death possessed of the crowne and scepter of Iudah,2. Chron. 21. by and by exalted himselfe in tyranny, and put to death sixe of his owne brethren, all younger than himselfe, with many princes of the realme, for which cause God stirred vp the E∣domites to rebell, the Philistims and Arabians to make war against him, who forraged his countrey, sacked and spoiled his cities, and tooke prisoners his wiues and children, the yon∣gest only excepted, who afterwards also was murdered, when he had raigned king but a small space. And lastly, as in do∣ing to death his owne brethren, hee committed crueltie a∣gainst his owne bowels, so the Lord stroke him with such an incurable disease in his bowels, and so perpetuall (for it conti∣nued two yeeres, that his very entrails issued out with tor∣ment, and so died in horrible misery. Albeit that in the former booke we haue already touch∣ed the pride and arrogancie of king Alexander the Great, yet wee can not pretermit to speake of him in this place, his example seruing so fit for the present subiect; for al∣though as touching the rest of his life hee was verie well
gouerned in his priuat actions, as a monarch of his reputati∣on might be, yet in his declining age (I meane not in yeeres▪ but to deathward) he grew exceeding cruell, not only tow∣ards strangers, as the Cosseis, whome he destroied to the suc¦king babe, but also to his houshold and familiar friends: Inso¦much, that being become odious to most, fewest loued hi and diuers wrought all meanes possible to make him away but one especially, whose sonne in law and other neare friends he had put to death, neuer ceased vntill he both ministred a deadly draught vnto himselfe,Iustine. whereby he depriued him of his wicked life, and a fatall stroke to his wiues and children after his death, to the accomplishment of his full reuenge. Phalaris, the tyrant of Agrigentum, made himselfe fa∣mous to posterity by no other meanes,Oros. then horrible cruel∣ties, exercised vpon his owne subiects, inuenting euery day new kinds of tortures to scourge and afflict the poore soules withall. In his dominion there was one Perillus an artificer of his craft, one expert in his occupation, who to flatter and curry fauour with him, deuised a new torment, a brasen bull of such a strange workmanship, that the voice of those that were rosted therein, resembled rather the roaring of a bull then the cry of men: the tyrant was well pleased with the in∣uention, but hee would needs haue the inuentour make first triall of his owne worke, as hee well deserued, before any o∣ther should take tast thereof. But what was the end of this tyrant?Cic. Off. 2. The people not able any longer to endure his mon∣strous and vnnaturall cruelties, ranne vpon him with one consent with such violence, that they soone brought him to destruction; and as some say, put him into the brasen bull, (which he prouided to rost others) to be rosted therein him∣selfe; deseruing it as well for approouing the deuise, as Peril∣lus did for deuising it. Edward the second of that name, king of England, at the request and desire of Hugh Spencer his darling,Enguerr. de Monstr. vol. 1. made war vp∣on his subiects, and put to death diuers of the peeres & lords of the realme, without either right or forme of lawe, inso∣much
that Queene Isabell his wife fled to Fraunce with her young sonne for feare of his vnbridled fury, and after a while finding oportunity and meanes to returne againe, guarded with certaine small forces which shee had in those countries gathered together▪ she found the whole people discontented with the kings demeanors, and ready to assist hir against him: so she besieged him with their succor, and took him prisoner, and put him into the tower of London to bee kept till order might be taken for his deposition, so that shortly after by the estates (being assembled togither) he was generally & iointly reputed & pronounced vnworthy to be king, for his exceding cruelties sake which he had cōmitted vpon many of his wor∣thy subiects: and so deposing him they crowned his young son Edward (the third of his name) king in his roome, he yet liuing and beholding the same. Iohn Maria duke of Millan may be put into this rancke of murderers:Paulus Iouius. for his custome was diuerse times when any citi∣zen offended him, yea and sometimes without offence too, to throw them amongst cruell mastiues to be torn in peeces and deuoured. But as hee continued & delighted this vnnaturall kind of murder, the people one day incensed & stirred vp a∣gainst him, ran vpon him with such rage and violence, that they quickly depriued him of life. And he was so wel beloued that no man either would or durst bestow a sepulchre vpon his dead bones, but suffered his body to lie in the open street vncouered, saue that a certain harlot threw a few roses vpon his wounds and so couered him. Alphonsus the second king of Naples Ferdinands son was in Tyranny towards his subiects nothing inferiour to his fa∣ther,Sabel. Guicciard. lib. 1. Philip de Com. Bemb. histor. Vent. lib. 2. for whether of them imprisoned & put to death more of the nobility & Barons of the realme it is hard to say; but sure it is that both were too outragious in all manner of cru∣elty: for which as soone as Charles the eight king of France departing from Rome made towards Naples, the hatred which the people bore him secretly with the odious remem∣brance of his fathers cruelty, began openly to shew it selfe by
the fruits; for they did not nor could not dissemble the great desire that euery one had of the approch of the Frenchmen: which when Alphonsus perceiued, and seeing his affaires and estate brought vnto so narrow a pinch, hee also cowardly cast away all courage to resist, and hope to recouer so hug a tempest: and hee that for a long time had made war his trade and profession, and had yet all his forces and ar∣mies complete & in readinesse, making himselfe banquerout of all that honour and reputation, which by long experience and deeds of armes hee had gotten, resolued to abandon his kingdome, and to resigne the title and authoritie thereof to his son Ferdinand: thinking by that meanes to assuage the heat of their hatred, and that so yoong and innocent a king who in his owne person had neuer offended them might bee accepted and beloued of them, and so their affection toward the French rebated and cooled. But this deuise seemed to no more purpose then a salue applied to a sore out of season, whē it was growne incurable, or a prop set to a house that is alrea∣die falne. Therefore hee tormented with the sting of his owne conscience, and finding in his mind no repose by day, nor rest by night, but a continuall Summns and aduer∣tisement by fearefull dreames, that the Noblemen which hee had put to death cried to the people for reuenge against him, was surprised with so terrible terrour, that foorth∣with without making acquainted with his departure ei∣ther his brother or his owne sonne, hee fled to Sicily, sup∣posing in his iourney that the Frenchmen were still at his backe, and starting at euerie little noise, as if hee feared all the elements had conspired his destruction. Philip Comineus that was an eie witnesse of this iourney, reporteth that euerie night hee would crie, that hee heard the French∣men, and that the verie trees and stones ecchoed Fraunce into his eares: And on this manner was his flight to Sicily. King Charles in the meane while hauing by force and blood∣shed to terrifie the rest taken two passages that were before him, the whole realme without any great resistance yeelded
it selfe vnto his mercie: albeit that the young king had done what hee could, to withstand him. But at length seeing the Neapolitanes ready to rebel and himselfe in danger to be ta∣ken prisoner, he fled from the castell of Naples, and with a small company got certaine brigandines wherein hee sailed to the Island Ischia, thirty miles from Naples, saying at his departure this verse out of the Psalmes: How vaine are the watchmen and guards of that city which is not guarded and wat∣ched by the Lord? which he oftentimes repeated, and so long as Naples was in his view. And thus was crueltie punished both in Ferdinand the father, and Alphonse the son. Artaxerxes Ochus the eight king of the Persians began his raign with thus many murders;Herodos. he slew two of his owne bre∣thren first: secondly Euageras king of Ciprus, his partner and associate in the kingdome: thirdly he tooke Gidon traiterou∣sly, & was the cause of forty thousand mens deaths that were slain & burned therin: beside many other priuate murders & outrages which he cōmitted, for which cause the Lord in his iustice rained down vengeance vpon his head: for Bagoas one of his princes ministred such a fatal cup to his stomack, that it mortified his sences, & depriued him of his vnmercifull soule and life: & not only vpon his head, but vpon his kingdome & his son Arsame also, for he was also poisoned by the same Ba∣goas, & his kingdome translated to Darius prince of Armenia, whome when the same Bagoas went about to make tast of the same cup which his predecessors did, he was taken in his own snare: for Darius vnderstanding his pretence, made him drinke vp his owne poyson which he prouided for him: and thus murder was reuenged with murder, and poyson with poyson,Exod. 22.24. according to the decree of the almighty who sayth Eie for eie, tooth for tooth, &c. In the yeare of the world 3659 Morindus a most cruell and bloodie minded Prince raigned here in England, who for his cruelties sake came to an vnhappie and bloodie end:Stow. for out of the Irish seas came foorth a monster which destroied much people, whereof he hearing, would of
his valiant courage needs fight with it, and was deuoured of it: so that it may truly here bee said that one monster deuou∣red another. There was (as ElianusElianus. reporteth) a cruell and pernici∣ous Tyrant, who to the end to preuent all practises of con∣spiracie and treason (as Tyrants are euer naturally and vpo desert, timorous) that might bee deuised against him; ena∣cted this law among his subiects, that no man should con∣ferre with another either priuately or publickely vpon paine of death, and so indeed hee abrogated all ciuill societie [for speech as it was the beginning and birth of fellowship, so it is the very ioint and glew therof] but what cared he for socie∣ty that respected nothing but his owne safety: hee was so far from regarding the common good, that when his subiects not daring to speake, signified their minds by signes, hee prohi∣bited that also: and that which is yet more, when not daring to speake nor yet make signes, they fell to weeping & lamen∣ting their misery, he came with a band of men euen to restrain their teares too: but the multitudes rage being iustly incen∣sed they gaue him such a desperate welcome, that neither he nor his fellowes returned one of them aliue. And thus his ab∣hominable cruelty came to an end together with his life, and that by those meanes (which is to be obserued) by which hee thought to preserue and maintaine them both. Childericus who in the yeare 697 succeeded in the king∣dome of Fraunce Theodoricke (that for his negligence and sluggish gouernment was deposed and made of a king a Fri∣er) exercised barbarous and inhumane cruelty vpon his sub∣iects:Michael. Rit. l b. 1. de regibus Franc. Lib. 2. cap. 46. For hee spared neither noble nor ignoble, but mixtly sent them to their graues without respect of cause or iustice. One of the noble sort hee caused to bee fastened to a stake and beaten with clubs not to death, but to chastisement: which monstrous cruelty so incensed the peoples mind against him, that there wanted no handes to take part with this clubbeaten man against the tyrant his enemie. Wher∣fore they laid wait for him as hee came one day from
hunting, and murdered him togither with his wife great with child, no man either willing or daring to defend him. Tymocrates the king or rather tyrant of the Cyrenians wil giue place to none in this commendation of cruelty: for hee fflicted his subiects with many and monstrous calamities, nsomuch that hee spared not the priests of his gods, which commonly were in reuerent regard among the Heathen, as the bloody death of Menalippus (Apolloes Priest) did wit∣nesse, whome to the end to marry his faire and beautiful wife Aretaphila, hee cruelly put to death: howbeit it prospered not with him as he desired; for the good woman not conten∣ted with this sacrilegious contract sought rather meanes to reuenge her first husbands death, than to please this new le∣chers humour. Wherefore she assaied by poyson to effect hir wish: and when that preuailed not, she gaue a young daugh∣ter shee had to Leander the tyrants brother to wife, who lo∣ued her exceedingly, but with this condition that hee should by some practise or other worke the death and destruction of his brother: Which indeed hee performed, for hee so bri∣bed one of the groomes of the tyrants chamber, that by his helpe he soone rid wicked Tymocrates out of the way by a speedy & deserued death. But to abridge these long discour∣ses, let vs looke into all times and ages and to the hystories of all countries and nations, and we shall find that tyrants haue euer co to one destruction or other. Diomedes the Thraci∣an king fed his horses with mans flesh as with prouender,Plut. in Dion. but was made at last prouender for his owne horses himselfe by Hercules. Calippus the Athenian that slew Dian his familiar friend, and deposed Dionisius the Tyrant, and committed many other murders among the people, was first banished Rheginum, and then liuing in extreame necessity,Philip. Melanct. lib. 3. Valemar. slaine by Leptines and Polyserchon. Clephes the second king of the Lumbardies, for his sauadge cruelty towards his subiects was slaughtered by one of his friends. Damasippus that massacred so many citizens of Rome was cut off by Silla. Ecelinus that plaied the tyrant at Taurisium, gelding boies,
deflouring maides, maiming Matrones of their dugs, cut∣ting children out of their mothers bellies, and killing 1200 Patauians at once that were his friendes,Sabel. lib. 8. c. 3. was cut short in a battaile. In a word if wee read and consult hystories of all countries and times, wee shall find seldome or neuer any notorious Tyrant and oppressor of his subiects that came to any good end, but euer some notable iudgement or other fell vpon them. CHAP. XXIII. Of those that are both cruell and disloiall. NOw if it bee a thing so vnworthy and euill be∣seeming a Prince as nothing more, to bee stained with the note of cruelty: how much more dishonourall is it, when with crueltie, disloialtie and falshood is coupled? and when hee is not ashamed not onely to play the Tyrant but also the traitor, dissembler, and Hypocrite, to the end hee may more freely poure out the fome of his rage against those that put confidence in him. This is one of the foulest and vilest blots that can bee, wherewith the honour and reputa∣tion of a man is not onely stained, but blasted and blotted out, not euer to bee recouered: for what persuasion can one haue of such? Or who is so fond as to put affiance in them? 2. Sam. 18.This was one of the notorious vices of king Saul, when maligning the prosperity of Dauid, hee cunningly promo∣ted him to bee generall of his army, and married him to one of his daughters, to this end, that by exposing him to the hazards and perrils of warre, hee might bring him to speedy destruction; seeking besides other vnlawfull meanes to put him to death by: but what was the end of this vniust murderer wee haue declared in the former chapter.
But aboue all that by Treason and deceit made way vnto their cruelty,Herodian. the Emperour Antonius surna∣med Caracalla, was the chiefe: who to reuenge himselfe more at full vpon the Citizens of Alexandria in Aegypt, faigne, as if hee would come see their city, built by Alexander; and receiue an Oracle from their God: which when hee approched neere vnto, the Alexandri∣ans prepared to entertaine him most honourably: and be∣ing entered, hee went first to visite their Temples, where to cast more colours vpon his trecherie hee offered many sacrifices, and in the meane while perceiuing the people gathered togither from all quarters to bid him wel∣come, finding oportunity fitting his wicked and traiterous enterprise, bee gaue commandement that all the young men of the city should assemble together in one place, say∣ing that hee would acquaint them to range themselues in battaile after the manner of the Macedonians, in honour of king Alexander. But whilest they thus assembled together in mirth and brauerie, hee making as though hee would bring them in aray by going vp and downe amongst them, and holding them in talke, his army enclosed them on all sides: then withdrawing himselfe with his guard hee gaue the watch-word that they should rush vpon them; which was performed with such outrage, that the poore credu∣lous people beeing surprised at vnawares were all most cruelly massacred. There might you see the most hor∣rible, barbarous and incredible butcherie of men that e∣uer was heard of: for besides those that were actors in this bloody Tragedy, there were others that drew the slaine bodies into great ditches, and very often haled in them that were scarse dead, yea and sometimes that were altogether aliue, which was the cause that diuerse soul∣diours perished at the same time, when those that ha∣uing some strength of life left, being haled to the ditch, held so fast by the halers, that diuerse times both fell in together. The blood that was shead at this massacre was
so much, that the mouth of the riuer Nilus, and the sea shore were died with the streames thereof, that ran down by smal∣ler riuers into those plaine places. Furthermore being desi∣rous to obtaine a victorie ouer the Parthians, that hee might get himselfe fame and reputation thereby, hee passed not at what rate he bought it: He sent therefore Embassadors with letters and presents to the king of Parthia, to demand his daughter in marriage, though hee neuer entended any such thing, and being nonsuted at the first with a deniall, yet pur∣sued he his counterfeit purpose with much earnestnesse: and with solemne oath protested his singular good affection and loue that he bore vnto her: so that in the end the match was condiscended vnto by all parties, whereof the Parthian peo∣ple were not a little glad, in hope of so durable a peace which by this marriage was like to be established betwixt thē. The king therefore with all his subiects being ready to entertaine this new bridegroome, went out with one consent to meet him in the midway: their encounter was in a fair plain, where the Parthians hauing sent backe their horses, being vnarmed and prepared not for a day of battaile, but of marriage and disport, gaue him the most honourable welcome they could, but the wicked varlet finding oportunity so fit, set his armed souldiors vpon the naked multitude, & hewed in peeces the most part of them: and had not the king with a few follow∣ers bestirred him well, he had ben serued with the like sauce. After which worthy exploit,Treason. lib. 2. cap. 3. and bloody stratageme, he took his voiage backward, burning and spoiling the towns and vil∣lages as he went, till hee arriued at Charam a city in Mesopo∣tamia, where making his abode a while, hee had a fancie to walke one day into the fields, and going apart from his com∣panie to vnburden nature, attended vpon by one onely ser∣uant, as hee was putting downe his breeches, another of his companie ranne in and stroke him through with his dagger. Thus God blessed the world by taking out of it this wicked Tyrant, who by treason and trechery had spilt so much inno∣cent blood.
Seturus Galba, another bird of the same feather, exercised no lesse perfidious cruelty vpon the people of three cities in Lusitania, for he assembled them togither in colour of proui∣ding for their common affaires: but when hee had gotten them into his hands vnarmed and weaponlesse, he took nine thousand of the flower of their youth, and partly committed them to the sword, and partly sold them for bondslaues. The disloiall and treacherous dealing of Stilico towards the Gothes, how deare it cost him and all Italy beside,Iornand. Paul. Aemil, hi∣stories doe sufficiently testifie: for it fell out that the Gothes (vnder the conduct of Allaricus) entred Italy with a puissant and fearefull army, to know the cause why the Emperour Honorius withheld the pension which (by vertue of a league, and in recompence of their aid to the Empire in time of war) was due vnto them: which by riper iudgement and delibe∣ration of the councill was quieted: & to preserue their coun∣trey from so imminent a tempest,Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3. offer was made vnto them of the Spaniards and Frenchmen, if they could recouer them out of the hands of the Vandales, which vsurped ouer them; so that incontinently they should take their iourney ouer the Alpes towards them, and depart their coasts. Which offer and gift the Gothes accepting, did accordingly fulfill the condition, and passed away without committing any riot or any dammage in their passages. But as they were vpon mount Cinis making towards France, behold Stilico, Honorius his fa∣ther in law (a man of a stirring, stubborne, and rash spirit) pur∣sueth and chargeth them with battaile vnawares, and drea∣ming of nothing lesse: whereat they, being at the instant a∣mazed, quickly gathered their spirits togither, and putting themselues in defence, fought it out with such courage and eagernesse, that the traitours army was wholly discomfited, and he himselfe with one of his sonnes slaine. The Gothes hauing gotten this victory, broke off their voiage to France, and turned their course backe againe to Italy, with purpose to destroy and spoile: And so they did, for they laid wast all the countrey of Piemont and Lumbardy, and elsewhere,
and besieged Rome itselfe: so that from that time Italy ne∣uer ceased to be scourged and tormented with the Gothes, for the space of eighteene yeeres. Moreouer, whosoeuer else haue bene found to follow the steps of these truce, peace, & promise breakers (void of truth and regard of reputation) al∣waies vnderwent worthy punishment for their vnworthy actes, and fell headlong into confusion and ignominy, making themselues subiects worthy to be curst & detested of all men. CHAP. XIIII. Of Queenes that were Murderers. IF these and such like cruelties as we haue spo∣ken of before, be strange and monstrous for men, what shall wee then say of wicked and bloody women, who (contrary to the nature of their sexe) addict themselues to all violence and bloodshed∣ding, as cursed Iezabel Queene of Israel did; of whome suf∣ficient hath beene spoken before. Athaliah, Achabs daughter, and wife to Ioram king of Iu∣da, was a bird of the same feather; for shee was possessed with such a spirit of fury and rage,2. King. 11. that after the death of her sonne Ochosias (that died without issue) shee put to death all the blood roiall, to wit, the posterity of Nathan, Salomons bro∣ther, to whome by right of succession, the inheritance of the crowne appertained; to the end, that shee might install her selfe into the kingly diademe: after this cruell butchery of all the roiall male children, except Ioas, who (by Gods pro∣uidence) was preserued aliue, shee vsurped the crowne and scepter of Iuda full seuen yeeres; at the end of which date, Ioas was exalted to the crowne, and she not onely deposed, but slaine by the hands of her guard that attended vpon her. Brunchild (whome histories call Brunhault) a Queene of France by marriage,Aimon. Nic. Gil. vol. 1. but a Spaniard by birth, was a woman that bred much mischiefe in her age, and that wrought many
horrible and death-deseruing crimes: for partly with her sub∣till deuises, and partly with her owne hands, shee murdered ten kings of France one after another: shee caused her hus∣band to slay his owne brother, she procured the death of her nephew Meroueus, whome against all equity and honestie, she had secondly espoused for her husband; for he being ha∣ted of his father for that vile incest, and perceiuing himselfe in danger of taking, made one of his owne seruants thrust him through. After shee had committed these and many other foule factes, shee went about also to defraud Clotairius the sonne of Chilpericke of the right of the crowne, which per∣tained vnto him, and to thrust in another in the roome: Whereupon arose great warre, in the which as shee dealt more boldly and manfully then the condition of her sexe would beare, so she receiued the due wages of her braue and vertuous deeds, for shee was taken prisoner with three of het nephewes, whose throats she saw cut before her face, and af∣ter her selfe was set vpon a camell, and led through the host three daies togither, euery man reuiling, mocking, reproch∣ing, and despiting her: and at last by the award and iudge∣ment of the princes and captaines of the army, shee was ad∣iudged to be tyed by the haire of her head, one arme & one foot to the taile of a wild and vntamed horse, and so to bee left to his mercy to be drawen miserably to her destruction: which was no sooner executed, but her miserable carkasse (the instrument of so many mischiefes) was with mens feet spurned, bruised, trampled, and wounded after a most strange fashion: and this was the wofull end of miserable Brunchild. Let euery one both great and small learne by these exam∣ples to containe themselues within the limits of humanitie, and not to bee so readie and prompt to the shedding of hu∣mane blood, knowing nothing to be more true than this, That he that smiteth with the sword, shall perish with the sword.
CHAP. XV. Of such as without necessitie or conference, vpon euery light cause, mooue warre. AS in surgerie, so in a commonwealth we must account warre as a last re∣fuge, and as it were, a desperate me∣dicine, which without very vrgent necessity, when all other meanes of maintaining our estate against the assaults of the enemy faile, ought not to be taken in hand: and indeed the chiefe scope and marke that all those that lawfully vn∣dertake warre,Cic. Off. lib. 1. ought to propound to themselues, should be nothing els, but the good and quiet of the commonwealth, with the peace and repose of euery member thereof. And therefore so oft as any reasonable offers and conditions of peace are propounded, they ought to be accepted, to the end to auoid the masse of euils (as ruines, bloodsheds, robberies) which alwaies accompany warre as necessary attendants: for whosoeuer doth not so, but vpon euery light occasion run∣neth to armes, and to trie the hazard of battaile, they mani∣fest their owne foolish and pernicious rashnes, and their small conscience in shedding humane blood. Amongst the good kings of Iuda, Iosias for piety & zeale in the seruice of God, was most renowmed; for hee purged the realme from all drosse of idolatry, repaired the decaied temple, and restored it to the first glory: and yet for all this, for committing this one crime, he lost his life; for as Nechao king of Aegypt was passing with an army towards the king of Babylon in Charcamis beside Euphrates to bid him battaile, he would needs encounter him by the way,2. Chron. 35. and interrupt his iourney by vnprouoked warre: yea though Nechao had by embassage assured him not to meddle with him, but intreated
onely free passage at his hand: yet would not Iosias in any wise listen (so opinionatiue and selfe willed was he) but gaue him battaile in the field without any iust cause, saue his owne pleasure, which turned to his paine: for he caught so many wounds at that skirmish, that shortly after he died of them, to he great griefe of the whole people, and the Prophet Iere∣e also that lamented his death. King Iohn of France (for refusing reasonable conditions of peace at the English mens hands) was ouerthrowen by them two miles from Poytiers, with a great ouerthrow:Froiss. vol. 1. Nic. Gil. vol. 2. for the En∣glishmen in regard of their owne small number, and the huge multitude of the French to encounter with them, timorously offered vp a surrender of all that they had either conquered, taken, or spoiled since their comming from Bordeaux, and so to be sworne not to beare armes against him for seuen yeeres, so that they might quietly depart. But the king that crowed before the conquest, affying too much in the multitude of his forces, stopt his eares to all conditions, not willing to heare of any thing but war, war, euen thinking to hew them in pie∣ces, without one escaping: but it fell out otherwise, for the Englishmen intrenching themselues in a place of aduantage, and hard of accesse, inclosed with thicke hedges and bram∣bles, disturbed and ouerthrew with their archers at the first onset the French horsemen, and wounded most of their men and horses with multitude of arrowes: it tarried not long ere the footmen also were put to flight on the other side, & the whole army of threescore thousand men, by bare eight thousand English, discomfited: diuers great lords were found slaine in the field, and diuers others with the king himselfe carried prisoners into England: which was a great shake to the whole Realme, and the occasion of many tumults and disorders that ensued afterwards. Moreouer, as it is a rash part to hazard the doubtfull e∣uent of battaile indiscretely, and without cause, so it is a point of no lesse folly to thrust ones selfe voluntarily into any acti∣on of war without charge, not being particularly called and
bound thereunto, or hauing a body vnsufficient and vnfit for the same. And this was also one of the warlike points of dis∣cipline, which the ancient Romans vsed; That none should presume to fight for his countrey, before hee had beene ad∣mitted by some captaine by a solemne oath. Of all the histories that I euer read, I know none more strange in matter of warre, than this which I now goe about to recite, of Henry of Luxenbourge, Emperour of Germanie, who when he heard that his sonne Charles king of Bohemia was in the French army,Froiss. vol. 1. Cap. 130. and that Philip of Valoys, king of France, was ready to giue battaile to the English, albeit hee was blind, and consequently vnfit for warre, yet would needs take part with the French: And therefore commaunded his men at armes to guide him into the place where the field was to be fought, that he might there strike one blow. They as foolish as himselfe, not willing to crosse his mind, and fea∣ring to loose him in the prease, tied him fast to the raines of their bridles, being by this meanes so coupled togither, as if they meant al to perish togither if need were, as indeed they did, for they were ouercome in battaile, and the next day found all dead, horse and men, fast bound togither. This ac∣cident befell at Crecy neare Abreuile, in which iourney the French king sustained an inestimable dammage, for hee lost fifteene of his chiefest princes, fourescore ensigns, twelue hundred knights, and about thirty thousand men. In the yeere 1455, the Hungarians without any iust cause or pretence,Theatr. hist. made war vpon the Emperour Otto, only moo∣ued with a desire of bringing vnder their subiection the Ger∣mane powers, and the rather at this time, because they sup∣posed the Emperours strength of war to be weakened and his power of men lessened, by those continuall troubles and warres which he had beene daily occupied in: notwithstan∣ding Otto, as by his former deedes of armes, hee deserued the sirname of Great, so in this exploit especially, for he conscri∣bed eight legions of men out of Franconia, Bauaria, and Bo∣hemia, and with that small valiant handfull, ouerturned and
destroied the huge vnchristened multitude of his enemies: for albeit the Bohemians being placed in the rereward, were as suddenly and vnexpectedly assaulted by the enemy that craftily passed ouer the riuer Lycus to set vpon them behind, as vnhappily put to flight with the losse of the carriages and vittailes, which they were set to protect; yet Otto with his other legions renuing the battell and encouraging his soul∣diers, gaue the enemy such an encounter and repulse, that he put them to flight, and slew them with a miserable slaugh∣ter: three of their kings hee tooke prisoners, and few of that vast army escaped with their liues. On the Emperours side died many worthy men, among whome, Conrade the Empe∣rours sonne in law, and Burghard duke of Sueuia were two, beside many other. In this successiue battaile it is to be no∣ted aboue the rest, how religiously the Emperor both began and finished it: the day before the fight, he inioyned a fast in his army, and directed his praiers to the Almighty, relying more vpon the presence of Gods helpe, than his owne pow∣er: After the conquest gotten, he caused solemne thankes to be giuen in all Churches to God for that great deliuerance. I would our moderne Generals and Captaines would learne by this example to follow his footsteps, & not to make their praiers quaffings, and their thanksgiuings carousings, as they vse to doe, euen as it were purposely to tempt the Lord, and to stirre vp his wrath against them. Penda, king of middle England,Lanque. Chron. making warre vpon Anna king of East Angles, slew him in open field; with which vi∣ctory being puffed vp in pride, he sent defiance to Osway king of Northumberland also: who hearing of his approch, proffe∣red him great gifts and faire conditions of peace, which when Penda obstinately refused, he was slaine in battaile with thir∣ty of his most noble captaines, although hee had thrise the number of people which Osway had. And thus the heathen and bloody Pagan ended his cruelty, and paied deare for his too much forwardnes in warre.
CHAP. XVI. Of such as please themselues ouermuch in seeing cruelties. THe Romanes were so accustomed by long vse of warre to behold fightings and bloodshed, that in time of peace also they would make themselues sports and pastimes therewith: for they would compell poore captiues and bondslaues, either to kill one an∣other by mutuall blowes, or to enter combat with sauadge and cruell beasts, to be torne in peeces by them. The first (according to SenecaSeneca.) that deuised and put in practise this vnkindly combat of beasts and malefactours, was Pompey, who prouided an army of eighteene Elephants to fight with men, and thought it a notable and commenda∣ble spectacle to put men to death after this new and strange fashion. Oh how mens minds are blinded with ouermuch prosperity! hee esteemed himselfe at that time to be higher in dignity than all other, when he thus threw to wild beasts, people of farre countries, and in the presence of the people caused so much blood to be shed: but not long after, himselfe was betraied by the treachery of the Alexandrians, & slaine by a bondslaue, (a iust quittance for murdering so many of that condition:) thus much out of Seneca. Now it is manifest that this was an ordinary pastime among the Romanes, albeit it is strange, that any pastime or pleasure could arise by seeing poore creatures interchangeably strike one another to death, and humane blood to runne like water along the streets. It was not then without cause, but by a special will of God to reuenge cruelty,Flor. that the bondslaues (conducted by Sparta∣cus the fencer) rebelled against their masters in Rome, after they had broken through the guards of Lentulus his house,
and issuing out of Capua, gathered togither aboue ten thou∣sand fighting men, and encamped themselues in Mount Ve∣suvius, where being besieged by Clodius Glaber, they sallied so rudely and boisterously vpon him, that the victory and spoile of their enemies tents, remained on their sides: after this, they ran ouer all the land, forraged the countrey, and destroied many villages and townes, but especially these foure, Nola, Nocera, Terreneuae, and Metaponte, were by them sacked and spoiled with a strange and bloody ouer∣throw: after all which, hauing encountred two Consuls, they ouercame Lentulus on mount Apennine, and discomfited Gaius Cassius here Modene: all which victories and luckie proceedings did so embolden & puffe vp the courage of cap∣taine Fencer, that he determined to giue an alarme to Rome, and to lay siege vnto it: but the Romans preparing and dire∣cting all their forces to withstand their practises, gaue him & his crew so sore a repulse, that from Rome they were faine to flie to the vttermost borders of Italy, & there seeing them∣selues pent in on all sides, and driuen to deep extremity, they gaue so desperat an onset vpon their enemies, that both their captaine & they were all slaine. And thus the Romans made iolly pastime with their fencers and bondslaues, and more (I thinke at this time) than they either looked or wished for: for four hundred of them being taken by the bondmen, were enforced to shew them pastime at the same game,Oros. lib. 5. c. 24. whereat they had often times made themselues merry at their costs, and to kill one another, as they had beforetime caused them to doe. How curious and desirous the people of Rome was wont to be of beholding these bloody and mischieiuous games,Cornel. Tacit. Annal. lib. 4. Cornelius Tacitus in the fourth boooke of his Annales decla∣reth at large: where he reporteth, That in the city of the Fidenauts (in the twelfth yeere of the raigne of Tiberius) the people being gathered togither to behold the fencers prises, were fiftie thousand of them hurt and maimed at one time by the Amphitheatre that fell vpon them:  cruell pastime
indeed, and a strange accident, not comming by aduenture (as some suppose) but by the iust vengeance of God, to sup∣presse such pernicious and vnciuill sports. The same storie is registred by Paulus Orosius in his seuenth booke, with this adiection, That at that time were slaine more than twenty thousand persons. I can not passe ouer in silence two notable and memorable histories of two lyons,Senec. lib. 1. de benefic. recorded by two famous Authors, Se∣neca the one, and Aulus Gellius the other. The first of whom reporteth, that he saw on the Theatre, a lyon, who seeing a slaue that sometimes had beene his keeper throwen among the beasts to be deuoured, acknowledged him and defen∣ded him from their teeth, and would not suffer any of them to doe him hurt.Aul. Gell. Noct. Attic. l. 5. c. 14. The second bringeth the testimony of one Appianus, that affirmed himselfe to haue seene at Rome a lyon, who for old acquaintance sake which he had with a condemned seruant, fawned vpon him, and cleared him in like manner from the fury of the other beasts; the history was this: A certaine bondslaue, too roughly handled by his ma∣ster, forsooke him, and fled away, and in his flight retiring into a desart, and not knowing how to bestow himselfe, tooke vp a caue for his lodging, where hee had not long abode, but a mightie lyon came halting to his denne, with a sore and bloody legge: the poore slaue all forgone at this strange and ougly sight, looked euery minute to be deuoured, but the lyon in another moode came fawningly and softly tow∣ards him, as if he would complaine vnto him of his griefe: whereat (somewhat heartened) hee bethought himselfe to apply some medecine to his wound, and to bind vp the sore as well as he could, which hee had no sooner done, but the lyon made out for his prey, and ere long returning, brought home to his host and surgeon certaine gobbets of raw flesh, which he halfe rosting vpon a rocke by the sunne beames, made his daily sustenance, for the time of his abode there: notwithstanding at length wearied with this odde & sauage
life, and hating to abide long in that estate, he forsooke the desart, and put himselfe againe to aduenture: now it chaun∣ced, that hee was taken by his old master, and carried from Aegypt to Rome, to the end to be an actour in those beastly tragedies, but by good chance his old patient the lyon (taken also since his departure, being ready amongst other beasts to play his part) knew him by and by, and ranne vnto him, faw∣ning and making much of him: the people wondering at this strange accident, after enquiry made of the cause therof, gaue him the Lion and caused him to lead him in a string through the city for a miracle: for indeed both this and the former deserue no other name. Thus God reprooueth the sauadge inhumanitie of men, by the example of the wild and furious beasts, at whose teeth poore seruants found more fauor, than at their masters hands. The Emperour Constantine, weighing the indignitie of these and such like pastimes, and knowing how farre they ought to be banished from the society of men, by a publike edict abolished all such bloody and monstrous spectacles. In like manner these monomachies and single combats perfour∣med in places inclosed for the purpose, wherein one at the least if not both must of necessitie die, ought to be abroga∣ted in a Christian pollicy, as by the Laterane councill it was well enacted with this penalty, That whosoeuer should in that manner be slaine, his body should be depriued of Eccle∣siasticall buriall: and truely most commonly it commeth to passe, that they that presuming most vpon their owne prow∣esse and strength, are most forward in offering combat, ei∣ther loose their liues, or gaine discredit, which is more grie∣uous than death.
CHAP. XVII. Of such as exercise too much rigor and Seueritie. FVrthermore we must vnderstand, that God doth not only forbid murder and bloodshed, but also all tyranny and oppression, therin prouiding for the weake against the strong, the poore against the rich, and bondslaues against their masters: to the end, that none might be trode vnder foote and oppressed of others, vnder paine of his indignation. Insomuch therefore as the Romans vsed such rigour towards their seruants, it came to passe by a iust iudgement of God, that they being lords ouer all the world, were three sundry times driuen by their seruants into great extremities. As first in Rome within the walles, at the same time when they also were troubled with the seditious factiōs of their tribunes. Secondly in Sicily, where they horribly laid wast the whole country▪ the cause of which commotion was, because the Romans had chained a multitude of slaues togi∣ther; and in that order sent them to manure & til the ground: for a certain Sirian first assembled two thousand men of them that came next hand, then breaking vp the prisons, multipli∣ed his army to forty thousand, and with them pulled downe castles, razed vp townes, & destroied euery where. The third vndertaken by a shepheard, who hauing killed his master, set at liberty all the bondmen, and prepared an army of them, wherewith he spoiled cities, townes, & castles, & discomfited the armies of Serulius and Lucullus, who were Pretours at that time: but at last they were destroied and rooted out
by little and little: and this good seruice got the Romanes at their seruants hands. As euery nation hath his proper vertue and vice ascribed to it, so the Spaniards for their part are noted famous for cru∣elty towards their subiects and vassals, insomuch that (as ex∣perience in many witnesseth) they are intollerable in that kind: for which cause they haue borne the marke of Gods iustice, for their rigorous & brbarous handling of the poore west Indians, whom they haue brought to that extremity by putting them to such excessiue trauels in digging their mines of gold (as namely in the island Hispagnola) that the most part by sighes and teares wish by death to end their miseries:Bonzoni. Milan. of the new world. many (first killing their children) haue desperatly hung thē∣selues on high trees: some haue throwen themselues head∣long from steepe mountaines, and others cast themselues into the sea to be rid of their troubles: but the tyrants haue neuer escaped scotfree, but came alwaies to some miserable end or other: for some of them were destroied by the inha∣bitants, others slewe one another with their owne hands, prouoked by insatiable auarice, some haue beene drowned in the sea, and others starued in the desart; in fine, few esca∣ped vnpunished. Bombadilla, one of the gouernours of Hispagnola, after hee had swaied there awhile, and enriched himselfe by the sweate and charge of the inhabitants, was called home againe into Spaine: whitherward (according to the com∣maundement receiued) as hee embarked himselfe, shipping with him so much treasure as in value amoūted to more than an hundred and fifty thousand ducats, beside many peeces and graines of gold, which he carried to the Spanish queene for a present, whereof one weighed three thousand duckats: there arose such a horrible and outragious tempest in the broad sea, and beat so violently against his ships, that foure and twentie vessels were shiuered in peeces and drowned at that blow; there perished Bombadilla himselfe with most of his captaines, and more than fiue hundred Spaniards,
that thought to returne full rich into the countrey, and be∣came with all their treasures a prey vnto the fishes. In the yeere of our Lord 1541, the eight day of Septem∣ber,he same au∣thor. there chanced in the city Suatimala which (lyeth in the way from Nicaragna Westward) a strange and admirable iudgement. After the death of Auarado, who subdued this prouince, and founded the city, and was but a little before slaine in fight, it rained so strangely and vehemently all this whole day and night, that of a sudden so huge a deluge and flood of waters ouerflowed the earth, streaming from the bottome of the mountaines into the lower grounds, with such violence, that stones of incredible bignes were carried with it; which tumbling strongly downwards, bruised and burst in pieces whatsoeuer was in their way. In the meane while there was heard in the aire fearefull cries and voices, and a blacke cow was seene running vp & downe in the midst of the water, that did much hurt. The first house that was ouerthrowen by this tempest, was dead Auarados, wherein his widow (a very proud woman that held the gouernment of the whole prouince in her hand, and had before despited God for her husbands death) was slaine with all her hous∣hold, and in a moment the city was either drowned or sub∣uerted: there perished in this tempest of men and women, six score persons: but they that at the beginning of the flood fled, saued their liues. The morrow after the waters were surceased, one might see the poore Spaniards lie along the fields, some maimed in their bodies, other with broken arms or legges, or otherwise miserably wounded. And thus did God reuenge he monstrous Spanish cruelties exercised vpō those poore people, whome in stead of enticing by faire and gentle means to the knowledge of the true God & his sonne Christ, they terrified by extraordinary tyranny (for such is the Spanish nature) making them thinke that Christians were the cruellest and most wicked men of the earth.
CHAP. XVIII. Of Adulterers. IT followeth by the order of our sub∣iect, now to touch the transgressions of the third commandement of the second. Table, which is, Thou shalt not commit Adulterie; In which words, as also in many other texts of Scripture, Adultery is forbidden, & grieuous threatnings denounced a∣gainst all those that defiling their bodies with filthy and vn∣pure actions, estrange themselues from God, and conioyne themselues to whores and ribauds. This sin did the Israelites commit with the women of Mi∣dian, by means whereof, they were to follow strange gods, & to fall into Gods heauy displeasure, who by a cruell plague destroied 24 thousand of them for the same sinne. And foras∣much as the Madianites (through the wicked and pernicious counsell of Balaam) did lay this snare for them, & were so vil∣lanous and shamelesse, as to prostitute, and be bauds vnto their owne wiues; therefore they were by the expresse com∣mandement of God discomfited, their kings & false prophets with all their men & women, except onely their vnpolluted virgins, that had known no man, slaine: and all their cities & dwellings, burned and consumed to ashes. As euery one ought to haue regard and care to their honesty, so maids especially, whose whole credit and reputation, hangeth thereupon; for they that make no account thereof, but suffer themselues to be polluted with any filthinesse, draw vpon them not onely most vile infamy, but also many great miseries: as is prooued by the daughter of Hippomenes prince of Athens, who being a whore, her father shut vp in a stable with a wild horse, giuing him no prouender, nor other meat to eate, that the horse (naturally furious enough, but more enraged by famine)
might teare her in pieces, and with her carcasse, refresh his hunger, as he did. Pontius Aufidian, vnderstanding that his daughter had bene betraied & sold into a leachers hands, by a slaue of his that was her schoolmaster, put them both to death. In like maner serued Pub. Attilius, Falisque his daugh∣ter that fell into the same infamie. Viues reporteth, that in our fathers daies,Lud. Viues. two brothers of Arragon perceiuing their si∣ster (whom they euer esteemed for honest) to be with child, (hiding their displeasure vntill her deliuery was past) came in suddenly, and stabbed her into the belly with their daggers, till they killed her, in the presence of a sage matron that was witnes to their deed. The same authour saith, That when he was a young man, there were three in the same country, that conspired the death of a companion of theirs, that went a∣bout to commit this villany, & as they conspired, so they per∣fourmed it, strangling him to death with a napkin, as hee was going to his filthines. As for adulterers, examples are infinite, both of their wicked liues and miserable ends. In which num∣ber, many of them may be scored, that making profession of a single life, and vndertaking the vow of chastity, shew them∣selues notwithstanding monstrous knaues & ribauds, as many of the Popes themselues haue done.Petr. praemonst. As we read of Iohn the eleuenth, bastard sonne to Lando his predecessour, who by meanes of his adulteries with Theodora then gouernesse of Rome came by degrees to the Papacie, so he passed the bles∣sed time of his holy popeship with this vertuous dame, to whom he serued in stead of a common horse to satifie her in∣satiable & disordinate lust: but the good & holy father was at last taken and cast in prison, and there smothered to death with a pillow. Benedict the eleuenth, dining on a time with an Abboresse his familiar,al. was poisoned with certaine figges that he eate. Clement the fift, was reported to be a common baud, & a protector of whores; he went apart into Auignion, & there staied of purpose to do nothing but whore hunt: hee died in great torment of the bloody flux, plurisie, and griefe of the stomack.
CHAP. XIX. Of Rapes. NOw if adulterie which with liking and consent of parties is commit∣ted, bee condemned, how much more greeuous and hainous is the offence, and more guiltie the of∣fendour, when with violence the chastity of any is assailed, and en∣forced? This was the sinne wher∣with Sichem the sonne of Hemor the Leuit is marked in holy scrip∣ture, for hee rauished Dina, Iaacobs daughter,Gen. for which cause Simeon and Lui her brethren reuenged the iniury done done vn∣to their sister vpon the head of not onely him and his father, but all the males that were in the citie, by putting them to the sword. It was a custome among the Spartanes & Messe∣nians during the time of peace betwixt them, to send yearely to one another certaine of their daughters to celebrate cer∣taine feasts and sacrifices that were amongst them, now in continuance of time it chanced that fiftie of the Lacedemo∣nian Virgines being come to those solemne feasts, were pur∣sued by the Messenian gallants to haue their pleasures of thē: but they iointly making resistance, and fighting for their ho∣nesties, stroue so long, not one yeelding themselues a prey into their hands, till they all died: wherevpon arose so long & miserable a warre, that all the countrie of Messena was de∣stroied thereby. Aristoclides a Tyrant of Orchomenus a city of Arcadia fell enamoured with a maid of Stymphalis: who seeing her father by him slaine because hee seemed to stand in his puposes light, fled to the Temple of Diana to take Sanctuarie, neither could once bee pluckt from the image of the goddesse vntill her life was taken from her: but hir death
so incensed the Arcadians that they fell to armes & sharpe∣ly reuenged her cruell iniury. Appius a Romane a man of power and authoritie in the city,us Liuius. enflamed with the loue of a Virgin whose father hight Virginius, would needs make her his seruant, to the end to abuse her the more freely, & whilst he endeuoured with all his power and pollicie to accomplish his immoderate lust, her father slew her with his own hands, more willing to prostitute her to death, than to so foule an opprobrie and disgrace: but euery man prouoked and stirred vp with the wofulnesse of the euent, with one consent pursu∣ed, apprehended, and imprisoned the foule lecher, who fea∣ring the award of a most shamefull death, killed himselfe to preuent a further mischiefe. In the yeare of our Lord 1271 vnder the raign of the Em∣perour Rodolphe,Nic. Gil. vol. 1. the Sicilians netled and enraged with the horrible whoredomes, adulteries & Rapes, which the Garri∣sons that had the gouernment ouer them committed, not a∣ble to endure any longer their insolent & outragious demea∣nor, entred a secret & cōmon conspiracy vpon a time appoin∣ted for the purpose, which was on Easter sunday at the shut∣ting in of the euening, to set vpon them with one accord, and to murder so many as they could: as they did, for at that in∣stant they massacred so many throughout the whole island, that of all the great multitude there suruiued not one to beare tidings or bewaile the dead. At Naples it chaunced in the Kings pallace,Bmb. lib. 3. hist. Venet. as young King Fredericke, Ferdinands sonne, entered the priuie chamber of the Queene his mo∣ther, to salute her and the other Ladies of the court, that the Prince of Bissenio waighting in the outward cham∣ber for his returne, was slaine by one of his owne seruants that suddainely gaue him with his sword three deadly strokes in the presence of many beholders, which deed, hee confessed that hee had watched three yeares to performe, in regard of an iniurie done vnto his sister, and in her to him,Benzoni. Milan. of the new found land. whome hee rauished against her will. The Spaniards that first tooke the Isle His∣paniola
were for their whoredomes and Rapes whhich they committed vpon the wiues and Virgins, all murdered by the inhabitants. The inhabitants of the Prouince Cumana, when they saw the beastly outrage of the Spanish nation,The same author. that lay along their coasts to fish for pearle, in forcing and rauishing (without difference) their women young and old, set vpon them vpon a Sunday morning, with all their force, and slew all that euer they found by the sea coasts Westward, till there remained not one aliue: And the fury of the rude vnciuill people was so great that they spared not the Monkes in their cloisters, but cut their throates as they were mumbling their Masses; burnt vp the Spanish houses, both religious and priuate, burst in peeces their belles, drew about their Ima∣ges, hurld downe their crucifixes and cast them in dis∣grace and contempt ouerthwart their streetes to bee trod∣den vpon, nay they destroyed whatsoeuer belonged vn∣to them, to their very dogges and hennes, and their owne Countriemen that serued them in any seruice whether re∣ligious or other, they spared not, they beate the earth and cursed it with bitter curses; because it had vpholden such wicked and wretched caitifes. Now the report of this massacre was so fearefull and terrible that the Spa∣niards which were in Cubagna doubted much of their liues also: and truly not without great cause, for if the In∣dians of the Continent had beene furnished and prouided with sufficient store of barkes, they had passed euen into that Island, and had serued them with the same sauce, which their fellows were serued with: for they wanted not will, but habi∣lity to doe it. And these are the goodly fruits of their adulte∣ries and Rapes, which the Spanish nation hath reaped in their new found land. The great calamity and ouerthrow which the Lacedemo∣nians endured at Leuctria, wherein their chiefest strength and powers were weakened and consumed, was a manifest
punishment of their inordinate lust committed vpon two Virgines,i. Mel. lib. 2. whome after they had rauished in that very place they cut in peeces and threw them into a pit, and when their father came to complaine him of the villanie, they made so light account of his words that in stead of redresse he found nothing but reproch, and derision, so that with griefe hee slew himselfe vpon his daughters sepulchre: but how gree∣uously the Lord reuenged this iniurie, hystories doe suffici∣ently testifie, and that Leuctrias calamitie doth beare wit∣nesse. Pausan. lib. 2.Brias a Grecian captaine being receiued into a Citizens house as a guest, forced his wife by violence to his lust: but when he was asleepe, to reuenge her wrong she put out both his eies: and afterward complained to the citizens also, who depriued him of his office and cast him out of their city. Macrinus the Emperour punished two souldiours that ra∣uished their hostesse on this manner: hee shut them vp in an oxes bowels with their heads out, and so partly with famish∣ment, and partly with wormes, and rottennesse, they consu∣med to death. Iohan magnus.Rodericus king of the Gothes in Spaine forced an Earles daughter to his lust, for which cause her father brought a∣gainst him an army of Sarasens, and Moores, and not onely slew him with his sonne, but also quite extinguished the Go∣thicke kingdome in Spaine, in this warre, and vpon this occa∣sion seuen hundred thousand men perished, as hystories re∣cord, and so a kingdome came to ruine by the peruerse lust of one lecher, Anno 714. At the sacking and destruction of Thebes by king Alex∣ander, a Thracian captaine which was in the Macedonian army tooke a noble Matron prisoner, called Tymoclea, whome when by no persuasion of promises he could entise to his lust, he constrained by force to yeeld vnto it:Plut. in vita. Alexand. Sabel. lib. 5. c. 6. but this noble min∣ded woman inuented a most witty & subtile shift both to rid her selfe out of his hands and to reuenge his iniurie: she told him that she knew where a rich treasure lay hid in a deepe pit
whether when with greedinesse of the gold he hastened, & standing vpon the brinke pried and peared into the bottome of it, she thrust him with both her hands into the hole, and tumbled stones after him that he might neuer find meanes to come forth: for which fact she was brought before Alexander to haue iustice, who demanding her what she was, she answe∣red that Theagenes who led the Thebane army against the Macedonians, was her brother: Alexander perceiuing the maruellous constancie of the woman, and knowing the cause of her accusation to bee vniust; manumitted and set her free with her whole family. When Cn. Manlius hauing conquered the Gallo-Greci∣ans, pitched his army against the Tectosages (people of Nar∣bonia towards the Piren mountains) amongst other prisoners, a very fair womā wife to Orgiagous Regulus was in the custo∣die of a Centurion, that was both lustfull and couetous:Liuiu. lib. 38. This lecher tempted her first with faire persuasions, and seeing her vnwilling, compelled her with violence to yeeld her body, as a slaue to fortune, so to infamy and dishonor: after which act somewhat to mitigate the wrong, he gaue her promise of re∣lease and freedome, vpon condition of a certaine summe of money; and to that purpose sent her seruant that was captiue with her to her friends to puruey the same: which hee brin∣ging, the Centurion alone with the wronged lady, met him at a place appointed, and whilest hee weighed the money, by her counsaile was murdered of her seruants: so she escaping caried to her husband both his money, and threw at his feet the villaines head that had spoiled her of her chastitie. Andreas king of Hungary hauing vndertaken the voiage into Siria for the recouety of the holy land, together with many other kings and Princes, committed the charge of his kingdome and family to one Bannebanius,Chronica Hun∣gariae. a wise and faithfull man, who discharged his office as faithfully as hee tooke it willingly vpon him: now the Queene had a brother called Gertrude that came to visite and comfort his sister in her hus∣bands absence, and by that meanes soiourned with her a long
time, euen so long till hee fell deadly in loue with Banneba∣nus lady, a faire & vertuous woman, & one that was thought worthie to keepe company with the Queene continually: to whome when hee had vnfolded his suit, and receiued such stedfast repulse that hee was without all hope of obtaining his desire, he began to droupe and pine, vntill the Queene his sister perceiuing his disease, found this peruerse remedie for the cure thereof: shee would often giue him oportunitie of discourse, by withdrawing her selfe from them being alone, and many times leaue them in secret and dangerous places, of purpose that he might haue his will of her, but she would neuer consent vnto his lust, and therefore at last, when hee saw no remedie, hee constrained her by force, and made her subiect to his will against her will: which vile disgracefull indignitie when shee had suffered, shee returned home sad and melancholy, and when her husband would haue embra∣ced her, she fled from him, asking him if he would embrace a whore, and related vnto him her whole abuse, desiring him either to rid her from shame by death, or to reuenge her wrong & make knowne vnto the world the iniury done vnto her. There needed no more spurs to pricke him forward for reuenge, he posteth to the court, and vpbraiding the Queene with her vngratefull and abhominable trecherie, runneth her through with his sword, and taking her heart in his hand, proclaimeth openly that it was not a deed of inconsiderati∣on, but of iudgement, in recompence of the losse of his wiues chastitie: foorthwith hee flieth towards the King his Lord, that now was at Constantinople, and declaring to him his fact, and shewing to him his sword besmeared with his wiues blood, submitteth himselfe to his sentence either of death in rigour, or pardon in compassion: but the good King enquiring the truth of the cause, though greeued with the death of his wife, yet acquite him of the crime, and held him in as much honour and esteeme as euer hee did, condemning also his wife as worthy of that which shee had endured, for her vnwomanlike and traiterous
part. A notable example of iustice in him, and of punishment in her, that forgetting the law of womanhood and modestie, made her selfe a baud vnto her brothers lust: whose memory as it shall be odious and execrable, so his iustice deserueth to be engrauen in marble with caracters of gold. Equall to this king in punishing a Rape, was Otho the first,Albert. Krant. lib. 3. for as he passed through Italy with an armie, a certaine woman cast her selfe downe at his feet for iustice against a villaine that had spoiled her of her chastitie; who deferring the exe∣cution of the law till his returne, because his hast was great, the woman asked who should then put him in mind there∣of, hee answered, This church which thou seest shall be a witnesse betwixt mee and thee, that I will then reuenge thy wrong. Now when hee had made an end of his warfare, in his returne, as hee beheld the church, hee called to mind the woman and caused her to be fetcht, who falling down before him desired now pardon for him whom before she had accu∣sed, seeing he had now taken her to wife, & redeemed his in∣iury with sufficient satisfaction: Not so I sweare (quoth Otho) your compacting shall not infringe, or collude the sacred  but hee shall die for his former fault, and so he caused hi be put to death. A notable example for them that after they haue committed filthinesse with a maid, thinke it no sin, but competent amends, if they take her in marriage whom they abused before in fornication. Nothing inferiour to these in punishing this sin, was Gonza∣ga duke of Ferrara, as by this historie following may appear: in the yeare 1547 a citizen of Comun,Theat. histor. was cast into prison vp∣on an accusation of murder, whome to deliuer frō the iudge∣ment of death, his wife wrought all means possible, therefore comming to the captaine that held him prisoner, she sued to him for her husbands life, who vpō condition of hir yeelding to his lust and payment of 200 duccats, promised safe deliue∣rance for him: the poor woman seeing that nothing could re∣deeme her husbands life, but losse & shipwrack of her owne honesty, told her husband, who willed her to yeeld to the
captains desire, & not to pretermit so good an occasion, wher∣fore she consented: but after the pleasure past, the traiterous and wicked captaine put her husband to death notwithstan∣ding: which iniury when she complained to Gonzaga duke of Ferrara, hee caused the captaine first to restore backe her 200 dukats, with an addition of 700 crowns, & secondly to marry her to his wife, and lastly, when hee hoped to enioy her bo∣dy, to be hanged for his trecherie. O noble Iustice, and com∣parable to the worthiest deeds of antiquitie, and deseruing to be held in perpetuall remembrance! As these before mentioned excelled in punishing this sin, so this fellow following excelled in committing it, and in be∣ing punished for it;Theat. histor. his name is Nouellus Cararius Lord of Pa∣uie, a man of note and credite in the world for his greatnesse, but of infamy and discredit for his wickednesse. This man af∣ter many cruell murders and bloodie practises, which he ex∣ercised in euery place where he came, fell at last into this no∣torious, and abhominable crime: for lying at Vincentia hee fell in loue with a young maid of excellent beautie but more ent honestie, an honest citizens daughter, whome hee anded her Parents to send vnto him, that hee might haue his pleasure of her: but when they regarding their cre∣dit, and shee her chastitie, more then the Tyrants command, refused to come; he tooke her violently out of their house, and constrained her body to his lust; and after to ad crueltie to villanie, chopt her into small peeces, and sent them to her Parents in a basket for a present: wherewith her poore fa∣ther astonished, caried it to the Senate, who sent it to Ve∣nice, desiring them to consider the fact, and to reuenge the cruelty. The Venetians vndertaking their defence, made war vpon the Tyrant, and besieging him in his own city, took him at last prisoner, and hanged him with his two sons Francis and William. Diocles, sonne of Pisistratus, Tyrant of Athens, for rauishing a maid,Lanquet. was slain by her brother; whose death when Hippias his brother vndertooke to reuenge, and caused the maidens
brother to be racked, that he might discouer the other con∣spirators, he named al the tyrants friends (which by comman∣dement being put to death) the Tyrant asked whither there were any more; none but only thy selfe (quoth hee) whome I would wish next to be hanged, wherby it was perceiued how abundantly he had reuenged his sisters chastitie, by whose notable stomacke all the Athenians being put in remem∣brance of their libertie, expelled their tyrant Hippias out of their city. Mundus a young Gentleman of Rome,Lanquet. chron. rauished the chast Matron Paulina in this fashion: when he perceiued her reso∣lution not to yeeld vnto his lust, hee persuaded the priests of Isis to say that they were warned by an Oracle, how that A∣nubius the god of Aegypt, desired the company of the said Paulina: to whome the chast Matrone gaue light credence, both because she thought the Priests would not lie, and also because it was accounted a great renowne to haue to do with a god: and thus by this meanes was Paulina abused by Mun∣dus in the temple of Isis, vnder the name of Anubius, which thing being after disclosed by Mundus himself, was thus iust∣ly reuenged; the Priests were put to death, the temple bea∣ten downe to the ground, the image of Isis throwne into Ti∣ber, and the young men banished. In the yeare of our Lord 955 Edwine succeeding his vncle Eldred was king of England:Lanquet. This man was so impudent that in the very day of his Coronation, hee soddainely withdrew himselfe from his lords, and in sight of certaine persons, ra∣uished his owne kinswoman, the wife of a Nobleman of his realme, and afterward slew her husband, that he might haue vnlawfull vse of her beautie: for which act he became so odi∣ous to his subiects and nobles, that they iointly rose against him, and depriued him of his crowne, when hee had raigned foure yeares.
CHAP. XX. Other examples of Gods Iudgements vpon Adulterers. AMongst all other things this is especially to bee noted, how God (for a greater punishment of the disordinate lust of men) stroke them with a new (yet filthy and stinking) kind of disease, cal∣led the French pocks; though indeed the Spaniards were the first that were infected therewith, by the heat which they caught among the women of the new found lands,Paulus Iouius. Ben. b. & sowed the seeds thereof first in Spaine, and from thence sprinkled Italy therewith, where the Frenchmen caught it, when Charles the eight their king went against Naples;Guicciardine. frō whence the contagion spread it selfe throughout diuers places of Eu∣rope. Barbary was so ouergrowen with it, that in all their ci∣ties the tenth part escaped not vntouched, nay almost not a family but was infected. From thence it ranne to Aegypt, Si∣ria, and to the great Cair; and it may nerehand truly be said, that there was not a corner of the habitable world, where this not only new and strange (for it was neuer heard of in ancient ages) but terrible and hideous scourge of Gods wrath stretched not it selfe. They that were spotted with it, and had it rooted in their bodies, led a languishing life full of aches and torments, and carried in their visages filthy markes of vncleane behauiour, as vlcers, boiles, and such like, that greatly disfigured them. And herein we see the words of S. Paul verified,1. Cor. 6.18. That an Adulterer sinneth against his owne body. Now for so much as the world is so brutishly carried into this sinne, as to none more, the Lord therefore hath de∣clared his anger against it in diuers sorts, so that diuers times hee hath punished it in the very act, or not long after, by a strange death.Sabell. Of which Alcibiades, one of the great cap∣taines of Athens, may stand for an example, who being pol∣luted
with many great and odious vices, and much giuen to his pleasures, and subiect to all vncleannesse, ended his life in the middest thereof: for as he was in companie of a Phrigian strumpet (hauing flowne thither to the king of Persia for shelter) was notwithstanding set vpon by certaine guards, which the king (induced by his enemies) sent to slay him; but they though in number many, through the cōceiued opinion of his notable valor, durst not apprehend him at hand, but set fire to the house, standing thēselues in arms round about it to receiue him if need were: Hee seeing the fire, leaped through the midst of it, and so long defended himselfe amongst them all till strength failed in himselfe, and blowes encreasing vp∣on him constrained him to giue vp his life amongst them. Plinie telleth of Cornelius Gallus and Q. Elerius,Plinie. lib. 7. two Ro∣mane knights that died in the very action of filthinesse. Theodebert, the eldest sonne of Clotharius,Mich. Rit. Neap. died amidst his whores, to whom he was (though married) too too much ad∣dicted. The like befell one Bertrane Ferrier,Lib. de obedi. at Barselon in Spaine, according to the report of Pontanus. In like manner there was one Giachet Geneue of Saluces,Fulgos. lib. 9. cap. 12. a man that had both wife and children of his owne, of good yeares, well lear∣ned and of good esteeme amongst his neighbor citizens, that secretly haunted the company of a yong woman; with whō being coupled one euening in his studie he sodainly died: his wife and children seeing his long tarriance, when time requi∣red to goe to bed, called him and knockt at his dore very hard, but when no answere was made, they broke open the dores that were locked on the inner side, and found him (to their great griefe and dismay) lying vpon the woman starke dead, and her dead also. Claudius of Asses, counsellour of the Parliament of Paris (a man very euill affected towards the professors of the Gos∣pell) committed villanie with one of his waighting maids, in the very middest whereof hee was taken with an apoplexie, which immediately after made an end of him.
CHAP. XXI. Shewing that Stues ought not to be suffered amongst Christians. BY this which hath beene spoken it appea∣reth manifestly, how infamous a thing it is among Christians to priuiledge and al∣low publike places for adulteries, albeit it is a common thing in the greatest ci∣ties of Europe, yea and in the very bow∣els of Christendome, where no such vil∣lanie should be tollerated. There is nothing that can cast any coulor of excuse vpon it, seeing it is expressely contrarie to Gods edict in many places, as first: Thou shalt not commit A∣dulterie. And in the 19 of Leuit. 29. Thou shalt not pollute thy daughter in prostituting her to be a whore, least the land bee defiled with whoredome, and filled with wickednesse. And in Deut. 23.17. Let there bee no whore of the daugh∣ters of Israell, neither a whorekeeper of the sonnes of Israel: this is the decree of God, and the rule which hee hath giuen vs to square our affections by, and it admitteth no dispensati∣on. But some doe obiect that those things are tollerated to auoid greater mischiefes: as though the Lord were not well aduised when he gaue forth those commandements, or that mortall men had more discretion than the immortall God. This truly is nothing els but to reiect and disanull that which Saint Paul requireth as a duty of al Christians:Ephes. 5. namely, That fornication and all vncleannesse should not once be named a∣mongst vs, neither filthinesse, foolish talking, or ieasting, which are things not comely; for so much as no whoremonger, nor vncleane person can haue any inheritance in the kingdome of God.Dial 3. Plato the Philosopher, though a Panym and igno∣rant of the knowledge of the true God, forbad expressely in his Commonwealth, Poets and Painters to represent or set to
the view any vncleane and lasciuious counterfeit, whereby good manners might bee any waies depraued.Lib. 7. cap. 7. Aristotle fol∣lowing his maisters steps ordained in his Politiques, That all filthie communication should bee banished out of his city. How farre were they then from giuing leaue and libertie for filthie and stinking brothel-houses to bee erected and main∣tained? In this therefore the very Heathen are a shame and reproch to those that call themselues Christians and Catho∣liques. Besides, the goodly reason which they alledge for their vpholding of their stewes is so farre from the truth, that the contrarie is euer truer, namely that by their odious and dishonest libertie more euill ariseth to the world, than other∣wise would, in so much as it setteth open a wide dore to al dis∣solutenesse and whoredomes, & an occasion of lecherie and vncleannesse euen to those that otherwise would abstaine from all such filthie actions. How many young folke are there, aswell men as women, that by this means giue them∣selues ouer to loosenesse, and vndoe themselues vtterly? how many murthers are, haue beene, and still will bee committed thereby? What a disorder, confusion, and ignomie of nature is it, for a father to lie with her with whom his son had been but a little before? Or the sonne to come after the father? and such like: but by the iust iudgement of God it commeth to passe that that which is thought to be enclosed within the precincts of certaine appointed places, spreadeth it selfe at large so farre, that oftentimes whole streetes and cities are poysoned; yea euen their houses, who in regard of their place either in the law or pollicie, ought to stop the streame of such vices: nay which is more meruaile, they that with open mouth vaunt themselues to bee Gods Leiutenants on earth, Christs vicars, and successors to his Apostles, are so filthie and abhominable, as to suffer publicke bauds and whores to be vnder their noses vncontrouled; and which is more, to enrich their treasures by their traffique. Cornelius Agrippa saith, that of all the hee-bauds of his time, Pope Sextus was most infamous, for hee builded a most glorious and stately
Stues (if any state or glorie can abide in so bad a place) aswell for common Adulterie, as vnnaturall Sodomy, to bee exer∣cised in. Hee vsed (as Heliogabalus was wont to doe) to main∣tain heards of whores with whom he participated his friends and seruants as they stood in need; and by Adulteries reared yearely great reuenues into his purse. Baleus sayth, that at this day euery whore in Rome paies tribute to the Pope, a Iulle, which amounted then to twentie thousand dukats by the yeare at least, but now the number is so encreased that it ariseth to fortie thousand. I thinke there is none ignorant how Pope Paule the third had by computation fiue and for∣tie thousand whores and courtizans, that paid him a month∣ly tribute for their whoredomes; and thus also this holy fa∣ther was a protector and vpholder of the Stues, and deser∣ued by his villanous behauiour (for hee was one of the lew∣dest Adulterers of that time) to beare the name of the mai∣ster and erector of these filthie places: And herein both hee and the rest of that crue haue shewed themselues enemies to God, and true Antichrists indeed, and haue not onely imitated, but farre surpassed shamelesse and wicked Caligu∣la in all filthie and monstrous dealings.Deut. 23. Thou shalt not (saith Moses) bring the hire of a whore into the house of the Lord thy God for any vow: by what title then can these honest men exact so great a rent from their whorish tenants, seeing it is by the law of God a thing so abhominable? truly it can no otherwise bee but a kind of art of bauderie, as may bee gathered out of the law which is in F. de ritu nuptius: L. palam. Qui habet mancipia, &c. the meaning whereof is, That hee which for gaine prostituteth his slaues to the lust of men, and draweth thereby commoditie to himselfe, is a baud: Hee is also stained with infamie by the law Athletas, that perta∣keth the gaine or wages of a whore. How much more then is that law of Iustinian to be commended which commandeth all whores to bee banished out of the confines of Citties and Commonwealths?Socrates lib. 5. cap. 18. Eccles. histor. It was also a worthie and memorable act of Theodesius when hee rooted the Stues out of Rome; and
of Saint Lewis king of Fraunce that pulled downe the Stues at Paris, and chased away as neere as hee could, all loose and whorish women from his dominions.Cornel. Tacitus. The ancient Ro∣manes permitted no woman to become an open whore, be∣fore she had made a formall declaration of her intent before the Aediles; thinking by this meanes to quench their hote lust, because they would bee ashamed to make such an open confession. And by a decree of the Senate it was enacted that no woman comming of gentle stocke should bee suffe∣red to giue her selfe ouer to this trade, it being a staine and blot to true Nobilitie. CHAP. XXII. Of whoredomes committed vnder colour of Marriage. SEeing that oftentimes it falleth out that those which in shew seeme most ho∣nest, thinke it a thing lawfull to con∣uerse together as man and wife by some secret and priuat contract, with∣out making account of the publicke celebration of marriage as necessarie, but for some worldly respects according as their foolish and disordinate affections mispersuadeth them, to dis∣pence therewith: It shall not bee impertinent as wee goe, to giue warning how vnlawfull all such conuersa∣tion is, and how contrarie to good manners, and to the laudable customes of all ciuill and well gouerned peo∣ple. For it is so farre from deseruing the name of mar∣riage, that on the other side it can bee nothing but plaine whoredome and fornication:Lib. de pudi. the which name and ti∣tle Tertullian giueth to all secret and priuie meetings
which haue not beene allowed of, receiued, and blessed by the church of God. Again besides the euill example which is exhibited, there is this mischiefe moreouer, that the children of such a bed cannot bee esteemed legitimate, yea and God himself accurseth such lawlesse familiaritie, as the mischieues that arise therefrom doe declare, whereof this one example which we alledge shall serue for sufficient proofe. In the raigne of Lewis the ninth king of France, and Iulius the second Pope of Rome, there was a Gentleman of Na∣ples called Antonio Bologne that had beene gouernour of Fredericke of Arragons house when hee was king of Naples, and had the same office vnder the Duchesse of Malfi after she was widdow, with whom in protract of time, hee grew to haue such secret and priuie acquaintance (albeit shee was a Princesse and he her seruant) that he enioied her as his owne wife. And thus they conuersed secretly togither vnder cou∣lor of marriage accorded betwixt them, the space of certaine yeares, vntill shee bore vnto him three children: by which meanes, their priuate dealings which they so much desired to smother and keepe close, burst out and bewraied it selfe. The matter being come to her brothers eares, they tooke it so to the heart, that they could not rest, vntill they had re∣uenged the vile iniurie & dishonor which they pretended to haue ben done to them & their whole house, equally by thē both. Therefore when they had chased them first from An∣cona, whether in hope of quietnes they had fled out of Na∣ples, they draue them also out of Tuscane: who seeing them∣selues pursued so hotely on euery side, resolued to make to∣wards Venice, thinking there to find some safetie: But in the midway shee was ouertaken and brought backe to Na∣ples, where in short space shee miserably ended her life: For her brothers guard strangled her to death, together with her chambermaid, who had serued in stead of a baud to them; and her poore infants which shee had by the said Bo∣logne. But he by the goodnesse of his horse escaping, tooke his flight to Millaine, where hee soiourned quietly a long
while, vntill at the instant pursuit of one of her brothers, the Cardinall of Arragon, he was slaine in the open streets, when he least mistrusted any present danger. And this was a true Cardinal-like exploit indeed, representing that mildnesse, mercifulnesse, and good nature which is so required of euery Christian, in traiterous murthering a man so many yeres after the first rancour was conceiued, that might well in halfe that space haue beene digested, in fostering hatred so long in his cruell heart, and waging ruffians and murtherers to commit so monstrous an act: wherein albeit the Cardinals crueltie was most famous, as also in putting to death the poore in∣fants, yet Gods iustice bare the sway, that vsed him as an instrument to punish those, who vnder the vaile of secret marriage, thought it lawfull for them to commit any villany. And thus God busieth sometime the most wicked about his will, and maketh the rage and fury of the deuill himselfe serue for meanes to bring to passe his fearefull iudgements. CHAP. XXIII. Of vnlawfull marriages, and their issues. NOw to redresse all such euils as haue before beene mentioned, and to auoid all inconueniences in this case, God of his bounti∣full mercy hath ordained marri∣age as a remedy to be applied to all such as haue not the gift of continencie, least they should fall into fornication: which not∣withstanding many shamelesse creatures that blush not at their owne filthines, but rather re∣ioice thererein, make no account of. Such are they, that ma∣king marriage one of the sacraments of the Church, doe ne∣uerthelesse despise it as a vile and prophane thing; albeit that
the Apostle saith, That marriage is honourable among all men, and the bed vndefiled; but whoremongers and adulte∣rers God will iudge. But they haue it not in that estimation, seeing by authority they are depriued of the vse thereof, and not of adultery. That which is honest and laudable is forbid∣den, and that which is sinnefull and vnlawfull, allowed of. This (saith Sleidan) is the custome of the Germane bishops,Lib. 4. for money to suffer their priests to keepe harlots, not exa∣cting any other punishment, sauing their purses to priuiledge their knaueries. But these reines of libertie were let more loose in certaine villages of the Cantons of the Switzers,Lib. 3. where it was not onely winked at, but also commaunded, that euery new priest should haue his priuat whore for his owne tooth, that hee might not intermeddle with other mens. Neither was it without reason that Iohn le Maire said, How vnder the shew and colour of chastity, priests whore∣domes did ouerflow, beeing men abandoned to all dissolute and riotous liuing. Now then it were farre better to marrie than to burne, yet in such sort to marry, that all giddinesse and inconsideration set aside, euery one should match him∣selfe according to his degree and age, with great respect and good aduisement had vnto them both, to the end to auoid those mischiefes and enormities which oftentimes happen, when either by an ouer hardy, foolish, and rash presumpti∣on, a man would nestle himselfe in an higher nest than his estate and calling requireth, or by a sensuall and fleshly lust passing the bounds of reason, goeth about to constraine, and interrupt the law of nature. The chiefest thing that is re∣quired in marriage, is the consent of parties, as well of them∣selues that are to be ioyned togither, as of each of their pa∣rents; the contrary whereof is constraint, where either par∣tie is forced:Iudg. 21. as it happened to those two hundred maides, which the Beniamites tooke by force and violence to be their wiues. This was a reproch to Romulus, the first king of Rome, when hee rauished the Sabine virgins that came to see their
sports, which was cause of great warre betwixt them. More∣ouer, besides the mutuall ioynt of loue which ought to be betwixt man and wife, it is necessary that they that marrie, doe marry in the Lord, to serue him in greater puritie, and with lesse disturbance; which can not be, if a Christian mar∣rie an infidell, for the great difficulties and hinderances that vsually spring from such a roote.Exod. 34 16, Deut. 7 3. Therefore it was straightly forbidden the people of God to contract mariages with Ido∣latours; yea, and the holy Patriarchs before any such law was giuen, had carefully great regard (in the marriages of their childrē) to this thing, as the example of Abraham doth sufficiently declare. Therefore they that haue any manner of gouernment and authority ouer vnmarried folkes, whe∣ther they be fathers, mothers, kinsmen, or tutours, ought to haue especiall care and regard thereof. Yea Christian prin∣ces and lords or rulers of commonwealths, should not in this respect be so supine and negligent in the performance of their offices, as once to permit and suffer this amongst them, which is so directly contrary to the word of God; but rather by es∣peciall charge forbid it, to the end, that both their lawes might be conformable, and in euery respect agreeable to the holy ordinances of God, and that the way might be stop∣ped to those mischiefes, which were likely to arise from such euill concluded marriages. For what reason is it, that a yong maide, baptized and brought vp in the Church of Christ, should bee giuen in marriage to a worshipper of images and idols, and sent to such a countrey where the worship of God is not so much as once thought vpon? Is not this to plucke a soule out of the house of God, and thrust it into the house of the deuill? out of heauen into hell? than which, what greater Apostasie or falling from God can there be? where∣of all they are guilty that either make vp such marriages, or giue their good will and consent to them, or doe not hin∣der the cause and proceedings of them, if any manner of way they can. Now that this confusion and mixture of religion in marriages is vnpleasant and noisome to God, it manifestly
appeareth by the sixt chapter of Genesis, where it is said, That because the sonnes of God, [to wit, those whome God had separated for himselfe from the beginning of the world to be his peculiar ones,] were so euill aduised, as to be allured with the beauties of the daughters of men, [to wit, of those which were not chosen of God to be his people; and to marry with them, corrupting themselues by this contagious acquaintance of prophane people, with whome they should haue had nothing to doe,] that therefore God was incensed against them, and resolued simply to reuenge the wickednes of ech party without respect. Beside, the monstrous fruits of those prophane marriages, doe sufficiently declare their odi∣ousnes in Gods sight: for from them arose gyants of strength and stature exceeding the proportion of men, who by their hugenes did much wrong and violence in the world, and gai∣ned fearefull & terrible names to themselues: but God (pro∣uoked by their oppressions) drowned their tyrannies in the flood, and made an end of the world for their sakes. In the time of the Iudges in Israel, the Israelites were chastised by the hand of God for this same fault; for they tooke to wiues the daughters of the vncircumcised, and gaue them their daughters also.Iudg. 3. In like sort framed they themselues by this means to their corrupt manners and superstitions, and to the seruice of their idolatrous Gods: But the Lord of heauen rai∣ned downe anger vpon their heads, and made them subiect to a stranger, the king of Mesopotamia, whome they serued the space of eight yeeres.1. King. 11. Looke what happened to king Salo∣mon for giuing his heart to strange women that were not of the houshold of Gods people: Hee that before was repleni∣shed with such admirable wisdome, that he was the wonder of the world, was in his old age depriued thereof, and besot∣ted with a kind of dulnes of vnderstanding, and led aside from the true knowledge of God to serue idols, and to build them altars and chappels for their worship; and all this to please forsooth his wiues humours, whose acquaintance was the chiefe cause of his misery and apostasie.
CHAP. XXIIII. Touching Incestuous marriages. NOw as it is vnlawfull to contract marriages with parties of contrary religion, so it is as vnlawfull to marry those that are neare vn∣to vs by any degree of kindred or affinitie, as it is inhibited not only by the law of God, but also by ciuill and politique constituti∣ons; whereunto all nations haue euer by the sole instinct of nature agreed and accorded, except the Aegyptians and Persians, whose abominations were so great, as to take their owne sisters and mothers to be their wiues, Cambyses, king of Media and Persia, married his owne sister, but it was not long ere he put her to death; a iust proofe of an vniust and accursed marriage. Many others there were in protract of time, that in their insatiable lustes, shewed themselues no lesse vnstaied and vnbridled in their lawlesse affections than hee: One of which, was Antiochus king of Iuda, sonne of Herodes, sirnamed Great;Ioseph antiq. lib. 17. cap. 15. who blushed not to marrie his sister, the late wife of his deceased brother Alexander, by whome shee had borne two children: but for this and di∣uers other hi good deeds, hee lost not only his goods (which were confiscated) but was himselfe also banished out of his countrey into a forraine place, from Iudea to Vienna in France. Herode also the Tetrarch was so impudent and shame∣lesse,The same, lib. 18. cap. 9. that hee tooke from his brother Philip his wife Hero∣dias, and espoused her vnto himselfe: which shamelesse and incestuous deed Iohn Baptist reproouing in him, told him plainly how vnlawfull it was, for him to possesse his brothers wife; but the punishment that befell him for this, and many other his sinnes, wee haue heard in the former booke, and need not here to be repeated.
Anton. Caracalla, tooke to wife his mother in law, allu∣red thereunto by her faire enticements, whose wretched and miserable end hath already beene touched in the tenth Chapter of this booke. The Emperour Heraclius, after the decease of his first wife, married his owne neece, the daughter of his brother, which turned mightily to his vndoing: for besides that, that vnder his raigne, and as it were, by his occasion, the Sara∣cens entred the borders of Christendome, and spoiled and destroied his dominions vnder his nose, to his soule and vtter disgrace: hee was ouer and aboue smitten corporally with so grieuous and irkesome a disease of dropsie, that hee died thereof. Thus many men run riot, by assuming to themselues too much libertie, and breake the bounds of ciuill honesty, re∣quired in all contracts, and too audaciously set themselues against the commaundement of God, which ought to be of such authority with all men, that none (be they neuer so great) should dare to derogate one iot from them, vnlesse they meant wholly to oppose themselues as profest enemies to God himselfe, and to turne all the good order of things into confusion. All which notwithstanding some of the Ro∣mish Popes haue presumed to encroch vpon Gods right, and to disanull by their foolish decrees, the lawes of the almigh∣tie:Sleid. lib. 9. As Alexander the sixt did, who by his bull approoued the incestuous marriage of Ferdinand king of Naples with his owne Aunt, his father Alphonsus sister by the fathers side, which otherwise (saith Cardinall Bembus) had beene against all law and equitie, and in no case to be tollerated and borne withall. Henry the seuenth, king of England, after the death of his eldest sonne Arthur, caused (by the speciall dispensation of Pope Iulius) his next sonne named Henry, to take to wife his brothers widdow called Katherine, daughter to Ferdinando king of Spaine, for the desire hee had to haue this Spanish affinitie continued: who succeeding his father in the crowne,
after continuance of time, began to aduise himselfe, and to consult whether this marriage with his brothers wife might be lawfull or no; and found it by conference both of holy and prophane lawes, vtterly vnlawfull: whereupon hee sent certain bishops to the Queene to giue her to know, That the Popes dispensation was altogither vniust, and of none effect to priuiledge such an act: to whome shee answered, that it was too late to call in question the Popes bull which so long time they had allowed of. The two Cardinals that were in Commission from the Pope to decide the controuersie, and to award iudgement vpon the matter, were once vpon point to conclude the decree, which the king desired, had not the Pope impeached their determination in regard of the Em∣perour Charles, nephew to the said Queene, whome hee was loth to displease: wherefore the king seeing himselfe fru∣strate of his purpose in this behalfe, sent into diuers coun∣tries to know the iudgement of all the learned Diuines con∣cerning the matter in controuersie, who (especially those that dwelt not farre off) seemed to allow and approoue the diuorce: thereupon hee resolued (reiecting his old wife) to take him to a new, and to marry (as he did) Anne of Bul∣laine one of the Queenes maids of honour, a woman of most rare and excellent beauty. Now as touching his first marri∣age with his brothers wife how vnfortunate it was in it owne nature, and how vniustly dispensed withall by the Pope, we shall anon see, by those heauie, sorrowfull, and troublesome euents and issues which immediatly followed in the necke thereof. And first and foremost of the euill fare of the Cardinall of Yorke, with whome the king beeing highly displeased, for that at his instance and request, the Pope had opposed himselfe to this marriage, requited him (and not vndeser∣uedly) on this manner: First he deposed him from the office of the Chancellourship: secondly, depriued him of two of his three bishopricks which he held: & lastly, sent him packing
to his owne house, as one whom hee neuer purposed more to see. Yet afterward being aduertised of certaine insolent and threatning speeches which hee vsed against him, hee sent a∣gaine for him: but he not daring to refuse to come at his call, died in the way with meere griefe, and despight. The Pope gaue his definitiue sentence against this act, and fauoured the cause of the diuorced ladie: But what gained hee by it? saue onely that the king offended with him, reiected him and all his trumperie, retaining his yearely tribute leuied out of this realme, and conuerted it to another vse; and this was the re∣compence of his goodly dispensation with an incestuous ma∣riage: wherein although to speake truly and properly he lost nothing of his owne, yet it was a deepe checke and no shal∣low losse to him and his successors to be depriued of so good∣ly a reuenue, and so great authoritie in this realme, as hee then was. CHAP. XXV. Of Adulterie. SEeing that marriage is so holy an instituti∣on and ordinance of God, as it hath been shewed to be, it followeth by good right that the corruption thereof, namely A∣dulterie, whereby the bond of marriage is desolued, should bee forbidden: for the woman that is polluted therewith, despi∣seth her owne husband, yea and for the most part hateth him, and foisteth in strange seed (euen his enemies brats) in stead of his owne, not onely to bee fathered, but also to bee brought vp, and maintained by him, and in time to bee made inheritours of his possessions; which thing being once known, must needs stirre vp coles, to set anger on fire, and set a broch much mischiefe: and albeit that the poore infants are inno∣cent and guiltlesse of the crime, yet doth the punishment and
ignominy thereof redound to them, because they can not be reputed as legitimate, but are euer marked with the blacke cole of bastardy whilst they liue: so grieuous is the guilt of this sinne, and vneasie to be remooued. For this cause the very heathen not onely reprooued adultery euermore, but also by authority of law prohibited it, and allotted to death the offenders therein. Abimelech, king of the Philistims, a man without circum∣cision, and therefore without the couenant,Gen. 26. knowing by the light of nature (for he knew not the law of God) how sacred and inuiolable the knot of marriage ought to bee, expressely forbad all his people from doing any iniury to Isaac, in regard of his wife, and from touching her dishonestly vpon paine of death. Out of the same fountaine sprang the words of Queen Hecuba in Euripides speaking to Menelaus as touching Helen, when she admonished him to enact this law, That euery wo∣man which should betray her husbands credit, and her owne chastitie to another man, should die the death. In old time the Aegyptians vsed to punish adultery on this sort, the man with a thousand ierkes with a reed,Diodor. and the wo∣man with cutting off her nose; but hee that forced a free wo∣man to his lust, had his priuie members cut off. By the law of Iulia, adulterers were without difference adiudged to death, insomuch that Iulius Antonius, a man of great parentage and reputation among the Romanes,Lib. 4. Annal. whose sonne was nephew to Augustus sister (as Cornelius Tacitus reporteth) was for this crime executed to death. Aurelianus the Emperour did so hate and detest this vice, that to the end to scare and ter∣rifie his souldiers from the like offence, he punished a soldier which had committed adultery with his hostesse in most se∣uere manner, euen by causing him to be tied by both his feet to two trees bent downe to the earth with force, which being let goe, returning to their course, rent him cruelly in pieces, the one halfe of his body hanging on the one tree, and the other on the other. Yea and at this day amongst the very Turkes and Tartarians, this sinne is sharply punished. So that
we ought not wonder that the Lord should ordaine death for the adulterer. If a man (saith the law) lie with another mans wife,euit. 20.10. if (I say) he commit adultery with his neighbours wife, the adulterer and the adulteresse shall die the death.Deut. 22.22. And in another place, If a man be found lying with a woman marri∣ed to a man, they shall die both twaine, to wit, the man that lay with the wife, and the wife, that thou maist put away e∣uill from Israel. Yea and before Moses time also, it was a cu∣stome to burne the adulterers with fire,Genes. 38. as it appeareth by the sentence of Iuda (one of the twelue Patriarchs) vpon Thamar his daughter in law, because he supposed her to haue plaied the whore. Beside all this, to the end this sinne might not be shuffled vp and kept close, there was a meanes giuen, whereby if a man did but suspect his wife for this sin, though shee could by no witnes or proofe be conuinced, her wicked∣nesse notwithstanding most strangely and extraordinarily might be discouered.Numb. 5. And it was this: The woman publike∣ly at her husbands sute, called in question before the priest, who was to giue iudgement of her after diuers ceremonies and circumstances perfourmed, and bitter curses pronounced by him, her belly would burst, and her thigh would rot, if shee were guilty, and she should be a curse amongst the peo∣ple for her sinne; but if she was free, no euill would come vn∣to her. Thus it pleased God to make knowne, that the filthi∣nesse of those that are polluted with this sinne, should not lie hid. This may more clearely appeare by the example of the Leuites wife, of whome it is spoken in the 19, 20, and 21 chapters of Iudges, who hauing forsaken her husband to play the whore, certaine moneths after hee had againe recei∣ued her to be his wife, she was giuen ouer against her will to the villanous and monstrous lusts of the most wicked and peruerse Gibeonites,Rape, li. 2. c. 19. that so abused her for the space of a whole night togither, that in the morning shee was found dead vpon the threshold, which thing turned to a great de∣struction and ouerthrow in Israel; for the Leuit, when hee a∣rose, and found his wife newly dead at the dore of his lod∣ging,
hee cut and dismembred her body into twelue pieces, and sent them into all the countries of Israel to euery tribe one, to giue them to vnderstand, how vile and monstrous an iniurie was done vnto him, whereupon the whole nation as∣sembling and consulting togither, when they saw how the Beniamites (in whose tribe this monstrous villanie was com∣mitted) make no reckening of seeing punishment executed vpon those execrable wretches, they tooke armes against them, and made warre vpon them; wherein though at the first conflict they lost to the number of forty thousand men, yet afterward they discomfited and ouerthrew the Benia∣mites, and slew of them 25000, rasing and burning downe the city Gabea (where the sinne was committed) with all the rest of the cities of that tribe, in such sort that there re∣mained aliue but sixe hundred persons, that saued their liues by flying into the desart, and there hid themselues foure moneths, vntill such time as the Israelites taking pitty of them, least they should vtterly be brought to nought, gaue them to wife (to the end to repeople them againe) foure hundred virgins of the inhabitants of Iabes Gilead, reserued out of that slaughter of those people, wherein man, woman, and child were put to the sword, for not comming forth to take part with their brethren in that late warre. And foras∣much as yet there remained two hundred of them vnproui∣ded for, the Ancient of Israel gaue them libertie to take by force two hundred of the daughters of their people; which could not be but great iniury and vexation vnto their parents, to be thus robbed of their daughters, and to see them mar∣ried at all aduentures without their consent or liking. These were the mischiefes which issued and sprang from that vile and abominable adultery of the wicked Gabaonites with the Leuits wife,One sin puni∣shed with an∣other. whose first voluntary sinne was in like man∣ner also most iustly punished by this second rape: and this is no new practise of our most iust God, to punish one sinne by another, and sinners in the same kind wherein they haue of∣fended.
When king Dauid, after hee had ouercome the most part of his enemies,2. Sam. 11. and made them tributaries vnto him, and en∣ioyed some rest in his kingdome, whilst his men of war pur∣suing their victory, destroied the Ammonites, and were in besieging Rabba their chiefe citie; hee was so inflamed with the beauty of Bathshabe, Vriahs wife, that hee caused her to be conueied to him to lie with her: to which sinne, hee com∣bined another more grieuous, to wit, when he saw her with child by him (to the end to couer his adultery) he caused her husband to be slaine at the siege, by putting him in the vant∣gard of the battaile at the assault; and then thinking himselfe cocksure, married Bathshabe. But all this while, as it was but vaine allurements, no solid ioy that fed his mind, and his sleep was but of sinne, not of safety, wherein he slumbered: so the Lord awakened him right soone by afflictions and crosses, to make him feele the burden of the sinne which hee had com∣mitted:2. Sam. 12. first therefore the child (the fruit of this adultery) was stricken with sicknesse and died; next his daughter Tha∣mar, Absoloms sister, was rauished by Ammon one of his owne sonnes;2. Sam. 13. 2. Sam. 15. thirdly Ammon for his incest was slaine by Absolom; and fourthly Absolom (ambitiously aspiring after the king∣dome, and conspiring against him) raised warre vpon him, and defiled his concubines, and came to a wofull destruction. All which things (being grieuous crosses to king Dauid) were in∣flicted by the iust hand of God to chastise and correct him for his good, not to destroy him in his wickednesse: neither did it want the effect in him, for he was so farre from swelling and hardening himselfe in his sinne, that contrariwise, he cast downe and humbled himselfe, and craued pardon and for∣giuenesse at the hand of God with all his heart, and true re∣pentance; not like to such as grow obstinate in their sinnes and wickednesse, and make themselues beleeue all things are lawfull for them although they be neuer so vile and dis∣honest. This therefore that wee haue spoken concerning Dauid, is not to place him among the number of leud and wicked liuers, but to shew by his chastisements, beeing a man
after Gods owne heart) how odious and displeasant this sinne of Adultery is to the Lord, and what punishment all others are to expect that wallow therein, since hee spared not him whome he so much loued and fauoured. CHAP. XXVI. Other examples like vnto the former. THe history of the rauishment of Helene, registred by so many worthy and excellent authours, and the great euils that pursued the same,Herodot. lib. 2. is not to be counted al∣togither an idle fable,Thucyd. or an in∣uention of pleasure, seeing that it is sure, that vpon that occasion great and huge warre arose be∣tweene the Greeians and the Troianes, during the which, the whole countrey was ha∣uocked, many cities and townes destroied, much blood shed, and thousands of men discomfited; amongst whome, the ra∣uisher and adulterer himselfe (to wit Paris, the chiefe moo∣uer of all those miserable tragedies) escaped not the edge of the sword; no nor that famous citie Troy (which entertained and maintained the adulterers within her wals) went vnpu∣nished, but at last was taken and destroied by fire and sword. In which sacking, old and gray headed king Priam, with all the remnant of his halfe slaine sonnes, were togither murde∣red, his wife and daughters were taken prisoners, and expo∣sed to the mercy of their enemies; his whole kingdome was entirely spoiled, and his house quite defaced, and well nigh all the Troiane nobilitie extinguished: and as touching the whore, Helene her selfe, (whose disloialtie gaue consent to the wicked enterprise of forsaking her husbands house, and following a stranger) shee was not exempt from punishment;
for as some writers affirme, shee was slaine at the sacke: but according to others,Anton. Vols. vp∣on Ouids epist. of Hermione to Orestes. she was at that time spared, and entertai∣ned againe by Menelaus her husband; but after his death, shee was banished in her old age, and constrained for her last refuge (beeing both destitute of reliefe and succour, and forsaken of kinsfolkes and friends) to flie to Rhodes, where at length (contrary to her hope) shee was put to a shamefull death, euen hanging on a tree, which shee long time before deserued. Tit. Liu.The iniury and dishonour done to Lucrece, the wife of Collatinus, by Sextus Tarquinius, sonne to Superbus the last king of Rome,Rape, l. 2. c. 19. was cause of much trouble and disquietnesse in the city and elsewhere: for first shee (not able to endure the great iniury and indignity which was done vnto her, pushed forward with anger and despite) slue her selfe in the presence of her husband and kinsfolke, notwithstanding all their de∣sires and willingnesse to cleare her from all blame: with whose death the Romans were so stirred & prouoked against Sextus the sonne, and Tarquinius the father, that they rebel∣led forthwith, and when hee should enter the city, shut the gates against him, neither would receiue or acknowledge him euer after for their king. Whereupon ensued warre a∣broad, and alteration of the state at home; for after that time, Rome endured no more king to beare rule ouer them, but in their roome created two Consuls to be their gouernours, which kind of gouernment continued to Iulius Caesars time. Thus was Tarquinius the father shamefully deposed from his crowne, for the adultery, or rather, rape of his sonne; and Tarquinius the sonne slaine by the Sabians, for the robberies and murders which by his fathers aduise he committed a∣mongst them; and hee himselfe not long after in the warre which by the Tuscane succours hee renued against Rome to recouer his lost estate,Plutarch in the life publick. was discomfited with them, and slaine in the midst of the rout. In the Emperour Valentinianus time, the first of that name, many women of great account and parentage, were for committing adulterie put to
death, as testifieth Ammianus Marcellinus. When Europe after the horrible wasting and great ruines which it suffered by the furious inuasion of Attilia,Lib. 28. began to take a litle breath and find some ease, behold, a new trouble more hurtfull and pernicious than the former, came vpon it, by meanes of the filthy leachery and lust of the Emperour Valentinianus the third of that name, who by reason of his euill bringing vp,Procop. and gouernment vnder his mother Placidia, being too much subiect to his owne voluptuousnesse, and tied to his owne de∣sires, dishonoured the wife of Petronius Maximus a Sena∣tour of Rome, by forcing her to his pleasure; an act indeed that cost him his life, and many more beside, and that drew after it the finall destruction of the Romane Empire, and the horrible besacking and desolation of the city of Rome: For the Emperour being thus taken and set on fire with the loue of this woman, through the excellent beauty wherewith shee was endued, endeauoured first to entice her to his lust by faire allurements; and seeing that the bulwarke of her vertuous chastity, would not by this meanes be shaken, but that all his pursuit was still in vaine, hee tried a new course, and attempted to get her by deceit and pollicy; which to bring about, one day setting himselfe to play with her hus∣band Maximus, he woon of him his ring, which he no sooner had, but secretly he sent it to his wife in her husbands name with this commaundement, That by that token shee should come presently to the court, to do her duty to the Empresse Eudoxia: shee, seeing her husbands ring, doubted nothing, but came forthwith as shee was commanded; where, whilst she was entertained by certaine suborned women whome the Emperour had set on, he himselfe commeth in place, and dis∣closeth vnto her his whole loue, which he said he could no longer represse, but must needs satisfie, if not by faire meanes, at least by force and compulsion, and so he constrained her to his lust. Her husband aduertised hereof,Rape, l. 2. c. 19. intended to reuenge this iniury vpon the Emperor with his owne hand: but seeing he could not execute his purpose, whilst Actius the captain
generall of Valentinianus army liued (a man greatly reueren∣ced and feared for his mighty and famous exploits, atchie∣ued in the warres against the Burgundians, Gothes, and Atti∣la) he found meanes by suggesting a false accusation of trea∣son against him (which made him to be hated and suspected of the Emperour) to worke his death. After that Actius was thus traiterously and vnworthily slaine, the griefe of infinite numbers of people for him, in regard of his great vertues and good seruice which he had done to the commonwealth, gaue Maximus fit occasion to practise the Emperours destruction, and that by this means: He set on two of Actius most faith∣full followers, partly by laying before them the vnworthy death of their master, and partly by presents and rewards to kill the Emperour, which they perfourmed as he was sitting on his seat of iudgement in the sight of the whole multi∣tude; amongst whome there was not one found that would oppose himselfe to Maximus in his defence, saue one of his Eunuchs, who stepping betwixt to saue his life, lost his owne: and the amazement of the whole city with this sudden acci∣dent was so great, that Maximus hauing reuenged himselfe thus vpon the Emperor, without much a doe not only seased vpon the Empire, but also vpon the Empresse Eudoxia, and that against her will to be his wife (for his owne died but a little before:) Now the Empresse, not able to endure so vile an indignity (being aboue measure passionate with griefe and desire of reuenge) conspired his destruction on this manner: She sent secretly into Africa to sollicite and request most in∣stantly, Gensericus king of the Vandals, by praiers mingled with presents, to come to deliuer her and the citie of Rome from the cruell tyranny of Maximus, and to reuenge the thrise vniust murder of her husband Valentinian; adding moreouer, that he was bound to doe no lesse in consideration of the league of friendship which by oth was confirmed be∣twixt them. Gensericus well pleased with these newes, laid hold vpon the offred occasion, which long time he had more wished than hoped for, & forthwith (being alreadie tickled
with hope of a great and inestimable booty) rigged his ships and made ready his army by sea, launching foorth with three hundred thousand men, Vandales and Moores, and with this huge fleet made straight for Rome. Maximus meane while mistrusting no such matter, especially from those parts, was sore affrighted at the sodaine brute of their comming; & not yet vnderstanding the full effect of the matter, perceiuing the whole city to bee in dismay, and that not onely the com∣mon people but also the nobilitie had for feare forsaken their houses, and fled to the mountains, or forrests for safety; hee I say destitute of succour, tooke himselfe also his heeles, as his surest refuge: but all could not serue to rid him from the iust vengeance of God prepared for him,Mandat. 6. lib. 2. cap. 8. for the murders which he had ben cause of: For certaine Senators of Rome, his pri∣uate & secret foes, finding him alone in the way of his flight, and remembring their old quarrels, fell vpon him sodainly & felled him downe with stones, and after mangled him in pee∣ces and threw his body into Tiber. Three daies after arriued Gensericus with all his forces, and entring Rome found it na∣ked of all defence, and left to his owne will and discretion: where (albeit he professed himselfe to be a Christian) yet hee shewed more pride and cruelty, and lesse pity than either At∣tila or Allaricus, two Heathen kings: For hauing giuen his souldiors the pillage of the city, they not only spoiled all pri∣uate houses, but also the Temples and monasteries in most cruell and riotous manner. All the best & beautifullest things of the city they tooke away, and carried a huge multitude of people prisoners to Affrica, amongst the which was Eudoxia the Empresse (with her two daughters Eudocia and Placidia) who was the cause of al this calamity, but her trechery saued not her selfe nor them from thraldome.Treason. lib. 2. cap 3. And thus was Rome sacked and destroied more than euer it was before, insomuch that the Roman Empire could neuer after recouer it selfe, but decaied euery day, and grew worse and worse. These were the calamities which the adultery of Valentinian brought vp∣on himselfe and many others, to his owne destruction, and
the vtter ruine of the whole Empire. Paulus Aemil. Nichol. Gil.Childericke king of France son to Merouee, for laying siege to the chastitie of many great ladies of his realme, the Prin∣ces and Barons conspired against him, and droue him to flie for his life. Paulus Aemil.Eleonor the wife to king Lewis of France (hee that first cut through the sea furrowes towards Ierusalem, against the Turks & Sarasens) would needs couragiously follow her hus∣band in that long and dangerous voiage: but how? Marry whilst he trauailed night & day in perrill of his life she lay at Antioch bathing her selfe in all delights, & that more licen∣tiously than the reputation or duty of a maried womā requi∣red; wherefore being had in suspition, & euill reported of for her lewd behauiour, it was thought meet that she should bee diuorced from the king vnder pretence of consanguinitie to the end she should not altogether be defamed. Fulgo. lib. 6. c r.The faire daughter of Philip the fair king of France esca∣ped not at so good a rate, for the king as soone as he smelt out the haunt of their vnchastity, caused them to bee apprehen∣ded and imprisoned presently, howbeit one of them (namely the Countesse of Poyters) her innocency being knowne was set at liberty, and the other two (to wit, the Queene of Na∣uar and the wife of Iohn de la March) being found guilty by proofe, were adiudged to perpetuall imprisonment. And the Adulterers (two brethren of the countrie of Aniou) with whom these ladies had often lien, were first cruelly slain, and after hanged. Froysard. vol. 1. cap. 22.Charles, son of the foresaid Philip the faire, had to wife the daughter of the Earle of Artois that also offended in the like case, and in recompence receiued this dishonor and ignominy to be diuorced, and put in prison, and to see him married to a∣nother before her face. Froysard. vol. 3. cap. 45.In the raigne of Charles the sixt, there befell a notable & memorable accident which was this: One Iaques le Grys of the country of Alanson being enamoured with a lady no lesse faire than honourable, the wife of the Lord of Carouge,
came vpon a day when hee knew her husband to bee from home to her house, & faining as if hee had some secret mes∣sage to vnfold vnto her on her husbands behalfe (for their fa∣miliarity was so great) entred with her all alone into a most secret chamber,Rape. lib. 2. cap. 19. where assoone as he had gotten her hee loc∣ked the dore, and throwing himselfe vpon her, forced her vnto his lust, and afterward saued himselfe by speedy flight. Her husband at his returne vnderstanding the iniury and wrong which was done him by this vile miscreant, sought first to reuenge himselfe by iustice, and therefore put his cause to bee heard by the Parliament of Paris, where being debated, it could not well bee decided, because hee wanted witnesses to conuince the crime, except his own wiues words, which could not bee accepted: so that the court to the end that there might some end be made of their quarrell, ordai∣ned a combate betwixt thē which was forthwith performed; for the two duellists entring the lists, sell presently to strokes, and that so eagerly, that in short space the quarrell was deci∣ded; the Lord of Carouge, husband of the wronged lady re∣mained conquerour, after he had slaine his enemie that had wronged him so wickedly & disloially: the vanquished was foorthwith deliuered to the hangman of Paris, who drag∣ged him to mount Falcon, and there hanged him. Now al∣beit this forme and custome of deciding controuersies hath no ground nor warrant either from humane or Diuine law (God hauing ordained onely an oath to end doubts where proofes and witnesses faile) yet doubtlesse the Lord vsed this as an instrument to bring the trecherous and cruell Adulterer to the deserued punishment and shame, which by deniall he thought to escape. A certaine Seneschall of Normandy,Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 1. perceiuing the vicious and suspitious behauiour of his wife with the steward of his house, watched them so narrowly that hee tooke them in bed togither: hee slew the Adulterer first, and after his wife; for not all her pittifull cryings for mer∣cie with innumerable teares for this one fault, and holding
vp in her armes the children which she had borne vnto him, no nor her house and parentage, being sister to Lewis the ele∣uenth then king, could not withhold him from killing her with her companion: Howbeit king Lewis neuer made shew of anger,Lanquet. chron. or offence for her death. Messelina the wife of Claudius the Emperour was a wo∣man of so notable incontinency, that she would contend with the common harlots in filthie pleasure; at last shee fell in loue with a faire young Gentleman called Silius, and to obtaine more commodiously her desire, she caused his wife Sillana to be diuorced; and notwithstanding she was wife to the Empe∣ror there liuing, yet shee openly married him: for which cause after great complaint made to the Emperour by the Nobles she was worthely put to death. Abusahed king of Fez was with six of his children murde∣red at once by his secretary for his wiues sake whom hee had abused.Paulus Iouius. Tom. 2. lib. 38. Sleid, lib. 10. And it is not long sithence the two cities Dalmendine and Delmedine were taken from the king of Fez & brought vnder the Portugall dominion, only for the rauishment of a woman whom the gouernour violently tooke from her hus∣band to abuse, and was slaine for his labour. CHAP. XXVII. Other examples like vnto the former. Munst. Cosm. lib. 3. Casp. Hed. hi∣stor. Ecclesiast.MAry of Arragon wife to Otho the third, was so vnchast and lasciuious a woman, and withall barren (for they commonly goe together) that shee could neuer satisfie her vnsatiable lust: she carried about with her conti∣nually a young lecher in womans clothes to attend vpon her person, with whome she daily committed filthinesse, who being sus∣pected was in the presence of many vntired, and found to be a man, for which villany he was burnt to death. Howbeit the
Empresse, though pardoned for her fault, returned to her old vomit, & continued her wanton trafficke with more then ei∣ther desired or loued her companie, at last shee fell in loue with the countie of Mutina, a gallant man in personage & too honest to be allured with her stale, though hee was often so∣licited by her, wherefore like a Tygre she accused him to the Emperour (for extreame loue conuerts to extreame hatred if it bee crossed) of offering to rauish her against her will; for which cause the Emperor Otho caused him to loose his head: but his wife being priuy to the innocency of her husband, tra∣uersed his cause, and required iustice, that though his life was lost, yet his reputation might be preserued, and to prooue his innocency shee miraculously handled yron red with heat without any hurt: which when the Emperour saw, searching out the cause very narrowly hee found out his wiues villany; and for her paines caused her to bee burned at a stake, but on the Earles wife he bestowed great rewards euen foure castels in recompence of her husband, though no reward could counteruaile that so great a losse. Rodoaldus the eight king of Lumbardie,Chron. Phil. Melanct. lib. 3. being taken in A∣dulterie euen in the fact, by the husband of the adulteresse, was slaine without delay, Anno 659 in like sort Iohn Malate∣sta slew his wife and the adulterer together when hee tooke them amidst their embracements. So did one Lodewicke ste∣ward of Normandy kill his wife Carlotta and her louer Iohn Lauernus, as they were in bed togither Hedion in his Chronicle telleth of a Doctor of the law that loued his proctors wife,Casp. Hed. pars 4. with whome as hee acquainted himselfe ouer familiarly and vnhonestly, both at her owne house, when her husband was absent, and at a bath in an old womans house hard by, the proctor watched their haunt so neare, that hee caught them naked together in the bath, and so curried the lecherous doctor with a curry-combe, that he scraped out his eies, and off his priuy members; so that within three daies after he died: his wife he spared because shee was with child, otherwise she should haue tasted the same sauce.
Another story like vnto this he telleth of a Popish priest that neuer left to lay siege to the chastitie of an honest Matrone, till she cōdiscended to his desire, brought him into the snare, and caused her husband to geld him. I would to God that all that dishonour their profession by filthie actions might bee serued after the same manner, that there might bee fewer ba∣stards and bauds and common strumpets than there are now adaies, and that since the feare of God is extinguished in their soules, the feare and certaintie of suddaine iudgements might restraine them. Wolfius Schrenk reported to Martin Luther how in Vayt∣land four murders were committed vpon the occasion of one Adultery; for whilst the Adulteresse strumpet was banquet∣ting with her louers, her husband came in with a hunting speare in his hand and stroke him through that sat next vnto her, and then her also, other two in the meane while leapt downe the staires with feare and hast, broke their armes and shortly after died. Theat. histor.A certaine Cardinall committed daily Adulterie with a mans wife, that winked & as it were subscribed vnto it; wher∣fore her brother taking this dishonor to his house in euil part, watched when the lecher had promised to come, but vpon occasion came not, & in the darke slew his sister, and her hus∣band supposing it to haue ben the Cardinall: but whē he per∣ceiued his error, he fled the country for fear of the law; how∣beit before his departure he wrought such means that whom hee missed in his purpose of the sword, him hee murdered by poison: this iudgement is not only for adulterers, but for wit∣tals also, that yeeld their consents to the dishonoring of their own wiues; a monstrous kind of creatures, and degenerat not only from the law of humanity, but of nature also. Martin Luther hath left recorded in his writings many ex∣amples of iudgements on this sin, but especially vpon clergie men, whose profession as it requireth a more strict kind of cō∣uersation, so their sins and iudgements were more notorious, both in their owne natures, and in the eie and opinion of the
world, some of which as it is not amisse to insert in this place, so it is not vnnecessary to beleeue them proceeding from the mouth of so worthie a witnesse. There was (saith he) a man of great authoritie & learning that forsaking his secular life betooke himselfe into the col∣ledge of preists,Luther in epist. consolat. ad Lu∣cum Cranach. (whether of deuotion or of hope of libertie to sin, let thē iudge that read this history) this new adopted priest fell in loue with a Masons wife, whom he so woed that he got his pleasure of her; & what fitter time but whē Masse was singing, did he daily chuse for the performing of his vil∣lany. In this haunt hee persisted a long season, till the Mason finding him in bed with his wife, did not summon him to law, nor pennance: but took a shorter course, & cut his throat.Luther. A∣nother nobleman in Thuringa, being taken in Adulterie was murdered after this strange fashion by the adulteresses hus∣band: he bound him hand & foot & cast him into prison, & to quench his lust, seeing that Ceres, that is, gluttony, is the fewel of Venus, that is, lust; denied him al maner of sustinance, & the more to augment his pain set hote dishes of meat before him, that the smel & sight thereof might more prouoke his appe∣tite, & the want therof torment him more. In this torture the wretched lecher abode so long, vntil he gnew off the flesh frō his own shoulders; and the eleuenth day of his imprisonment ended his life: this punishmēt was most horrible & too too se∣uere in respect of the inflicter, yet most iust in respect of God, whose custome is to proportion his iudgements to the quali∣ty of the sinne that is committed. Luther affirmeth this to haue happened in his childhood, and that both the parties were known vnto him by name, which for honor and charity sake he would not disclose. There was another nobleman that so delighted in lust,Luther. Mandat. 1. Atheisme. li. 1. cap. 25. & was so inordinat in his desires, that he shamed not to say, that if this life of pleasure, & passing from harlot to harlot might endure euer, he would not care for heauē or life eternal: what cursed madnesse & impiety is this? a man to be so forgetful of his maker & himself, that he preferred his whores before his
Sauiour, and his filthy pleasure before the grace of God, doth it not deserue to be punished with scorpions? Yes veri∣ly, as it was indeed, for the polluted wretch died amongst his strumpets, being stroken with a suddaine stroke of Gods vengeance. In the yeare 1505 a certaine Bishop well seene in all lear∣ning and eloquence, and especially skilfull in languages, was notwithstanding so filthy in his conuersation, that he shamed not to defile his bodie and name by many Adulteries: but at length hee was slaine by a cobler whose wife hee had often corrupted, being taken in bed with her, and so receiued a due reward of his filthinesse. Lanquet. chron.In the yeare of our Lord 778 Kenulphus king of the West Saxons in Britaine, as hee vsually haunted the company of a a certaine harlot which he kept at Merton, was slaine by one Clito the kinsman of Sigebert that was late king. The same.Sergus a king of Scotland was so foule a drunkard & glut∣ton and so outragiously giuen to harlots, that hee neglected his owne wife, and droue her to such penurie that shee was faine to serue other noblewomen for her liuing; wherefore she murdered him in his bed, and after slew her selfe also. Arichbertus eldest son vnto Lotharius king of France, di∣ed euen as he was imbracing his whores. In summe to conclude this matter, our English Chronicles report that in the yeare of our Lord 349 there was so great plentie of corne and fruit in Britaine that the like had not ben seene many yeares before, but this was the cause of much idlenesse, gluttony, lechery, and other vices in the land, for v∣sually ease and prosperitie are the nurses of all enormitie, but the Lord requited this their riotous and incontinent life with so great a pestilence & mortalitie, that the liuing scantly suf∣ficed to bury the dead. Petrarch.Petrarch maketh mention of a certaine Cardinall, that though hee was seuenty yeares old, yet euery night would haue a fresh whore, & to this end had certain bauds purueiors and prouiders of his trash: but he died a miserable and wret∣ched
death. And Martin Luther reported, that a bishop be∣ing a common frequenter of the Stues in Hidelberge came to this miserable end: The bords of the chamber whither hee vsed to enter were loosened, that assoone as hee came in hee flipt through and broke his necke. But aboue all, that which wee find written in the second booke of Fincelius is most strange and wonderfull,Iob. Fincelius. lib. 2. of a Priest in Albenthewer, a towne neare adioining to Gaunt in Flaun∣ders, that persuaded a yong maid to reiect and disobey all her parents godly admonitions & to become his concubine: whē she obiected how vile a sinne it was, and how contrary to the law of God, hee told her that by the authority of the Pope, hee could dispence with any wickednesse were it neuer so great, and further alledged the discommodities of marriage and the pleasure that would arise from that kind of life; in fine he conquered her vertuous purpose, and made her yeeld vnto his filthie lust. But when they had thus pampered their desires together a while, in came the deuill and would needs conclude the play: for as they were banquetting with ma∣ny such like companions, he tooke her away from the priests side, and notwithstanding her pittifull crying and all their ex∣orcising and coniuring, carried her quite away, telling the Priest that very shortly he would fetch him also, for hee was his owne darling. CAAP. XXVIII. More examples of the same argument. I Cannot passe ouer in silence a history truly tragical, touching the death of many men who by reason of an A∣dulterie slew one another in most strange and cruell manner, & indeed so strangely, that (as farre as I euer red or knew) there was neuer the
like particular deed heard of, wherein God more euidently poured forth the stream of his displeasure, turning the courage and valor of ech part into rage and furie, to the end that by their owne meanes he might bee reuenged on them. In the Dukedome of Spoleto which is the way from Ancona to Rome (of the ancient Latines called Vmbria) there were three brethrē who kept in their possession three cities of the said dukedome, namely Faligno, Nocera, and Treuio, the el∣dest of whom whose sirname was Nicholas, as he passed from one town to the other, being at Nocera, lodged diuers times in the castell in the keepers and captaines house, whome hee had there substituted to defend the place with an ordinary band of souldiors: now as he made his abode there a few daies, hee grew to cast a more lasciuious eie vpon the captains wife than was meet, and from looking fell to lusting after her, in such sort that in short space hee got very priuy & familiar ac∣quaintance with her, & oftentimes secret, & suspicious mee∣tings: which being perceiued by her husband, he after wat∣ched so narrowly their haunts, that once hee spied thē toge∣ther without being seen of thē: Neuerthelesse disgesting and swallowing vp this sorrow with silence, and without giuing forth any tokens therof, he cōsulted in himself to reuenge the iniury by the death & rasing out, not only of the Adulterer, but also of the whole race & fraternity. Now when hee had hammered this enterprise & laid forth the plot thereof in his head, he dispatched presently a messenger to the three gen∣tlemen brethrē, to inuite thē against the next day to the hun∣ting of the fairest wild bore that was this many a day seene in the forrests of Nocera. Signior Nicholas failed not to come at the time appointed accompanied with Duke Camerino, who desired to be one of this iolly crue: they supped in the towne but lodged in the castel, where being at rest about midnight, the captain rushed into his chamber with the greatest part of his guard, & there handled Signor Nicholas on this maner, he first cut off his priuy mēbers as being principal in the offence, thē thrust him through on both sides with a spear, next pluckt
out his heart, & lastly tore the rest of his body into a thou∣sand peeces. As for the duke Camerino hee shut him vp in a deep & darke dungeon with all the strangers of his retinue. At day breake another of the brethren called Caesar, that lay that night in the town was sent for to come & speak with his brother, & assoone as he was entred into the court of the ca∣stell, seuen or eight of the guard bound him & his followers, & caried him into the chamber where his dead brother lay chopt as small as flesh to the pot, & there murdered him al∣so. Conrade the third brother being by reason of a marriage absent from this feast, when hee receiued the report of these pitifull newes, gathered togither a band of men from all quar∣ters, and with them (assisted with the friends and allies of the duke Camerino then prisoner) laid siege to the castle, they battered the walles, made a breach, and gaue the assault of entrance, and were manfully resisted fiue houres long, till the defendants beeing but thirtie or fortie men at the most, not able to stand any longer in defence, were forced to retire and lay open way of entrance to the enemie, then began a most horrible butchery of men: for Conrade hauing woon the fort, first hewed them in pieces that stood in resistance, then fin∣ding the captaines father, slue him, and cast him piecemeale to the dogs, some he tied to the tailes of wild horses, to bee drawne ouer hedges, ditches, thornes and briers; others hee pinched with hote yrons, and so burnt them to death, which when the captaine from the top of the dungeon, where hee had saued himselfe, beheld, he tooke his wife whome hee held there prisoner, and binding her hand and foot, threw her headlong from the top of the tower vpon the pauemēt; which the souldiors perciuing, put fire to the tower, so that he was constrained through heat and smoke (himself, his brother, and his little child) to sally downe the same way, which he had taught his wife a little before to goe: and so all three broke their neckes: their carcasses were cast out to bee meat for wolues, as vnworthy of humane sepulture. And this was the catastrophe of that wofull tragedy, where by the
occasion of one adulterie (so heauie is the curse of God vpon that sin) a number of men came to their ends. Luth. prand. lib. 5. cap. 15.In the time of Pope Steuen the eight, there was a varlet priest that was captaine in the house of a Marques of Italy, who although he was very mishapen and euill fauoured, yet was entertained of the lady Marques his mistres to her bed, and made her paramour; vpon a night as hee was going to lie with her according ro his wont (his Lord being from home) behold a dog barked so fiercely, leaping & biting at him, that all the seruants of the house being awaked ran thitherward, and finding this gallant in the snare tooke him, and for all his bald crowne stripped him naked, and cut off cleane his priuy and adulterous parts, and thus was this lecherous Priest serued. Luth. prand. lib. 6. cap. 6.Pope Iohn the thirteenth a man as of wicked conuersation in all thinges, so especially abhominable in whoredomes and adulterie, which good conditions whilest he pursued, he was one day taken tardy in the plaine fields, whether hee went to disport himselfe; for hee was found in the act of adultery, and slaine forthwith: and these are the godly fruits of those sin∣gle life louers, to whom the vse of mariage is counted vnlaw∣full, and therefore forbidden, but adultery not once prohibi∣ted nor disallowed. CHAP. XXIX. Of such as are diuorced without cause. BY these and such like iudgements, it plea∣seth God to make knowne vnto men how much hee desireth to haue the e∣state of mariage maintained and preser∣ued in the integritie, and how much e∣uery one ought to take heed how to de∣praue or corrupt the same: now then to
proceed; if it be a sinne to take away, rauish, or entise to folly another mans wife, shall we not thinke it an equall sinne for a husband to forsake his wife, and cast her off to take another, shee hauing not disanulled and cancelled the band of marri∣age by adultery? Yes verily: for as concerning the permissi∣on of diuorce to the Israelits vnder the law,Mat. 19. our sauiour him∣selfe expoundeth the meaning and entent therof in the gos∣pell, to be nothing els but a tolleration for the hardnesse and stubbornnesse of their hearts, and not a constitution from the beginning; vpon which occasion speaking of mariage, and de∣claring the right & strength of the same, he saith, That who∣soeuer putteth away his wife, except it bee for adulterie, and marrieth another committeth adulterie: and he that marri∣eth her that is put away, committeth adultery also. Al which notwithstanding the great men of this world let loose them∣selues to this sinne too licentiously, as it appeareth by many examples: As of Antiochus Theos sonne of Antiochus Soter king of Siria, who to the end to goe with Ptolomie Philadel∣phus king of Aegypt, and marry his daughter Bernice, cast off his wife Laodicea that had borne him children, and tooke Bernice to bee his wife: but ere long hee reiected her also, and betraied her to her enemies (namely his sonne Callini∣cus) who slew her with one of her sonnes, and all that belon∣ged vnto her; and then he tooke again his old wife, for which cause Ptolomie Euergetes (sonne to Philadelphus) renued war vpon him. Herod the Tetrarch was so bewitched with the loue of Herodius his brother Philips wife,Ioseph. of the Iewish anti∣quitie. lib. 18. cap. 7.9. that to the end hee might enioy her, hee disclaimed his lawfull wife, and sent her home to her father king Aretas, who being touched & netled with this indignity and disgrace, sought to reuenge himselfe by armes: and indeed made so hote war vpon him, and charged his army so furiously, that it was discomfited by him: after which shameful losse, he was by the Emperor Caligulas com∣mandement, banished to Lions, there to end the residue of his daies.
Amongst the Remans Marcus Antonius was noted for the most dissolute and impudent in this case of diuorce,Plutarch. for albeit that in the beginning of his triumphirship he forsooke his first wife to mary Octauius his sister, yet he proceeded further, not content herewith but must needs forsake her to, to bee with Cleopatra the queen of Aegypt, from whence sprung out many great euils, which at length fel vpon his own head to his finall ruin & destruction: for when he saw himself in such streights, that no means could be found to resist Octauius, hee sheathed with his own hands his sword into his bowels, whē all his ser∣uants being requested, refused to performe the same; & being thus wounded, hee fell vpon a little bed intreating those that were present to make an end of his daies, but they all fled and left him in the chāber crying & tormēting himself vntill such time that he was cōueied to the monumēt wherin Cleopatra was enclosed, that he might die there. Cleopatra seeing this pi∣tifull spectacle, all amased let down chains & cords from the high window, & with the help of her two maids drew him vp into the monument, vniting their forces, and doing what they could to get his poore carcasse, though by a shamefull & vn∣decēt maner, for the gate was locked & might not be opened; & it was a lamentable sight to see his poor body al besmeared with bloud, & breathing now his last blast (for he died assoon as he came to the top) to be drawne vpon that cruell fashion. As for Cleopatra who by her flattering allurements rauished the hart of this miserable man, & was cause of his second di∣uorce, she plaied her true part also in this woful tragedy, & as she partaked of the sin so she did of the punishment: for after she saw her self past hope of help, & her sweet heart dead, she beat her own breasts, & tormented her self so much with sor∣row that her bosome was brused & halfe murdered with her blows, & her body in many places exulcerate with inflamati∣ons: she puld off her hear, rent her face with her nailes, & al∣together in phrensied with grief, melancholy, & distresse, was found fresh dead, with her two maids lying at her feet: & this was the miserable end of those two, who for enjoying of a few
foolish & cursed pleasures together, receiued in exchange in∣finite torments and vexations, and at length vnhappy deaths togither in one & the same place, verifieng the old prouerbe: For one pleasure a thousand dolours. Charles the eight king of France,Philip. de Cont. after he had ben long time married to the daughter of the king of the Romanes, sister to the Archduke of Austria, was so euill aduised as to turne her home again vpō no other occasion, but to mary the duchesse of Britaine, the sole heire to her fathers dukedome: wherein he doubly iniured his father in law the Roman king; for he did not only reiect his daughter, but also depriued him of his wife the duchesse of Britaine, whom by his substitute (according to the maner of great Princes) he had first espoused. BembusBembus. in his Venetian history handling this story, somewhat molli∣fieth the fault, when he saith that the Roman kings daughter was neuer touched by king Charles in the way of mariage all the while she was there, by reason of her vnripe & oueryong yeares. After a while, after this new maried king had giuen a hote alarme to all Italy, and conquered the realme of Na∣ples; as the Venetians were deliberating to take the matter in hand of themselues, & to resist him, Maximilian the Ro∣man king sollicited them in the same, & thrust them forward, aswell that he might confederate himselfe with the duke of Millan, as that he might reuēge the iniury touching his repel∣led daughter: so that by this means the French king was sore troubled at his return, hauing to withstād him al the Veneti∣an forces, with the most part of the Potentates of Italy; not∣withstāding he broke through thē al after he had put the Ve∣netians to the worst:Philip. de Com. but being returned after this victorious & triumphant voiage, it happened that one day as hee led the queen to the castle of Amboise to see some sport at tenise, he stroke his forehead against the vpper dore post of the gallory as he went in, that he fel presently to the ground speechles,Surseuil. & died incontinently in the place, from whence (though the fil∣thiest & sluttishest place about the castle) they remoued not his body, but laid it on a bed of straw to the veiw of the world
from two of the clocke in the afternoone till eleuen at mid∣night, and this good successe followed at last his so much de∣sired diuorce. CHAP. XXX. Of those that either cause or authorise vn∣lawfull diuorcements. Mat. 19.ALthough the commandement of our Sauiour Christ bee very plaine and manifest, That man should not sepe∣rate those whome God hath ioined together, yet there are some so void of vnderstanding and iudgement, that they make no conscience to dis∣solue those that by the bond of ma∣riage are vnited:Iudg. 15. of which number was Sampsons father in law, who took his daughter (first giuen in mariage to Sampson) and gaue her to another, without any other reason saue that he suspected that Sampson loued her not: but what got he by it? Marry this: the Philistims prouoked against him, consu∣med him and his daughter with fire; because that by the meanes of his iniury Sampson had burned their corne, their vineyards, and their oliue trees. 1. Sam. 25.After the same sort dealt king Saule with Dauid when he gaue him his daughter Michol to wife, and afterward in de∣spight and hatred of him tooke her away againe, and bestow∣ed her vpon another, wherein as in many other things hee shewed himselfe a wicked and prophane man, and was wor∣thely punished therefore as hath ben before declared. Froysard. vol. 1.Hugh Spencer one of king Edward of Englands chiefest fa∣uourits, insomuch that his eare and heart was at his pleasure, was he that first persuaded the king to forsake and repudiate the Queene his wife (daughter to Philip the Faire, king of France) vpon no other occasion, but onely to satisfie his owne
appetite, and the better to follow his delights: And thus by this meanes shee was chased out of England, and driuen to retire to king Charles her brother; where hoping to find rest and refuge, shee was deceiued: for what by the crafts and practises of the English, and what by the Popes authoritie (who thrust himselfe into this action, as his custome is) shee was constrained to dislodge her selfe, and to change her countrey very speedily: wherefore from thence shee went to craue succour of the Countie of Henault, who furnished her with certaine forces, and sent her towards England: where being arriued, and finding the people generally at her com∣maund, and ready to doe her seruice, shee set vpon her ene∣mie Hugh Spencer, tooke him prisoner, and put him to a shamefull death, as hee well deserued. For hee was also the causer of the deaths of many of the Nobles of the Realme, therefore he was drawne through the streets of Herford vp∣on a hurdle, and after his priuie members, his heart, and head were cut off, his foure quarters were exalted in foure seuerall places to the view of the world.
Now if these be found guiltie, that either directly make or indirectly procure diuorcements, shall wee excuse them that allow and authorize the same, without lawfull and iust occasion? No verily,Guicciard. li. 4. no though they be popes that take it vp∣on them: as we read pope Alexander the sixt did; who for the aduancement of his hautie desires, to gratifie and flatter Lewis the twelft king of France, sent him by his son a dispen∣sation to put away his wife (daughter to king Lewis the ele∣uenth) because shee was barren and counterfait; and to re∣contract Anne of Bretaigne, the widdow of Charles the eight lately deceased. But herein though barrennesse of the for∣mer was pretended, yet the dutchie of the latter was aimed at, which before this time, he could neuer attaine vnto. But of what force and vertue this dispensation by right was, or at least ought to be, it is easie to perceiue, seeing that it is not only contrary to the words of the Gospell, Mat. 19, but also to their own decrees, secund. part. quaest. 7. Hi qui matrimoniū: wherein is imported, that marriage ought not to be infringed for any default or imperfection, no not of nature; but Popes may maime and clip both the word of God and all other writings, and doe whatsoeuer themselues liketh, be it good or bad. CHAP. XXXI. Of Incestuous persons. ALthough incest be a wicked and abo∣minable sinne, and forbidden both by the law of God and man, in so much that the very heathen held it indetestation, yet are there some so inordinately vicious and so dissolute, that they blush not once to pollute themselues with this filthinesse.Genes. 35. Reu∣ben the Patriarch was one of this vile crew, that shamed not to defile himselfe with Bilba his fathers concubine, but hee was cursed for his labour: for whereas by right of eldership and birth,Genes. 49. he ought to haue had a certaine prerogatiue and authoritie ouer his brethren, his excellencie shed it selfe like water, and he was surpassed by his brethren both in encrease of progenie and renowme. Ammon, one of king Dauids sonnes,2. Sam. 13. was so strongly enchaunted with the loue of his sister Thamar, that to the end to fulfill his lust, hee traiterously forced her to his will:Rape, lib. 2. cap. 21. but Absolom her natural brother, (hun∣ting for opportunitie of reuenge for this indignity towards his sister) inuited him two yeeres after to a banquet with his o∣ther brethren, and after the same, caused his men to mur∣der him for a farewell. The same Absolom that slew Ammon for incest with his sister,2. Sam. 16. committed himselfe incest with his fathers concubins, mooued thereto by the wicked counsell of Achitophel, that aduised him to that infamous deed of defiling his fathers
bed: but it was the forerunner of his ouerthrow, as wee haue already heard. Diuers of the Romane Emperours were so villanous and wretched,Suet. Lamprid as to make no bones of this sinne with their owne sisters, as Caligula, Antoninus, and Commodus: and some with their mothers, as Nero, so much was he giuen ouer and trans∣ported to all licentiousnesse.Oros. lib. 7. c. 4. Plutarch telleth vs of one Cyanippus, that being ouercome with wine, defloured his owne daughter Cyane, but hee was slaine of her for his labour. Neither doe I thinke it so vnnatu∣rall a part for her to kill her father, as in him to commit in∣cest with his own daughter: for the oracle lessened, or rather approoued her fault, when it abhorred and chastened his crime: for when Siracusa was grieuously infected with the pestilence, it was pronounced by the oracle that the plague should continue, till the wicked person was sacrificed: which darke speech when no man knew, Cyane haled her father by the head to the altar, telling them that hee was that wicked person pointed at by the Oracle, and there sacrificed him with her owne hands, killing her selfe also with rhe same knife, that her innocencie might be witnessed euen by her blood. Thus it pleased God euen among the idolatrous hea∣then to execute iustice & iudgement vpon the earth, though by the meanes of the deuill himselfe, who is the authour of all such villany. Valeria Thusculana was in loue with her owne father,Plutarch. and vnder colour of another maid got to lie with him: which as soone as hee vnderstood, hee slew himselfe in detestation of his owne ignorant abomination and wickednesse: nay so monstrous and horrible is this sinne euen in the sight of man,Valerius. that Nausimenes (a woman of Athens) taking her owne sonne and daughter togither, was so amazed and grieued there∣with, that shee neuer spake word after that time, but remai∣ned dumbe all the rest of her life time: as for the incestours themselues, they liued not, but became murderers of their owne liues.
Papyrius a Romane, got with child his owne sister Canusia, which when their father vnderstood, hee sent each of them a sword wherewith they slue themselues. But aboue all, the vengeance of God is most apparant in the punishment of Heraclius the Emperour,Zonar. lib. 3. who to his no∣torious wickednesses, heresie, persecution, and paganisme hee added this villany,Paul. Diac. lib. 18. to defile carnally his owne sister; so to his notorious punishments (the Saracens sword, dropsie, and the ruine of the Empire) the Lord added this infamous and cruell iudgement, that he could not giue passage to his vrine, but it would flie into his face, had not a pentise beene applied to his belly to beat it downward. And this last plague was pro∣per to his last sinne, wherein the very member which he had abused, sought reuenge of him that abused it; for that hee had confounded nature, and most wickedly sinned against his owne flesh. Agathias,Agathias. writing of the manners of the Persians, repor∣teth, that certaine Philosophers comming out of Aegypt into Greece, where they had seene all manner of vnnaturall mix∣tures, found the carkasse of a man without a sepulchre, which when in charity they buried the next day it was found vnbu∣ried againe; and as they went about to bury it the second time, a spirit appeared vnto them, and forbad them to doe it, saying, That it was vnworthy that honour, seeing when it li∣ued he had committed incest with his own mother. A nota∣ble story, shewing that the very earth abhorreth this mon∣strous confusion of nature: the truth whereof let it lie vpon the authors credit. Most abominable was the incest of Artaxerxes king of Persia,Herod. lib. 9. for first he tooke to himselfe Aspasia, his brother Cy∣rus concubine, hauing ouercome him in warre; and afterward gaue the same Aspasia to his owne sonne Darius to wife; from whome, after carnall knowledge, hee tooke her againe, com∣mitting incest vpon incest, and that most vnnaturally: but marke how the Lord punished all this: first Darius his eldest sonne was put to death for treason, then Ochus (succeeding
in the inheritance) slew Arsame another of his brethren; and albeit Artaxerxes himselfe died without note of iudgement, yet his seed after him was punished for his offence, for so mi∣serable a calamitie pursued them all, that in the second gene∣ration not one was left, to sit vpon his throne. Now to teach vs how execrable and monstrous this kind of sinne is, and how much to be abhorred of all men, the ex∣ample of a poore bruit beast may stand in stead of a lesson for vs, it being so worthy of remembrance, that I thought meet to make rehearsall of it in this place. It is reported by Varro,Varro. a learned and graue writer (whome S. Augustine often com∣mendeth in this booke de ciuitate Dei) of a certaine horse which by no meanes could be brought to couer a mare that was his damme, vntill by hiding her head,Lib. 2. de re ru∣stica, cap. 7. they beguiled his senses: but after when hee perceiued their guile, and knew his damme being vncouered, he ran so furiously vpon the kee∣per with his teeth, that incontinently he tore him in pieces. Truly a miraculous thing, and no doubt diuinely caused to reprooue the enormous and too vnruly lusts of men. CHAP. XXXII. Of effeminate persons, Sodomites, and other such like monsters. SArdanapalus king of Assyria,Frog. lib. 1. was so lasci∣uious and effeminate, that to the end to set forth his beauty, hee shamed not to paint his face with ointments, and to at∣tire his body with the habites and orna∣ments of women,Cic. lib. 5. Tuscul. quest. and on that manner to sit and lie continually amongst whores, & with them to commit all manner of filthinesse and villany: wherefore being thought vnworthy to beare rule ouer men, first Arbaces his lieutenant rebelled, then the Medes and Babylonians reuolted, and ioyntly made warre vpon him,
till they vanquished and put him to flight: and in his flight he returned to a tower in his pallace, which (mooued with griefe and despaire) he set on fire, and was consumed therein. Such like was the impudent lasciuiousnes of two vnwor∣thy Emperors,Lamprid. Commodus and Heliogabalus, who laying aside all Emperiall grauitie, shewed themselues oftentimes pub∣likely in womans attire; an act as in nature monstrous, so very dishonest and ignominious: but like as these cursed mon∣sters ranne too much out of frame in their vnbridled lusts and affections, so there wanted not many that hastened and emboldened themselues to conspire their destruction, as vn∣worthy in their iudgements to enioy the benefit of this light: wherefore to one of them poison was ministred, and when that would take no effect, strangling came in the roome thereof, and brought him to his end: the other was slaine in a iakes where hee hid himselfe, and his body (drawne like carrion through the streets) found no better sepulchre but the dunghill. Touching those abominable wretches of Sodome and Gomorrah,Gen. 19. which gaue themselues ouer with all violence, and without all shame and measure, to their infamous lusts, polluting their bodies with vnnaturall sinnes, God sent vpon them an vnnaturall raine, not of water, but of fire and brim∣stone, to burne and consume them, that were so hote and fer∣uent in their cursed vices: So that they were quite rooted and raked out of the earth, and their cities and habitations destroied, yea and the very soile that bore them, made de∣solate and fruitlesse, and all this by fire, whose smoke ascen∣ded like the smoke of a furnace: yea and in signe of a further curse for to be a witnesse and a marke of this terrible iudge∣ment, the earth and face of that countrey continueth still parched and withered, and (as Iosephus saith) whereas before it was a most plentifull and fertile soile, and as it were, an earthly paradise, bedecked with fiue gallant cities; now it lyeth desart, inhabitable, and barren, yeelding fruit in shew, but such as being touched, turneth to cinders. In a word, the
wrath of God is so notoriously and fearefully manifested therein, that when the Holy Ghost would strike a terrour in∣to the most wicked, hee threatneth them with this like pu∣nishment, saying, The Lord will raine vpon each wicked onePsal. 11.6. Fire, snares, and brimstone, for his portion. Howbeit this maketh not but that still there are too ma∣ny such monsters in the world, so mightily is it corrupted and depraued: neither is it any maruell, seeing that diuers bishops of Rome, that take vpon them to be Christs vicars, and Pe∣ters successours, are infected with this filthy contagion: As namely, Pope Iulius the third, whose custome was to pro∣mote none to Ecclesiasticall liuings, saue onely his bugge∣rers: amongst whome was one Innocent, whome this holy fa∣ther (contrary to the Suffrages of the whole colledge) would needs make Cardinall: nay, the vnsatiable and monstrous lust of this beastly and stinking goat was so extraordinary, that hee could not abstaine from many Cardinals them∣selues. Iohn de la Casa, a Florentine by birth, and by office Archbishop of Beneuento, and Deane of his Apostaticall chamber, was his Legat and Intelligencer in all the Vene∣tian signiories: a man equall or rather worse than himselfe, and such a one, as whose memory ought to be accursed of all posteritie, for that detestable booke which he composed in commendation and praise of Sodomie, and was so shamelesse, nay rather possessed with some deuilish and vncleane spirit, as to divulgate it to the view of the world. Here you may see (poore soules) the holinesse of those whome you so much re∣uerence, and vpon whome you build your beleefe & religion: you see their braue & excellent vertues, and of what esteem their lawes and ordinances ought to be amongst you: Now touching the end that this holy father made, it is declared in the former booke among the rank of Atheists, where we pla∣ced him. And albeit that he & such like villains, please their
owne humours with their abominations, and approoue and cleare themselues therein, yet are they rewarded by death, not onely by the law of God,Leuit. 20. but also by the law Iulia. When Charlemaigne reigned in France, there happened a most notable iudgement of God vpon the monkes of Saint Martine in Tours, for their disordinate lusts: they were men whose food was too much and dainty, whose ease was too easie, and whose pleasures were too immoderate, being alto∣gither addicted to pastimes and meriments: In their apparell they went clad in silke like great lords;Nic. Gil. vol. 1. and (as Nichol. Gill. in his first volume of French Chronicles saith) their shoes were gilt ouer with gold, so great was the superfluity of their riches and pride: in summe, their whole life was luxurious and infamous: for which cause there came forth a destroy∣ing angell from the Lord (by the report of Eudes the Abbot of Clugny) and slew them all in one night, as the first borne of Aegypt were slaine, saue one onely person that was prefer∣ued, as Lot in Sodome was preserued: this strange accident mooued Charlemaigne to appoint a brotherhood of Canons to be in their roome (though little better, and as little profi∣table to the common wealth as the former.) It is not for nothing that the law of God forbiddeth to lie with a beast,Leuit. 18. and denounceth death against them that com∣mit this foule sinne: for there haue been such monsters in the world at sometimes,Exod. 22. Leuit. 20. Deut. 27. as we read in Caelius and Volaterranus, of one Crathes a sheepheard, that accompanied carnally with a shee goat, but the Buck finding him sleeping, offended and prouoked with this strange action, ran at him so furiously with his hornes, that hee left him dead vpon the ground. God that opened an asses mouth to reproue the madnesse of the false Prophet Balaam, and sent lions to kill the strange in∣habitants of Samaria, emploied also this bucke about his ser∣uice in executing iust vengeance vpon a wicked varlet.
CHAP. XXXIII. Of the wonderfull euill that ariseth from this greedinesse of lust. IT is to very good reason, that the scripture forbiddeth vs to abstaine from the lust of the flesh and the eies,1. Ioh. 2. which is of the world and the cor∣ruprion of mans owne nature; for so much as by it we are drawne and en∣ticed to euill, it being as it were, a cor∣rupt root which sendeth forth most bitter, soure, and rotten fruit:Iam. 1. and this happeneth not onely when the goods and riches of the world are in quest, but also when a man hunteth after dishonest and vnchast delights: this concupiscense is it that bringeth forth whoredoms, adul∣teries, and many other such sinnes, whereout spring forth of∣tentimes floods of mischiefes, and that diuers times by the selfe will and inordinate desire of priuat and particular per∣sons:Gen. 39. what did the lawlesse lust of Putiphars wife bring vpon Ioseph? was not his life endangered, and his body kept in close prison, where hee cooled his feet two yeeres or more. We haue a most notable example of the miserable end of a certaine woman, with the sacking and destruction of a whole city, and all caused by her intemperance and vnbri∣dled lust. About the time that the Emperour Phocas was slaine by Priscus,Sabell. one Gysulphus (gouernour and chieftaine of a cuntry in Lumbardie) going out in defence of his cuntry against the Bauarians (which were certaine reliques of the Hunnes) gaue them battaile, and lost the field and his life withall: Now the conquerours (pursuing their victory) laid siege to the chiefe citie of his prouince, where Romilda his wise made her abode: who viewing one day from the wals the young
and faire king with yellow curled locks gallopping about the city, fell presently so extreamely in loue with him, that her mind ran of nothing but satisfying her greedy and new con∣ceiued lust: wherefore (burying in obliuion the loue of her late husband, with her young infants yet liuing, and her coun∣trey, and preferring her owne lust before them all) shee sent secretly vnto him this message, That if hee would pro∣mise to marry her, shee would deliuer vp the citie into his hands: he well pleased with this gentle offer, (through a de∣sire of obtaining the citie, whioh without great bloodshed and losse of men, he could not otherwise compasse) accep∣ted of it, and was receiued vpon this condition within the wals: and least hee should seeme too perfidious, hee perfor∣med his promise of marriage, and made her his wife for that one night, but soone after (in scorne and disdaine) hee gaue her vp to twelue of his strongest leachers to glut her vn∣quenchable fire: and finally nailed her on a gibbet, for a finall reward of her treacherous and boundlesse lust. Marke well the misery whereinto this wretched woman threw her selfe; and not onely her selfe, but a whole city also by her boiling concupiscense, which so dzled her vnderstanding, that shee could not consider how vndecent it was, dishonest, and in∣conuenient, for a woman to offer her selfe, nay to sollicite a man that was an enemy, a stranger, and one that shee had neuer seene before, to her bed, and that to the vtter vndo∣ing of her selfe, and all hers. But euen thus many more (whose hearts are passionate with loue) are blindfolded after the same sort, (like as poeticall Cupid is fained to be) that not knowing what they take in hand, they fall headlong into de∣struction ere they be aware. Let vs then be here aduertised to pray vnto God that hee would purifie our drossie hearts, and diuert our wandring eies from beholding vanity to be seduced thereby.
CHAP. XXXIIII. Of vnlawfull gestures, Idlenesse, Gluttony, Drunkennes, Daunsing, and other such like dissolutenes. LIke as if we would carry our selues chast∣ly and vprightly before God, it behoo∣ueth vs to auoid all filthines and adul∣tery, so wee must abstaine from vnciuill and dishonest gestures, which are (as it were) badges of concupiscense, & coles to set lust on fire, and instruments to in∣iury others withall:Sabel. from hence it was that Pompey caused one of his souldiers eyes to be put out in Spaine, for thrusting his hand vnder a womans garment that was a Spaniard: and for the same or like offence, did Sertorius command a foot∣man of his band to be cut in pieces. Oh that we had in these daies such minded captaines, that would sharply represse the wrongs and rauishments, which are so common and vsuall a∣mongst men of warre at this day, and so vncontrolled! they would not then (doubtlesse) be so rife and common as in these daies they are. Kissing is no lesse to be eschewed than the former, if it be not betwixt those that are tied togither by some bond of kindred or affinitie, as it was by auncient custome of the Medes and Persians, and Romanes also, according to the report of Plutarch and Seneca: and that which is more,Sueton. Ti∣berius Caesar forbad the often and daily practise thereof in that kind, as a thing not to be frequented, but rather vtterly abhorred, though it bee amongst kinsfolkes themselues. It was esteemed an indignitie among the Grecians, to kisse any maid that was not in blood or affinitie allied vnto them; as it manifestly appeareth by the earnest sure and request of the wife of Pisistratus the tyrant of Athens, to put to death a yong mā for kissing her daughter in the streets, as he met her,Valer. lib. 1. c. 5.
although it was nothing but loue that mooued him thereto. Saint Augustine also affirmeth,De ciuitat. Dei. lib. 21. cap. 11. that he which wantonly kis∣seth a woman that is not his wife, deserueth the whip. It is true,Gen. 27.45. that the holy scripture often mentioneth kissing, but ei∣ther betwixt father and child, or brethren, or kinsfolkes, or at least in manner of salutation betwixt one another of acquain∣tance,2. Sam. 20.9. according to the custome of the people of God: and sometimes also it is mentioned as a token of honour and reue∣rence which the subiect perfourmeth to his superiour in this action.1. Sam. 10. In the former ages, Christians vsed to kisse also, but so, that it was euer betwixt parties of acquaintance, and in such sort,Iust. Apolog. 2. Tectull. that by this manner of greeting, they testified to each other their true and sincere charity, peace, and vnion of heart and soule in the Lord. Such chearings and louing embracings were pure and holy, not lasciuious and wanton, like the kisses of profane and leacherous wretches and strum∣pets,Prou. 7.13. whereof Salomon maketh mention. Furthermore euery man ought to shun all meanes and occasions which may en∣duce or entise them to vncleannesse: and among the rest es∣pecially Idlenesse, which can not choose but be, as it were, a wide doore and passage for many vices to enter by, as by ex∣perience we see in those that occupy themselues about no good nor profitable exercises, but mispend their time in tri∣fling and doing nothing, and their wits either vpon vaine and foolish conceits to the hurt of others, or vpon lasciuious and vnchast thoughts, to their owne ouerthrow; whereas on the contrary, to them that are well emploied either in bodie or mind, no such thing betideth: wherefore we ought to be here aduertised euery one of vs to apply our selues to some honest and seemely trade, answerable to our diuers and se∣uerall estates and conditions, and not to suffer our selues to be ouergrowne with Idlenesse, least thereby wee fall into mis∣chiefe: for whome the aduersarie (that malitious and wic∣ked one) findeth in that case, hee knowes well how to fit them to his purpose, and to set them about filthy and perni∣cious seruices.
Next to Idlenesse, the too much pampering the bodie with dainty and much food, is to be eschued; for like as a fat and well fed horse wincheth and kicketh against his rider, so the pampered flesh, rebelleth against God, and a mans owne selfe: this fulnes of bread and abundance of fleshly delights, was the cause of the destruction of Sodome and Gomorrha,Ezech. 16.9. and therefore our Sauiour to good purpose warneth vs, to take heed to our selues,Luk. 21.34. that we be not oppressed with surfet∣ting and drunkennes; and the Apostle, To take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, but to walke honestly,Rom. 13.13. not beeing giuen to gluttony and drunkennesse, chambering and wantonnesse: and in another place, Not to be drunke with wine wherein is excesse:Ephes. 5. for besides the losse of time and mispence of goods, the grieuous diseases and pangs of the body, and dulling and besotting of the wit, which spring from intempe∣rance, many other great euils depend and wait thereon; as whoredoms, adulteries, vncleannesses, quarrels, debates, mur∣ders, with many other such like disorders and mischiefes. Noah, that holy Patriarch, by drinking too much wine,Gen. 9. not only discouered his owne shame, but also was the occason of that cruell curse which the Lord sent vpon the posteritie of Cham, which euen to this day lieth heauy vpon them. Lot, though he hated the sinne of Sodom,Gen. 19. and escaped the punishment of Sodome, yet being ouercome with the wine of the mountaines, he committed incest with his own daugh∣ter, and made a new Sodome of his owne family. Balthasar, rioting and reuelling amongst his pots, had the end both of life and kingdome denounced against him,Dan. 5. by a bodiles handwriting vpon the wall, the Lords decree.Iudith. 13. Whilst Holofernes besotted his senses with excesse of wine and good cheare, Iudith found meanes to cut off his head. The Emperours Septimus Seuerus, and Iouinianus, died with eating and drinking too much. Likewise a certaine African called Donitius,Euseb. ouetcharged his stomack with so much food at supper, that he died there∣with.
Gregory of Tours reporteth of Childericke a Saxon, that glutted himselfe so full of meat and drinke ouer night, that in the morning he was found choked in his bed. In our memory, there was a priest in Rouergne neare Mil∣laine, that (dining with a rich farmer for his yeeres dinner) cheered himselfe so well, and filled his belly so full, that it burst in two, and he died suddenly. Plutarch.Alexander the Great, hauing inuited many of his fauorites and captaines to supper, propounded a crowne in reward to him that should drinke most: now the greatest drinker swal∣lowed vp foure steaens of wine, and woon the price, being in value worth sixe hundred crownes, but lost his life (a iewell of greater worth) for hee suruiued not three daies after this vile excesse: besides, the rest that stroue with him in this goodly conflict of carousing, one and fourty of them died to beare him company. The same Alexander was himselfe subiect to wine, and so distempered diuers times therewith, that hee often slew his friends at the table in his drunkennesse, whome in sobriety he loued dearest. Incest, lib. 2. cap. 31.Plutarch telleth vs of Armitus and Ciranippus, two Sira∣cusians, that being drunke with wine, committed incest with their owne daughters. Clemines, king of Lacedemonia, being disposed to carouse after the manner of the Scithians, dranke so much, that hee became and continued euer after senslesse. Anacreon the Poet, a grand consumer of wine, and a no∣table drunkard, was choked with the huske of a grape. The monstrous and riotous excesses of diuers Romane Emperours (as Tiberius by name, who was a companion of all drunkards) is strange to be heard, and almost incredible to be beleeued: hee loued wine so well, that instead of Tiberius, they called him Biberius; and in stead of Claudius, Caldus; and in stead of Nero, Mer: noting by those nicknames, how great a drunkard he was. The Earle of Aspremont, (after he had by infinite excesse
exhausted all his substance) beeing vpon a day at S. Michell, dranke so excessiuely, that he died therewith. Cyrillus, a citizen of Hippon, had an vngratious son,Aug. tom. 10. ver. 33. who leading a riotous and luxurious life, in the midst of his drun∣kennes killed his owne mother great with child,Paricid. lib. 2. cap. 11. and his fa∣ther, that sought to restraine his fury; & would haue rauished his sister, had she not escaped from him with many wounds. Bonosus the Emperour,Flauius Vopisc. is reported to haue bene such a no∣torious drunkard, that he was said to be borne not to liue, but to drinke: if any embassadours came vnto him, hee would make them drunke, to the end to reueale their secrets: hee ended his life with misery, euen by hanging, with this epi∣taph, That a tunne, not a man, was hanged in that place. Philostrates, being in the bathes at Sinvess,Martd. lib. 11. deuoured so much wine, that hee fell downe the staires, and almost broke his necke with the fall. Zeno, the Emperor of the East,Platina. was so notoriously giuen to excesse of meats and drinks, that his senses being benummed, he would often lie as one that was dead: wherfore being be∣come odious to all men by his beastly qualities, his wife Ari∣ade fell also indetestation of him, & one day as he lay sensles she transported him into a tombe, & throwing a great stone vpon it, pined him to death, not suffering any to remoue the stone, or to yeeld him any succour; and this was a iust reward of his drunkennesse. Pope Paulus the second, beside the exceeding pompe of apparel which he vsed, he was also very careful for his throat, for (as Platina writeth of him) he delighted in all kind of ex∣quisite dishes and delicate wine, and that in superfluitie; by which immoderate and continuall surfetting, hee fell into a grieuous apoplexy, which quickly made an end of his life. It is reported of him, that hee ate the day before he died, two great melons, and that in a very good appetite; when as the next night the Lord stroke him with his heauy iudgement. Alexander, the sonne of Basilius,Phil. Melancth▪ lib. 4. and brother of Leo the Emperour, did so wallow and drowne himselfe in the gulfe of
pleasure & intemperance, that one day (after he had stuffed himselfe too full of meat) as he got vpon his horse, he burst a vaine within his bodie, whereat vpwards and downwards is∣sued such abundance of blood, that his life and soule issued forth withall. Concerning Daunsing (the vsuall dependants of feasts and good chear) there is none of sound iudgement that know not, that they are baits end allurements to vncleannesse, and as it were, instruments of bawdry: by reason whereof, they were alwaies condemned among men of honour and reputation, whether Romans or Greekes, and left for vile and base min∣ded men to vse. And this may appeare, by the reproch that Demosthenes the oratour gaue to Philip of Macedonie and his courtiers, in an oration to the Athenians, wherein hee tearmed them common dauncers, and such as shamed not assoone as they had glutted their bellies with meat, and their heads with wine, to fall scurrilously a daunsing: As for the honourable dames of Rome, truly wee shall neuer read that any of them accustomed themselues to daunce, according to the report of Salust touching Sempronia, whome hee iud∣ged to bee too fine a dauncer and singer to be honourable withall: as if these two could no more agree than fire and water. Cicero in his apologie of Muraena,Muraena. rehearseth an ob∣iection of Cato against his client, wherein he chalenged him for dancing in Asia; which he maketh a matter of so great re∣proch, that not daring to maintaine or excuse the fact he flat∣ly denieth it, saying, That no sober and discreet man euer would commit that fault, vnlesse his sence and reason was bereft him. Plutarch also setting forth the vertues of women putteth in this among the rest, that she ought to be no dancer: and spea∣king in a not her place to all others aswell as women, biddeth them to repulse euen their friends if they should lead and en∣tise them to that exercise. Besides, all the ancient Doctours of the Church haue vt∣terly condemned them as vnlawfull: Thou learnest to sing prophane and idle songs (saith Basil) and forgettest the godly
Psalmes and Hymns which were once taught thee: thou caperest and leapest with thy feet in daunses (vnwise as thou art) when as thou shouldst rather bend thy knees in praier to the almighty: but what gaine is got hereby? Marry this, that virgines return rob∣bed of their Virginities, and maried wiues of their troth to their husbands; both, and all, lesse chast than they went, and more disho∣nest then they should, if not in act, which peraduenture may bee, yet stained in thought which cannot be eschewed. Heare (saith Chrisostome) you maids and wiues which are not ashamed to daunse and trip it at others marriages, and to pollute your sexes; wheresoeuer a lasciuious daunce is daunced, there the deuill bea∣reth the other part and is the author of it. It is better (saith Am∣brose) to dig and delue vpō holy daies than to dance. And in ano∣ther place writing to his sister, he saith, that he need not care for dissolute behauiours and songs which are vsed at marriages to make him merry with all, for when banquets are concluded with daunces, then is chastity in an euill case and in great danger to suffer shipwracke by those suspicious allurements. Besides this,Orig. lib. 1. con∣tra Cels. Can. 5. & 52. dancing hath beene absolutely forbidden by consent of the whole church of Christ before time, vnder paine of excōmu∣nication; as it may appeare by the Constantinoplitane coun∣sell vnder Iustinian the Emperour: what answere can they make then to this that are Christians and allow of these for∣bidden sports? Is it the denying of a mans selfe? The spiritu∣all regeneration? The putting off the old man touching our conuersation in this life? And if al adulterie & vncleannesse,Ephes. 5.4. all filthinesse and foolish talking, iesting and such like, ought not once to bee named amongst vs, because they are things not comely, If I say it bee not lawfull to ieast or speake the least lasciuious word that is, how shall it be lawfull to doe an action with the motion & consent of the whole body, which representeth nothing else but folly, vanity, and lasciuiousnes? And this is for thē that demand where dancing is forbidden in the scripture, which I touch as it were by the way, and do but point at, not minding to frame any long discourse therof, seeing there is a particular treatise touching the same matter,
which hee may read that desireth to know any more tou∣ching it. Now let vs see what goodly fruits and commodities haue risen therfrom. The daughters of the children of Isra∣ell being dancing in Silo vpō a feastiual day, after the maner of the vncircumcised Idolaters, were rauished by the Benia∣mites for to be their wiues,Iudg. 11. and that mixtly without regard of one or other were they of neuer so high or base condition. At the feast which Herod the Tetrarch made to the prin∣ces and captains and nobles of Galilee, the daughter of Hero∣dias pleased him and his company so well with her dauncing,Mark. 6. that to gratifie this filthy strumpet the incestuous tyrant cau∣sed Iohn Babtist to be beheaded. Lodowicke Archbishop of Magdeburge celebrating a so∣lemne feast at a Towne called Caluen, inuited many of the worthy citizens to make merry with him; the place for their ioyaltie was the great hall, wherein iudiciall causes were appointed to bee discussed: here after the banquet ended they fell a dauncing men and women mixtly together, such a ridiculous rounde clay and such a multitude, that what with the weight of their bodies, or rather the indignatiō of God a∣gainst thē for this scurrilous & immodest behauior, the beams of the house began to crack & threaten a certain ruin, wher∣at the Archbishop affrighted caught hold by a fair dame and began first to go down the staires, but the steps afore losened, assoon as he trod vpon thē tumbled down and he & his com∣fort headlong withal, and were crushed in peeces: and thus he that was principall of the feast & sport, was made an example to all the rest of the Lords vengeance, because he dishonored his calling and profession by such lewd & light behauior: and this was one goodly effect of dancing. Chron. Mag∣denburge.Another we read of in the Chronicles of the same citie to this effect, in a village called Ossemer adioining to Stendel, as the Popish priest plaied the minstrell to his parishoners that danced the morris before him, & reioiced in their merry may games: a tēpest arose & a thunderbolt stroke off his right hād togither with the harp which he plaied on, & cōsumed a four & twenty men & women of the company: a iust punishmēt of
so profane a priest, who in stead of dehorting them (as his du∣ty bound him) from that lasciuious custome, plaid the chiefe part in their madnes, and was an inciter of them vnto it. Moreouer, in many places by dances, grieuous & spitefull quarrels haue ben stirred vp, & many murders executed, the exāples wherof are so euident & notorious, that it is not need∣full now to stand vpon them: to conclude therefore this point with the saying of Lud. Viues;Lodouicus Vi∣ues. There is not a greater vanity in the world than dancing, for (saith he) I heard of certain men of Asia, that cōming into Spain whē they first saw the Spani∣ards dance, were so sore affrighted that they ran away for fear, supposing thē to haue ben either possessed with some spirit, or out of their wits at least: & truly I think if a mā had neuer seen a woman dance before, he could hardly be of another iudge∣ment, there being nothing that resembleth frenzy and lunacy more thē the strange shakings & motions of the body at the noise of a beaten sheepskin: verily it is a pastime to marke the graue behauior, the measurable march, the pompe & osten∣tatiō of womēdancers, & the great care they haue to perform wisely so foolish an action: it is very likely that all their wit at that time is distilled frō their head into their feet, for there it is more requisit & needfull thē in the braine: thus much saith L. Viues. Now touching Mummeries & Maskes, I place thē in the same ranck with the other, forsomuch as they are deri∣ued frō the same fountain, & cōmunicate the same nature, & produce the same effects, & oftētimes are so pernicious, that diuerse honorable womē haue ben rauished & cōueied away by their means: Nay & some Masquers haue ben wel chasti∣sed in their own vices: as it happened in the raign of Charles the sixt, to six that masked it to a mariage at the hostell of S. Pauls in Paris, being attired like wild horses, couered with loose flax dangling down like haire: albedaubed with greafe for the fitter hanging therof, & fast bound one to another, & in this guise entred the hall, dancing with torches before thē: but behold sodainly their play turned to a tragedy, for a spark of one of their torches fell into the greasie flax of his neigh∣bor, and set it immediately on fire, so that in the turning of an
hand they were all on flame, then gaue they out a most hor∣rible outcrie: one of them threw himselfe headlong into a tub of water prouided to rense their drinking cups and gob∣blites, and vpon that occasion standing not farre off; two were burnt to death without stirring once from the place: the ba∣stard Foix & the Earle of Iouy escaped indeed present death, but being conueied to their lodgings they suruiued not two daies: the king himselfe being one of the six, was saued by the duchesse of Berry, that couering him with her loose and wide garments quenched the fire before it could seaze vpon his flesh.Vol. 4. cap. 52. Froyssard the reporter of this tragedie saith, that the next morrow euery man could say that this was a wonderfull signe and aduertisement sent by God to the king to warn him to renounce all such fond and foolish deuises which hee de∣lighted too much in, & more than it became a king of France to do: and this was the euent of that gallant masque. It resteth now that we speake somewhat of Plaies & Co∣medies, and such like toies and may games which haue no o∣ther vse in the world but to depraue and corrupt good man∣ners, and to open a dore to all vncleannesse: the ears of yong folke are there polluted with many filthy & dishonest spee∣ches, their eies are there infected with lasciuious and vnchast gestures and countenances, and their wits are there stained and imbrued with so pernicious liquor, that (except Gods good grace) they will euer sauour of it: the holy and sacred scripture ordained to a holy & sacred vse, is oftētimes by these filthie swine prophaned to please and to delight their audi∣ence. In few words there is nothing els to be found amongst them but nourishment to our sences of foolish and vaine de∣lights:Tertul. Oros. for this cause many of the sager Romans as Nasica and diuerse other Censors, hindred the building of the Theatres in Rome, for an opinion they had that their sports and pa∣stimes which were exercised therein, serued to no other pur∣pose but to make the people idle, effeminae, and voluptu∣ous: and besides the maisters guiders & actors of plaies were alwaies debarred as men infamous, from bearing any publick
office or dignitie in the Commonwealth. Tiberius Caesar himselfe though of most corrupt and rot∣ten manners and conuersation,Tacit. lib. 4. yet in open Senate complai∣ned and found fault with the immodesty of stage plaiers, and banished them at that same time out of Italy: when Domiti∣an was Censor he put out of the Senat a citizen of Rome,Fulgos. De curiositate. be∣cause hee was too much addicted to the imitation of the fa∣shions of plaiers and dancers: & Plutarch saith, that we ought to shun all such spectacles. If then such pastimes were by the iudgement of the Ro∣mans noted with infamy, shall we haue their equals in follies in better account? Basill calleth such sports and pastimes, The workehouse, forge, and common shop of all wickednesse:Homil. 4. & therefore Chrisossome praieth and admonisheth the faithfull of his time to abstaine from frequenting such places. S. Augu∣stine also forbiddeth to bestow our money vpon tumblers,Homil 6. in. 1. cap. Gen. Can. 51. iugglers, and plaiers, and such like? Beside by the Constanti∣noplitane councell vnder Iustinian, it was inhibited to be once present at such sports, vnder the paine of excomunication: and that the ancient Christians did by common consent not only condemne but also vtterly abstaine from such pastimes, it may appeare by the testimony of Tertullian, writing to the Gentiles to this effect:Apolog. We renounce and send backe (saith hee) sports & plaies vnto you as to the head and fountain from whence they were first deriued: wee make no reckoning of those thinges which we know were drawne from superstition: we loue not to be∣hold the folly of turning with chariots, nor the vnchastity of the Theatre, nor the cruelty of sword playing, nor the vanity of lea∣ping, wrestling, and dancing: but take pleasure in exercises of bet∣ter report, and lesse hurt. Moreouer how odious and irkesome in the sight of the Lord such spectacles are, and what power and sway the deuill beareth therein, the iudgement of God vpon a Christian woman (reported by TertullianTertul. de spect.) may sufficiently instruct vs: There was a woman (saith he) that went to the Theatre to see a play, and returned home possessed with an vncleane spi∣rit:
who being rebuked in a coniuration for daring to assault one of the faith, that professed Christ; answered that he had done well because he found her vpon his owne ground. The same author reporteth another example as strange, of a woman also that went to see a tragedie acted, to whome the night following appeared in a dreame the picture of a sheet (a presage of death) casting in her teeth that which she had done; and fiue daies after, death himselfe seazed vpon her. As touching wanton songs and vnchast and ribald bookes (that I may be briefe) I will content my selfe onely with that which is alledged by Ludiuicus Viues cōcerning that matter. The Magistrate (saith hee) ought to banish out of his dominion all vnhonest songs and Poemes,Lib. of instru∣ction of a Christian wo∣man. and not to suffer nouelties to bee published day by day in rimes and Ballades, as they are: as if a man should heare in a city nothing but foolish and sturrilous dir∣ties, such as would make euen the younger sort that are well brought vp to blush, and stir vp the indignation of men of honour and grauitie: this ought Magistrate to preuent, and to discharge the people from reading Amadis, Tristram, Launcelot, du lake, Melusine, Poggius scurrilities, and Boccace nouelties, with a thousand more such like toies: and thus much out of Viues. CAAP. XXXV. Of Theenes and Robbers. IT followes that wee speake in the next place of such as by their greedy couetousnesse and vnquenchable de∣sire of lucre, transgresse the fourth commandement of the second table, to wit, Thou shalt not steale: wherein not only simple theft but also sacri∣ledge is condemned, and first of Sa∣criledge.
Into this sinne fell wretched Achan in the time of Ioshua,Ioshua. 7. when in the sacke of Ierecho, hee seeing a Babilonish gar∣ment with certaine gold and siluer, couered it and stole it a∣way, and hid it in his tent, contrary to the commandement of the Lord: for which cause the Lord was offended with his whole people, as if they all had beene necessarie to the crime; and infer bled them so before their enemies, that they were be at ndowne at Hay, and shamefully put to flight, nei∣ther was his anger appeased vntill that the offendant being diuinely and miraculously descried, was stoned to death and burnt with his children, and all his substance: But to come vnto prophane stories, let vs begin with Heli∣odorus measurer of Seleuchus king of Asia: who by the Kings commandement and suggestion of one Simon, gouernour of the Temple, came to take away the gold and siluer which was kept in the treasurie of the Temple, and to transport it vnto the kings treasurie, whereat the whole city of Ierusalem put on sackcloth, and poured out praiers vnto the Lord: so that when Heliodorus was present in the Temple with his souldiours readie to seaze vpon the treasure, the Lord of all spirits and power, shewed so great a vision that hee fell suddainely into extreame feare and trembling: for there appeared vnto him an horse with a terrible man sitting vpon him most richly barbed, which came fiercely and smote at him with his foreseer; moreouer there appeared two young men, notable in strength, excellent in beautie, and comely in aparrell, which stood by him on either side and scourged him with many striples, so that Heliodorus that came in with so great a company of souldiours and attendants, was stroken dumbe and caried out in a litter vpon thens shoulders: for his strength was so abated that he could not helpe himselfe, but lay destitute of all hope of recouery, so heauy was the hand of God vpon him, vntil by the praiers of Onias the high priest he was restored; then loe, he confessed that hee which dwelt in heauen had his eie on that place, and defended it from all those that came to hurt and spoile it.
Another of this true, was in Crassus the Romane, who en∣tring Ierusalem robbed the Temple of two thousand talents of siluer and gold;Iosephus, Zonar. beside the rich ornaments, which amoun∣ted in worth to eight thousand talents, and a beame of bea∣ten gold cōtaining three hundred pound in weight:Campoful. lib. 1. for which sacraledge, the vengeance of God so pursued him, that with∣in a while after he was ouercome by the Parthians and toge∣ther with his sonne slaine, his euil gotten goods being disper∣sed, and the scull of his head being made a ladle to melt gold in, that it might be glutted with that being dead, which aliue it could neuer be satisfied with. Iosephus. lib. 17.Herod following the steps of Hircanus his predecessor that tooke out of the sepulchre of king Dauid three thousand ta∣lents of money,Zonar. Annal. 1 thinking to find the like treasure, broke vp the sepulchre in the night, and found no money but rich or∣naments of gold which hee tooke away with him: howbeit to his cost, for two of his seruants perished in the vaut, by a diuine fire as it is reported, and he himself had small successe in his worldly affaires euer after. Iulian the Apostatae robbed the church of the reuenues thereof, and tooke away all beneuolences and contributions to schooles of learning, to the end the children might not be instructed in the liberall arts, nor in any other good litera∣ture. Hee exaggered also his sacriledge with scornefull ieasts, saying that hee did further then saluation by making them poore: seeing it was written in their owne bibles; Blessed are the poore, for theirs is the kingdome of heauen: but how this sacreligious theefe was punished,Lib. 2. cap. 20. is already declared in the former booke. Zonaras.Leo Croponymus tooke out of the Temple of Constantino∣ple an excellent crowne of gold beset with precious stones, which Mauritius had dedicated to the Lord, but assoone as he had set it on his head, a cruell feuer seased vpon him that he died very shortly. Fulg of. lib. 1. chap. 2.The punishment of the sacriledge of Queene Vrratha in Spaine, was most wonderful and speedie: for when in her war
against her son Alphonsus she wanted money, she robbed the church dedicated to S. Isidore, and tooke with her own hands the treasures vp, which her souldiours refused to doe: but ere she departed out of the church, vengeance ouertook her and stroke her dead in the place. Moreouer the Lord so hateth this ireligious sinne, that he permitteth the deuil to exercise his cruelty vpon the spoilers of prophane and idolatrous temples, as he did vpon Dionisius the tyrant of Siracusa;Aelianus. who after many robberies of holy things, and spoiling the churches, died sodainly with extream ioy as authors report, hee spoiled the temple of Proserpina at Locris, and shaued off the golden beard of Aesculapius at E∣pidamnum, saying it was an vnseemely thing for Apollo to be beardlesse and his sonne bearded: hee depriued Iupiter O∣limpus of his golden raiment, and gaue him a woollen coat in steed thereof; saying it was too heauie for him in the sum∣mer, and too cold in winter, and that this was more conueni∣ent for both seasons: the pretext of al his sacriledge was this, that seeing the Gods were good, why should not he be perta∣ker of their goodnesse. Such another was Cambises king of Persia,Sabel. lib. 4. c. 3. Herod. lib. 1. who sent fiftie thousand men to rob and destroy the temple of Iupiter Am∣mon, but in their iourney so mighty a tempest arose, that they were ouerwhelmed with the sand, not one of them remaining to carry news of their successe. Brennus was constrained to slay himselfe for enterprising to rob the Temple of Apollo at Delphos: Philomelus,Fulgo. lib. 1. c. 2. Ono∣marchus, and Phayllus, went about the same practise, and in∣deed robbed the Temple of all the treasures therein; but one of them was burned, another drowned, and the third broke his necke: to conclude, the Athenians put to death a yong child for taking but a golden plate out of Dianaes Tem∣ple, but first they offered him otheriewels & trinckets, which when hee despised in respect of the plate, they rigorously pu∣nished him as guilty of sacriledge. Cardinal Wolsey being determined to erect two new colled∣ges,Stow. chron.
one at Oxford, and the other at Ipswich, obtained li∣cense and authoritie of Pope Clement the seuenth to sup∣presse about the number of fortie Monasteries to furnish and set forward the building of his said colledge; which irreligi∣ous sacriledge (I call it sacriledge, because not done of conscience but to patch vp pride) was furthered by fiue per∣sons who were the chiefe instruments of the dissolution of Daintrey Monasterie, because the Prior and Couent would not graunt them certaine lands in farme at their owne price: But what punishment ensued vpon them at Gods hand the world was witnesse of: for of those fiue persons, two fell at discord amongst themselues, and the one slue the other, for the which the suruiuour was hanged; the third drow∣ned himselfe in a well; the fourth being then worth two hundred pounds, within three yeares became so poore that hee begged vntill his dying day; and the fift called (Doctor Allane) was cruelly maymed in Ireland, the Cardinall him∣selfe falling into the Kings displeasure was deposed from his Bishopricke and died miserablie, the Colledges which hee ment to haue made so glorious a building, came neuer to any good effect; the one at Ipswich being cleane defaced, the o∣ther at Oxford vnfinished. And thus much of Sacriledge, now let vs come and see the punishment of simple theft; the principall cause where∣of is couetousnesse, which is so vnruly an euill, and so deepe rooted in the heart of man, that euer yet it hath vsed to encroch vpon the goods of others, and to keepe possession of that which was none of it owne; breaking all the bandes of humanity, equity, and right, without being contained in any measure or mean: whereof we haue a most notable example in the old world before the floud, which (by Moses report) ouerflowed with iniquitie and extortion; the mightie ones oppressed the weake, the greater trod vnder foot the lesse, and the rich deuoured the poore: when the Lord saw the generall deluge of sinne and disorder thus vni∣uersally spread (which indeed was a signe of great defection
and contempt of him) hee like a iust iudge that could not en∣dure these monstrous iniquities, sent a deluge of waters a∣mongst them by opening the windows of heauen, and brea∣king vp the fountaines of the great deepes, and giuing pas∣sage to the waters both by heauen and by earth, so that it rai∣ned fortie daies and fortie nights without ceasing, and the waters preuailed vpon the earth, and ouercouered the high mountaines by fifteene cubites, the earth being reduced into the same estate which it had in the beginning before the waters were tooke away from the face thereof: verily it was a most hideous and sad spectacle to see first the vallies, then the hils, and last the highest mountaines so ouerflowne with water, that no shew or appearance of thē might be per∣ceiued, it was a dreadful sight to behold whole houses tossed to and fro vp and downe in the waues, and at last to be shiue∣red in peeces, there was not a citie nor village that perished not in the deepe, not a tree nor tower so high that could ouerpeere the waters: as they encreased more and more in a∣bundance, so feare, horror, and despaire of safetie encrea∣sed in the heart of euery liuing soule. And on this fashion did God punish those wicked rebels, not at one blow, but by little and little encreasing their paine, that as they had a long time abused his patience, and made no reckoning of a∣mendment, so the punishment of their sinne might bee long and tedious. Now in this extremitie one could not helpe a∣nother, nor one enuie another, but all were concluded vnder the same destruction, all surprised, assieged, and enuironed a∣like, aswell he that roued in the fields as he that staied in the houses, he that climed vp vnto the mountains, as hee that a∣bode in the vallies, the merciles water spared none: it was to no purpose that some ascēded their high houses, some climed vpon trees, and some scaled the rockes, neither one nor other found any refuge or safety in any place, the rich were not sa∣ued by their riches, nor the strong by the pith of their strēgth, but all perished and were drowned togither, except Noah and his familie: which punishment was correspondent
vnto the worlds iniquitie, for as the earth was corrupted and polluted with abundance of sinne: so God sent abundance of water to purge and clense away the filthinesse thereof, as at the latter day hee will send fire to purifie and refine heauen and earth from their dregs, and restore them to their first and purest estate. And thus God reuenged the extortion and cru∣eltie of that age. But yet for all this those sinnes were not then so defaced and rooted vp, but that they be burnished againe and grown in time to as big a Bulke: for euen at this day the greatest part of the world is giuen to practise fraud and deceit, and by vnlawfull meanes to encroch vpon others goods; which sub∣tleties, though they desire neuer so to disguise and cloke, yet will they euer bee condemned & reputed kinds of theft before God: now as some are of greater power and authority than others in the world, so answerable to their selues is the qualitie of their sinnes, and by consequence the punishment: the greater of power, the greater theeues and the greater iudgement: for if a poor man through pouerty and necessity cutteth a purse, of stealeth any other trifle, be culpable; how much more culpable shall he that is rich bee, that vsurpeth the goods of his neighbor? Draco the lawgiuer of Athens appointed death to be the punishment of theft: Solon mitigated that rigor, and punished it with double restitution: The Locrians put out his eies that had stolen ought from his neighbour: The Hetrurians sto∣ned them to death: The Scythians abhorred thē more than all creatures, because they had a communitie of all things except their cups. The Vacceians vsed such seuerity towards this kind of men, that if one had taken but a handfull of corne, he was sure to die for it. Marcus Fabius being Censor, condemned his own son Bute to death being apprehended for theft. Tiberius the Emperor punished a souldior after the same manner for stealing a Pea∣cock: in sum, there was no Cōmonwealth wherin this sin was not highly detested, & sharply punished, except the Lacede∣monian,
where it was permitted and tollerated for their exer∣cise of warlike discipline. It was a rash and seuere,Theat. histor. yet as it proued a iust ded of Tam∣burlaine that mightie tyrant and conqueror of Asia, when a poore woman complained to him of one of his souldiors that had taken from her a little milke and a peece of cheese with∣out paiment, he caused the souldiors belly to be ripped to see whither shee had falsly accused him or no, and finding the milke in his stomacke adiudged him worthy of that punish∣ment for stealing from so poore a woman. When Theophilus raigned Emperour in the East, there was a certaine souldiour possessed of a very gallant and braue horse, which his captaine by all meanes possible sought to get from him,Zonar. Annal. 3. but he would not in any case part with him; wherefore hee put him forth of pay and tooke his horse from him by force, and sent him for a present to the Emperour Theophilus: now it chanced that this poore souldiour was slaine in the battaile for want of his horse, and his wife and children left destitute of succour, insomuch that through necessity shee was constrained to flie to Con∣stantionple and to complaine to the Emperour of the iniu∣ry done vnto her husband: with this resolution entring the citie, she met the Emperour riding vpon her husbands horse, and catching the horse bridle, chalenged him not onely for stealing the horse, but also being the cause of her husbands death. The Emperour wondering at the womans boldnesse, examined her more narrowly and found out the whole prac∣tise of that wicked captaine, whom he banished presently his Empire, and bestowed his possession in recompence vpon the distressed widdow. Ibicus the Poet being set vpon by theeues, when hee saw that they would not only spoile him of his money but of his life also, he cried for help and reuenge to the cranes that flew ouer his head, a while after as these murdering theeues sat to∣gither in the market place, the same cranes appearing vnto them in the aire, they whispered one another in the eare, and
said, yonder flie Ibicus reuengers, which though secretly spo∣ken, yet was ouerheard: so that they being examined and found guiltie, were put to death for their paines. The like story Martin LutherLuther. reporteth touching a trauailer; only dif∣fering in this, that as cranes detected the former, so crows laid open the latter. Albert. Krantz. lib. 10. cap. 7.In the yeare 1384 when as al Saxony was so infested with theeues, that no man could trauaile safely in the countrie, the Princes calling a councill, set downe this order, That not only the theeues themselues should be seuerely punished, but all that did protect or harbor any of them; which decree whē as Theodorick countie of Weringrode impugned, the body of the councill sent for him and adiudged him to a most cruell and shamefull death. Cranth. lib. 10. cap. 30.In the year 1410 Henry duke of Luneburge, a most iust & seuere prince, went about to purge his country from all thefts & robberies, insomuch as the least offence cōmitted in that kind he suffered not to goe vnpunished: now it happened as the Duke went towards Luneburge, hee sent before him one of his chiefest officers to prouide necessaries against his com∣ming; who riding thout a cloake, the weather being cold, entreated a ploughman to lend him his cloke till his returne; which whē the clown refused to do, he took it without leaue, but it cost him his life for it, for the ploughman awaited the dukes comming and directed his complaint vnto him on this maner: What auaileth it (O noble prince) to seek to suppresse the outrage of theeues & spoilers, when as the chiefest offi∣cers dare commit such things vncontrolled, as the lieutenant of Tzela hath but now taken frō memy cloke? the duke hea∣ring this complaint, & considering the cause, dissembled his councill till his returne backe from Luneburge vnto the same place, where calling for his leiutenant, and rating him for his iniury, he commanded him to be hanged vpon a tree: a won∣derfull seueritie in iustice and worthy to be commended; for what hope is it to root out small and pettie theeues, if we suf∣fer grand theeues to goe vncorrected.
There is another kind of theft practised of them that be in authority, who vnder the title of confiscation assume vnto themselues stollen goods, and so much the readilier, by how much the value of the things amounteth to more worth: an action altogither vniust and contrary to both diuine and hu∣mane law, which ordaine to restore vnto euery man his own: & truly he that in steed of restitution with holdeth the good of his neighbour in this manner, differeth no more from a theefe, than that the one stealeth boldly without feare, the other timorously and with great danger: and what greater corruption of Iustice can there be then this? For who would follow the law vpon a theefe when he knoweth hee shall ra∣ther run into further charge, than recouer any of his old losse? Beside this, it happeneth that poore small theeues are often drawne to the whip, or driuen to banishment, or sent to the gallows, when rich grand theeues lie at their ease and escape vncontrouled, albeit the qualitie of their crime bee far vne∣qual, according to the Poet: The simple doue by law is censured,Dat veniam coruis vexat censura colum∣bas. When rauenous crowes escape vnpunished. The world was euer yet full of such rauenous rauens, so nimble in pilling others goods, and so greedy of their owne gaine; that the poore people in steed of being main∣tained and preserued in the peaceable enioying of their por∣tions, are gnawne to the very bones amongst them: for which cause Homer in the person of Agamemnon cal∣leth them deuourers of men: likewise also the Prophet Dauid in the sixteenth Psalme calleth them eaters of his people: and yet want they not flatterers and trencher-friends (Canckerwoms of a Cōmonwealth) that vrge thē for∣wards, & deuise daily new kind of exactions, like horseleaches to sucke out the very blood of mens purses, shewing so much the more wit & deceit therein, by how much the more they hope to gaine a great part therof vnto their selues: being like
hungerstarued Harpeis, that will neuer bee satisfied, but still snatch and catch al that commeth neare their clouches: and these are they that doe good to no man, but hurt to all; of whom the Marchant findeth himselfe agreeued, the Artifi∣cer troden vnder foot, the poore laborer oppressed, and gene∣rally all men endamaged. CHAP. XXXVI. Of the excessiue burdenings of the Comminaltie. AS it is a iust & approued thing be∣fore God to doe honor and reue∣rence to kings and Princes, and to bee subiect vnder them in all obedience: so it is a reasonable and allowable duty to pay such tributes and subsidies, (whereby their great charges & honourable estate may bee maintained) as by right of equitie are due vnto thē: and this is also commanded by our Sauior Christ in expresse words when hee saith,Mat. 22.21. Giue vnto Caesar that which is Caesars. And by the Apostle Paule more expressely,Rom. 31.7. pay tributes, ren∣der vnto all men their due: tribute to whome tribute belongeth, and custome to whom custome: Marke how hee saith, Giue vn∣to all men their due: and therein obserue that kings and prin∣ces ought of their good and iust disposition bee content with their due; and not seeke to load and ouercharge their sub∣iects with vnnecessary exactions, but to desire to see them ra∣ther rich and wealthie than poore and needy, for thereby commeth no profite vnto themselues; further it is most vn∣lawfull for them to exact that aboue measure, vpon their commons, which being in mediocrity is not condemned: I say it is vnlawfull both by the law of God and man, [the law of God and man is termed all that which both God and man
allow and agree vpon, and which a man with a safe consci∣ence may put in practise:] for the former we can haue no o∣ther schoolmaster nor instruction, saue the holy scripture, wherein God hath manifested his will vnto vs, concerning this very matter, as in Deuteronom. 18, speaking of the office and duty of a king, he forbiddeth them to be horders vp of gold and siluer, and espousers of many wiues, and louers of pride; signifying thereby, that they ought to containe them∣selues within the bounds of modestie and temperance, and not giue the raines to their owne affections, nor heape vp great treasures to their peoples detriment, nor to delight in warre, nor to be too much subiect to their owne pleasures; all which things are meanes of vnmeasurable expense: so that if it be not allowable to muster togither multitudes of goods, for the danger and mischiefe that ensueth thereof, as it ap∣peareth out of this place; then surely is it much lesse law∣full to leuy excessiue taxes of the people; for the one of these can not be without the other: and thus for the law of God it is cleare, that by it authority is not committed vnto them, to surcharge, and as it were, trample downe their poore sub∣iects, by vnmeasurable and vnsupportable imposition. As for that which the Prophet Samuel in the name of God, giueth notice to the Israelites of, touching the right of a king; wherein he seemeth to allow him the disposition of the goods and persons of his subiects: I answer first, that God being an immooueable truth, cannot contradict himselfe by commanding and forbidding the same thing; and secondly, that the word of the text in the originall, signifieth nothing else, but a custome, or fashion, as it appeareth in the 1. Sam. 11.13: besides, the speech that the Prophet vseth, impor∣teth not a commandement, but an aduertisement of the sub∣iection, whereunto the people were about to thrust them∣selues, by desiring a king after the manner of other nations, whose customes amongst them, was to exercise authority and dominion as well ouer their goods as their persons: for which cause, God would haue them forewarned, that they might
know how vile a yoke they put their owne neches vnder, and what grieuous and troublesome seruitude they vndertooke, from the which they could no waies be deliuered, no though they desired it with teares. Furthermore, that a king in Israel had no power (in right and equity) to take away the possessions of any of his sub∣iects, and appropriate it to himselfe, it appeareth by Nabaoths refusal to king Achab,1. King. 12. to giue him his vineyard, though he re∣quested it (as in may seeme) vpon very reasonable conditi∣ons,1 King. 12. either for his money, or for exchange; so that a man would thinke hee ought not to haue denied him: howbeit his desire being thus crossed, he could not mend himselfe by his authority, but fell to vexe and grieue himselfe, and to champe vpon his owne bit, vntill by the wicked and detesta∣ble complot of Iezabel, poore Nabaoth was falsly accused, vn∣iustly condemned, and cruelly murdered; and then hee put in possession of his vineyard: which murder (doubtlesse) shee would neuer haue attempted, nor yet Nabaoth euer haue re∣fused to yeeld his vineyard, if by any pretence of law they would haue laid claime vnto it: but Nabaoth knowing that it was contrary to Gods ordinance,Num 36.9. for him to part with his pa∣trimonie (which he ought most carefully to preserue) would not consent to sell ouer his vineyard neither for loue nor mo∣ney, nor other recompence: and herein hee did but his duty, approoued by the holy scripture. Now how odious a thing before God, the oppression of poore people is, it is manifest by his owne words in the prophesie of Ezechiel, where hee saith,Chap. 15.9. Let it suffice, O princes of Israel, leaue off crueltie and oppression, and execute iudgement and iustice: take away your exactions from my people, and cease to thrust them from their goods and heritages. Now concerning the law of man, which all men agree vnto, because it is grounded vpon reason and equitie, we find no permission giuen to kings to vse the goods of other men at their pleasures; for that was far from equity: neither was there any such liberty bestowed vpon them, by those that first in the beginning exalted them to that degree
of dignity: but rather (as diuers worthy authors auouch) their owne vertues vnd good behauiour which woon them credit amongst the better sort, installed them first vnto that honor.Cic. lib. 3. de legibus. Aug. de ciuitat Dei. lib. 4. c. 6. And truely, there is nothing more rightfull and iust in mans societie, than that euery one should possesse and enioy that which is his owne, in peace and quietnesse, without distur∣bance or violence; in which respect also, rules of iustice are established, called lawes, which no good kings will euer seeke to stand against. They are indeed lords of the earth, as some say, and truly; but so, that their lordships stretch no fur∣ther than right, and passe not the rule of equity; and notwith∣standing the proprietie of goods and possession, remaineth vntouched.Lib. 7. c. . & 5. de benefictis. To kings (saith Seneca) pertaineth the soueraignty ouer all things, but to priuat men the proprietie. Tiberius Caesar, being sollicited by the gouernours of the prouinces, to lay heauier tributes, and leuy larger subsidies from his people, made (though a Painym) this notable an∣swer: That a good shepheard ought to sheare his sheepe, not to flea them. Saint Lewes, that good king, amongst all his o∣therwise and vertuous exhortations which he gaue vnto his sonne before his death, this was none of the least nor last;Nic. Gil. That he should neuer craue any taxe or subsidie of his sub∣iects, but vpon vrgent necessitie and very iust cause, and that if he did otherwise, hee should not be reputed for a king, but for a tyrant. CHAP. XXXVII. Of those that haue vsed too much crueltie towards their subiects in Taxes and Exactions. IT is cleare then by these foresaid assumpti∣ons, that a king may not impose vpon his sub∣iects vnmeasurable taxes, and subsidies, least hee make himselfe guiltie of extortion; the roote and fountaine many times of many great mischiefes
and inconueniences, and in very deed from whence oftener changes, seditions, and ruines of common-wealths haue pro∣ceeded, than from any other cause beside. What happened to Roboam, king of Israel, for shewing him∣selfe too rigorous on this behalfe to his subiects, but the de∣fection of the greater part of his kingdome from him; for be∣ing come to the crowne after the death of his father Salomon, when the people came and made a supplication to him to be eased from his fathers burdens, hee (despising the counsell of his sage and ancient counsellours,1. King. 12. and following the giddy ad∣uise of his young companions) gaue them a most sharpe and soure reply, saying, That if his father had laid a heauie yoke vpon them, hee would encrease it; and if hee had chastised them with rods, he would correct them with scourges: which when they of Israel heard, they reuolted from him, (all saue the two tribes of Iuda and Beniamin) and stoned to death his collectours, and chose them another king to rule ouer them: thus Roboam was depriued of ten parts of his kingdome tho∣rough his own vnaduised tyranny, and fled all amazed vnto Ierusalem, where he liued all his daies without recouery of the same. Achaeus, king of Lydia, was hanged vp against a hill, and his head throwne into a riuer running by, because of the great subsidies which he exacted of his people. Plutarch. apoh. Reg.Dionysius, the first of that name, a notorious and renow∣med tyrant, not only in regard of his exceeding cruelty, but also of his vniust rackings and exactions, was so violent in that practise of doing wrong, that albeit he well knew the griefes and vexations of the people, that ceased not to complaine and lament their case continually, yet hee diminished not their burdens, but multiplied them more and more, and suckt and gnew out all that euer hee could, vntill hee left them naked, empty, and dispoiled: to conclude, this grand theefe, that durst not trust his wife nor owne daughters,Frog. lib. 21. after he had bene discomfited by the Carthaginians, was slaine by his seruants. Of the Romane Emperours that most vexed the commi∣nalty
with tributes and taxes, these three were chiefe, Cali∣gula, Nero, and Caracalla, of whome, this latter did most pill and pull the people, and would often say,Dion. & Xiph. That the gold & siluer of the kingdome pertained in right to none but him: be∣ing reprooued of his mother at a time for his immoderate & excessiue expences, saying, That there was almost not so much more treasure left as he had alreadie spent; hee made her this answer, That shee should take no care for that, for as long as his hand was able to wield his sword (which hee held naked before her) hee would not want money. This is the sword which many now adaies (after the example of Cara∣calla) haue taken vp, to cut out (by force and violence) a way to their owne wils, and to cut the throat of equitie & iustice, and to compell the poore people to forgoe their goods, and surrender them into their hands: Now how odious and hate∣full these three were made vnto the people by their owne wicked demeanours, their miserable ends do sufficiently te∣stifie; which we haue already before mentioned, and meane afterward more at large to speake of. The Emperour Constance, sonne to Constantine, whose fa∣ther was Heraclius, cōming at a time out of Greece to Rome,Fulgos. lib. 9. cap. 4. abode there but fiue daies, but in that short space committed so much outrage in ransacking the temples and other publike places, and carrying away so many rich ornaments and pi∣ctures (whereof those places then abounded) that in mans re∣membrance, noforraine barbarous enemy, hauing taken the city by force of warre, euer went away with the like spoile: besides, hee did so oppresse the allies and tributaries of the Empire, (and chiefly the Siciliens) with taxes and imposts, that many of them were constrained to sell their children for money, to satisfie his extortion: and by this meanes, he scra∣ped togither an infinit masse of rapins and euill gotten goods, but enioyed the sweet of them not very long; for very soone after, hee was murdered by his owne men of warre, in his re∣turne out of Sicilie: and all that spoile which he had vniustly surprised, was suddenly taken and transported into Africa, by
the Saracens that then inhabited the city Panorme. Lewis the eleuenth, king of France, after hee had ouer∣charged his subiects with too grieuous burdens of paiments and taxes, fell into such a timerous conceit & feare of death, as neuer any man did the like: hee attempted all meanes of auoiding or delaying the same, as first during his sicknesse, he gaue his phisition monethly ten thousand crownes, by that meanes to creepe into his fauour; wherein hee beeing in all other things a very niggard and pinchpenny, shewed him∣selfe on the other side more then prodigall: next he sent in∣to Calabria for a Hermit reported to be a holy and deuout man, to whome at his arriuall, hee perfourmed so much du∣tie and reuerence, as was wonderfull and vnseemely: for hee threw himselfe on his knees, and besought him to prolong his decaying life, as if hee had beene a God and not a man: but all that hee could doe was to no purpose, no nor the re∣liques which Pope Sixtus sent him to busie himselfe withall, nor the holy viall of Rheims which was brought him, could prorogue this life of his, nor priuiledge him from dying a dis∣content and vnwilling death: he suspected the most part of his nearest attendants, and would not suffer them to ap∣proch vnto him in his sicknesse: after hee had thus prolon∣ged the time in hope, and yet still languished in extreame di∣stresse of his disease, it was at length told him in all speed, that hee should not set his mind any longer vpon those vaine hopes, nor vpon that holy man, for his time was come, and hee must needs die. And thus hee that during his raigne shewed himselfe rough and cruell to his subiects, by too ma∣ny and heauy impositions, was himselfe in his lattet end thus roughly and hardly dealt withall. Christiern, the eleuenth king of Denmarke, Norway, and Suecia, after the death of king Iohn his father, raigned the yeere of our Lord 1514, and was too intollerable in impo∣sing burdens and taxes vpon his subiects; for which cause the Swecians reuolted from his gouernment: whome though after many battailes and sieges hee conquered, and placed
amongst them his garrisons to keepe them in awe, yet ceased they not to rebell against him, and that by the instigation of a meane gentleman, who very quickely got footing into the kingdome, and possessed himselfe of the crowne and gouern∣ment. Now Christiern hauing lost this prouince, and beeing also in disdaine and hatred of his owne countrey, and fearing least this inward heat of spight should grow to some flame of danger to his life, seeing that the inhabitants of Lubeck con∣spiring with his vncle Fredericke, began to take armes against him, hee fled away, with his wife (sister to the Emperour Charles the fift) and his young children to Zeland, a prouince of the Emperours, after hee had raigned nine yeeres: after which, the Estates of the realme (aided by them of Lubeck) assembling togither, exalted his vncle Fredericke, prince of Holsatia, (though old and ancient) to the crowne; and pub∣lishing certaine writings, addressed them to the Emperour and the princes of his Empire, to render a reason of their con-proceeding, and to make knowne vnto them vpon how good siderations, they had deposed and banished Christierne, for the tyranny which hee exercised among them: ten yeres af∣ter this, hee got togither a new army by sea, in hope to reco∣uer his losses, but contrary to his hope he was taken prisoner, and in captiuity ended miserably his daies. Henry, king of Suecia, was chased from his scepter for en∣terprising to burden his commons with new contributions. Those that were deuisers of new taxes and tributes,Nic. Gil. vl. 1. for the most part euer lost their liues in their labours: for proofe whereof, let the example of Parchenus or Porchetes serue; who for giuing counsell to king Theodebert, touching the rai∣sing of new subsidies, was stoned to death by the multitude, in the city Trieues. Likewise was George Presquon cruelly put to death by the people for persuading and setting forward Henry of Suecia, to the vexation and exaction of his subiects.
CHAP. XXXVIII. More Examples of the same subiect. Platiniae in vi∣ta Zacharin.AIstulphus the nineteenth king of Lum∣bardy, was not onely a most cruell tyrant, but also a grieuous oppressour of his subiects with taxes and exa∣ctions;Phil. Melanct. lib. 3. for hee imposed this vpon euery one of them, to pay yeerely a noble for their heads: against this man, Pope Steuen prouoked king Pepin of France, who comming with an army, droue the ty∣rant into Ticinum, and constrained him to yeeld to partiall conditions of peace; howbeir Pepin was no sooner gone, but he returned to his old byas; wherefore the second time he came and droue him to as great extremitie: in so much, as another peace was concluded: after the accomplishment whereof, peruerse Aistulph, still vexing his subiects, was pla∣gued by God with an apoplexie, and so died. Zonar. lib. 3.Iustinian the Emperour, as be was profuse and excessiue in spending, so was hee immoderate and insatiable in gathering togither riches, for hee exercised his wit in deuising new tri∣butes and paiments, and reioyced his heart in nothing more: for which causes there arose a grieuous sedition at Constanti∣nople against him; wherein not onely the excellent and fa∣mous monuments of the Empire were burned, but also fourty thousand men slaine: and this was no small punishment for his oppression. At Paris there is to be seene in the corne market, a certain monument hard at the mouth of the common sinke, which conuaieth away all the filth out of the city;Eras. in lingua. the occasion whereof is reported to be this: A certaine courtier seeing the king sad and melancholly for want of treasure, counselled him to exact of euery countriman that brought ware into the city
but one penny, and that but for two yeares togither: which when the king put in practise, and found the exceeding com∣moditie thereof, he not only continued that taxe, but also in∣uented diuers others, to the great damage of the Common∣wealth and inriching of his owne treasurie. Wherefore hee that put it first into his head, when he saw that he had not so much authoritie in dissuading as hee had in persuading it, to take punishment of himselfe for that inconsiderate deed, and to warne others from attempting the like, he commanded by his testament that his body should bee buried in that com∣mon sincke, to bee an example of exaction and the filthinesse thereof. Barnabe Vicount of Millane by the report of Paulus Io∣nius,Tom. 2. Viuorū illustrum. was an vnconscionable oppressor of his subiects and te∣nants, for hee did not only extort of them continuall imposts and payments, but enioned them to keepe euery one a dog; which if they came to any mishap, or were either too fat or too leane, the keeper was sure to bee beaten, or at least some fine to be set on his head: this tyrant was taken by Iohn Gale∣acius, and after seuen months imprisonment poysoned to death. Archigallo brother to Gorbonianus in nature,Lanquet. though vnlike in conditions (for hee was a good Prince, whereas this was a Tyrant) was crowned King of Britaine in the yeare of the world 3671, we may well place him in this ranke of oppressors, for he deposed the Noblemen, and exal∣ted the ignoble: he extorted frō men their goods to enrich his treasure: for which cause the estates of the realme depriued him of his roiall dignitie, & placed his yonger brother Elydu∣rus in his roome, after he had raigned fiue yeares. Hardiknitus king of Denmarke,The same. after the death of Ha∣rold, was ordained king of England in the yeare of the Lord 1041, this king as he was somewhat cruell (for he caused the body of Harold to be taken vp out of the sepulchre, and smi∣ting off his head to be cast out into the riuer Thames, be∣cause he had iniured his mother Emma when he was aliue:)
so hee was burdensome to his subiects in tributes and exacti∣on: for which cause growing into hatred with God and his subiects, hee was stricken with suddaine death, not without suspition of poysoning, after he had raigned three years. The same.William Rufus second sonne of William the conquerour succeeded his father as in the kingdome of England, so in dis∣position of nature, for they were both cruell, vnconstant and couetous, and burdened their people with vnreasonable ta∣xes: insomuch that what with the morreine of men by pe∣stilence, and the oppressions of them by exactions, the tillage of the earth was put off for one yeare, being the yeare 1096, whereby ensued great scarsitie the yeare following throughout all the land: but for the oppression William was iustly punished by sodaine death, when being at his disport of hunting hee was wounded with an arrow glaunsing from the bow of Tyrill a French knight: and so his tyranny and life ended togither. The same.Neither dooth the Lord thus punish oppressors them∣selues, but also they that either countenance, or ha∣uing authoritie doe not punish the same; as it appea∣reth by this example following: In the yeare of our Lord 475, there liued one Corrannus a king of Scots: who though hee gouerned the people in peace and quiet∣nesse a long space, and was indeed a good Prince, yet be∣cause his Chancelour Tomset vsed extortion and exaction a∣mongst his subiects, and hee being aduertised thereof did not punish him, hee was slaine traiterously by his owne subiects. It is not vnworthie to bee noted, how Edward the third king of England, prospered a long while in the warres against France, and got many worthie and wonderfull victories: but when Prince Edward, sonne vnto the foresaid Edward, after conditions of peace concluded, began to set taxes and impo∣sitions vpō the country of Aquitaine, then did king Edwards part begin to decline, and the successe of war which the space
of fortie years neuer forsooke him, now frowned vpon him, so that he quickly lost all those lands which by composition of peace were granted vnto him. CAAP. XXXIX. Of such as by force of armes haue either taken away, or would haue taken away, the goods and lands of other men. NOw if they that oppresse their subiects and deuour them in this manner,In this whole chapter note the nature of ambition, and the fruits thereof. bee found guil∣tie, then must they needs bee much more, that are carried with the wings of their own hungrie ambitious desire to inuade their lands and signiories, attended on with an in∣finite retinue of pillages, sackings, ruines of cities and peo∣ple; which are alwaies necessarie companions of furious vnmercifull warre. There are no flouds so broad, nor moun∣taines so steepe, nor rockes so rough and dangerous, nor sea so long and furious, that can restraine the rash and headstrong desire of such greedie minded Sacres: so that if their bodie might bee proportioned to the square and greatnesse of their mindes, with the one hand they would reach the East, and with the other hand the West (as it is said of Alexander:) howbeit hereof they boast and glorie no lesse than they that tooke delight to bee surna∣med citie-spoilers: others burners of cities, some conquerors, and many Eagles and Faulcons, seeking as it were fame by infamy; and by vice eternitie. But to these men it often cōmeth to passe, that euen then when they think to aduance their dominion, and to stretch their bounds and frontiers furthest, they are driuen to recoile for feare of being dis∣possessed themselues of their owne lands and inheritances:
and euen as they delt with others rigorously and by strength of weapons, so shall they bee themselues rehandled and dealt withall after the same measure, according to the word of the Prophet denounced against such as they, Cur∣sed bee thou that spoilest and dealest vnfaithfully; when thou hast made an end of spoiling others, thou thy selfe shall bee spoi∣led: and when thou hast done dealing traiterously, then treason shall begin to be practised against thee: and this curse most com∣monly neuer faileth to sease vpon these great Theeues and Robbers, or at least vpon their children and successours; as by particular examples wee shall see, after wee haue first spoken of Adonias, who not content with his owne estate of being a kings sonne,1. King. 12. which God had allotted him, went about to get the crowne and kingdome from his brother Sa∣lomon,Treason. lib. 2. cap. 3. to whome by right it appertained (for God had ma∣nifested the same by the mouth of his father Dauid) but both hee and his assistants for their ouerbold and rash enterprise, were iustly by Salomon punished with death. arod.Crassus king of Lidia was the first that made war against Ephesus, and that subdued the Greekes of Asia, to wit the Phrigians, Mysians, Chalybeans, Paphlagonians, Thraci∣ans, Bythinians, Ionians, Dorians, Aeolians, and Pamphilians, and made them all tributaries vnto him: by meanes whereof hee being growne exceeding rich and puissant, by the detri∣ment and vndoing of so many people; vaunted and gloried in his greatnesse and power, and euen then thought himselfe the happiest man in the world, whē most misery and aduersi∣ty, griefe and distresse of his estate and whole house, appro∣ched neerest: for first and formost one of his sonnes that was deare vnto him, was by ouersight slaine at the chase of a wild bore, next himselfe hauing commenced war with Cirus, was ouercome in battaile: and besieged in Sardis the chiefe ci∣ty of his kingdome, and at last taken and carried captiue to Cyrus, despoiled of all his late glorie and dominion. And thus Crassus (as sayth Plutarch after Herodotus) bore the punishmēt of the offence of his great grandfather Giges,
who being but one of king Candanles attendants slew his ma∣ster, and vsurped the crowne at the prouokement of the Queene his mistresse, whom he also tooke to be his wife: And thus this kingdome decaied by the same meanes by which it first encreased. Policrates the Tyrant,Herod. was one that by violence and tyran∣nous meanes, grew from a base condition to an high estate: for being but one of the vulgar sort in the citie Samos, hee with the assistance of sifteene armed men, seased vpon the whole citie, and made himselfe Lord of it: which deuiding into three parts, he bestowed two of them vpon his two bre∣thren, but not for perpetuitie; for ere long the third part of his vsurpation cost the elder of them the best part of his life, and the younger his liberty, for he chased him away that hee might be sole possessor of the whole Island: after this he in∣uaded many other Islands, besides many cities in the same land: he raised the Lacedemonians from the siege of Samos which they had begirt. And when hee saw that all things fell out so well to his owne wish, that nothing could be more, fea∣ring so great prosperity could not but carry in the taile some terrible sting of aduersitie and mischance; attempted by vo∣luntary losse of something of value to preuent the mischiefe which he feared to ensue, and this by the aduise of his deare friend and ally (the king of Aegypt) therefore hee threw a ring which hee had in great price, into the sea; to the end to delude fortune (as he thought) thereby: but the ring was af∣ter found in a fishes belly, and offered as a present vnto him: and this was an euident presage of some ineuitable misfortune that waited for him: neither did it proue vaine and friuolous, for hee was hanged vpon a gibbet of Sardis, by the comman∣dement of Orates the gouernour of the city; who vnder pre∣tence of friendship, and coulor of rendering his treasure into his hands, and bestowing vpon him a great part thereof, pro∣mising also to passe the rest of his daies vnder his wing, for fear of the rage of Cambises, drew him to come priuately to speak with him, and so easily wrought his will vpon him.
Aristodemus got into his hands the gouernment of Cu∣ma,Dions. Halicar. lib. 7. after hee had made away the principall of the citie: and to keepe it the better being obtained, hee first won the vulgars hearts by presents, then banished out of the Ci∣tie their children whome hee had put to death, and entertained the rest of the youth with such varietie of pleasures and delights, that by those deuises hee kept him∣selfe in his tyrannous estate many yeares: but assoone as the children of those slaine Citizens, were growne to ripe yeares of strength and discretion, being desirous to reuenge their fathers deaths, they set vpon him in the night, so at vnawares, that they put him and all his family to the slaughter. Plutarch.Tymophanes vsurped a principality, power, and rule, in Corinth a free citie, and became so odious thereby to the whole people, yea and to his owne brother Tymoleon also, that laying aside all respect of nature, hee slew him with his owne hands: preferring the libertie of his countrie, be∣fore any vnity or bond of bloud. When the cities of Greece (sayth Orosius) would needes through too greedie a desire and Ambition of raigne,Lib. 3. cap. 12. get euery one the maisterie and so∣ueraigntie of the rest, they altogither made shipracke of their owne liberties by encroching vpon others: as for instance, The Lacedemonians, how hurtfull and vncommo∣dious the desire of bringing their neighbour adioining cit∣ties vnder their dominion was vnto them, the sundrie dis∣comfitures and distresses within the time of that warre vn∣dertaken vpon that onely cause befell them,Oros. lb. 3. ca. 2. beare sufficient record. Seruius Tullus the sonne to a bondman, addicted himselfe so much to the exploits of warre, that by Prowesse hee got so great credite and reputation among the Romanes; that hee was thought worthie to bee made the sonne in law of king Tarquinius by marrying one of his daughters:Titus Liuius. after whose death hee also vsurped the crowne, vnder colour of the Protectorship of the kings two yong sonnes. Who when
they came to age and bignesse, maried the daughters of their brother in law Tullius: by whose exhortation and continu∣all prouokement, the elder of them which was called Tar∣quinius, conspired against his father in law, and practised to make himselfe king, and to recouer his rightfull inheritance, and that by this means: he watched his oportunitie when the greatest part of the people were out of the citie about gathe∣ring their fruit in the fields, and then placing his companions in readinesse to serue his turne if need should be, he marched to the pallace in the roiall robes, guarded with a company of his confederats: and hauing called a Senate, as hee began to complaine him of the trecherie and impudencie of Tullius, behold Tullius himselfe came in & would haue run violent∣ly vpon him, but Tarquinius catching him about the middle threw him headlong down the staires, and presently sent cer∣taine of his guard to make an end of the murder which hee had begun. But herein the cruelty of Tullia was most mon∣strous; that not only first moued her husband to this bloudy practise, but also made her coach to be driuen ouer the body of her father which lay bleeding in the middest of the street scarce dead. Manlius after hee had maintained the fortresse of Rome against the Gaules, glorying in that action,Parricide. lib  cap. 11. and enuying the good hap and prosperity of Camillus, went about to make himselfe king, vnder pretence of restoring the people to their ancient entire libertie: but his practise being discouered, he was accused, found guiltie, and by the consent of the multi∣tude adiudged to be throwne headlong downe from the top of the same fortresse; to the end that the same place which gaue him great glory might bee a witnesse and memoriall of his shame and last confusion: for all his valiant deedes before done were not of so much force with the people, to excuse his fault or saue his life, as this one crime was of weight to bring him to his death. In former times there liued in Carthage one Hanno,Oros. lib. 4. c. 6. who because hee had more riches than all the Commonwealth
beside, began to aspire to the domination of the citie: which the better to accomplish, he deuised to make shew of marry∣ing his only daughter, to the end that at the mariage feast he might poyson the chiefest men of credit and power of the ci∣tie, whome hee knew could or would any waies withstand or countermand his purpose: but when this deuise tooke no ef∣fect, by reason of the discouerie thereof by certain of his ser∣uants, he sought another meanes to effect his will: He got to∣gither a huge number of bondslaues and seruants, which should at a sodaine put him in possession of the citie; but be∣ing preuented herein also by the citizens, hee seased vpon a castle with a thousand men of base regard, euen seruants for the most part, whither thinking to draw the Affricanes, and king of the Moores to his succour, he was taken & first whip∣ped, next had his eies thrust out, and then his armes and legs broken in peeces, and so was executed to death before al the people: his carcas being thus mangled with blows was han∣ged vpon a gallowes, and all his kindred and children put to death, that there might not one remaine of his straine, either to enterprise the like deed or to reuenge his death. That great and fearefull warriour Iulius Caesar, one of the most hardie and valiants peeces of flesh that euer was, after he had performed so many notable exploits, ouercome all his enemies, and brought all high and haughtie purposes to their desired effect: being prickt forward with the spur of ambiti∣on and a high mind, through the meanes and assistance of the mightie forces of the Commonwealth, which (contrary to the constitution of the Senate) were left in his hands, hee set footing into the state, and making himself maister & Lord of the whole Romane Empire, vsurped a soueraigntie ouer thē. But as he attained to his dignitie by force and violence, so he inioied it not long,Plutarch. Sueton. rop. neither gained any great benefit by it, ex∣cept the losse of his life may bee counted a benefite, which shortly after in the open Senat was bereft him: for the conspi∣rers therof assoon as he was set down in his seat, cōpassing him about, so vehemently ouercharged him on all sides, that not∣withstanding
al the resistance he could make for his defence, tossing amongst them, and shifting himselfe vp and downe, he was ouerthrowne on the earth, and abode for dead, through the number of blowes that were giuen him, euen three and twentie wounds. The monarchie of Assyria was at one in∣stant extinguished in Sardanapalus: and of Babylon in Baltha∣sar, Arbaces being the worker of the first, and Darius king of Persia of the latter; both of them receiuing the wages not of their wickednesse, but also of their predecessours & great grandfathers crueltie and oppressions, by whome many peo∣ple and nations had bene destroied. Moreouer, as the Baby∣lonian Empire was ouerthrowne by Darius of Persia, so was his Persian kingdome (in Darius the last king of that country his time, this mans successour) ouerturned by Alexander. Againe, the great dominion of Alexander (who suruiued not long after) was not continued to any of his by inheritance, but deuided like a prey amongst his greatest captaines, and from them the most part of it in short time descended to the Ro∣mans; who spreading their wings and stretching their gree∣die talents far and neere, for a while rauened and preyed ouer all the world, and enriched and bedecked themselues with the spoiles of many nations; and therefore it was necessarie that they also should be made a prey, and that the far fetcht Gothes and Vandales should come vpon them, as vpon the body of a great Whale that suffers shipwracke vpon the sea shore: since which time the Romane Empire went to decay, and grew euery day weaker than other: yea and many prin∣ces setting themselues against and aboue it, haue robbed it of the realmes and prouinces which it robbed others of before: and thus wee may see, how all things runne, as it were, in a circle, and how great the vncertentie of this world is, seeing that the mightiest are subiect to so many and great changes: For if there be any thing vnder the sunne that may carry any shew of stabilitie or continuance, surely it is a monarchie or common wealth, grounded vpon the vnitie and consent of all people, maintained by the authority of the greatest and
most mightie, and vnderpropped with the shores of much strength and wealth, as that Romane Empire was: and yet for all that, there was neuer any, though neuer so well rea∣red and furnished, and deepe rooted, which at the length hath not bene demolished, ransacked, and pulled vp by some notable and strange calamity. And this is that which the spi∣rit of God would giue vs to know, by the vision of that great image, represented to Nabuchadnezzar in a dreame, accor∣ding to Daniels interpretation thereof; to wit, that the foure great and puissant monarchies of the world, should at last bee ruinated and dispersed, like the chaffe before the wind, till they were consumed and brought to nothing, albeit they were glorious and excellent as gold and siluer, or strong and mightie as brasse and iron. How much more foolish and euill aduised are they then, that for a certaine apparant splendour and shew of worldly honour (which is as fraile as any rose, as variable as the wind, as light and vaine as a shadow or smoke, as vnassured as a rot∣ten planke) haue the eies of their minds so dazled, and their wits so bewitched, & all their affections so transported, as to mingle heauen and earth togither, to dash the East against the West, to stirre vp discord and dissention betwixt man and man, and to shed so many thousand mens blood, and all for a paltry desire of raigne, though to their owne finall ruine and destruction? Sabellicus.And thus came it to passe in the time of the Emperor Otho, to a duke of Venice, called Peter Caudian, who (not content with his dukedome) went about to vsurpe a tyrannicall rule ouer the whole segniory, and that by pride and threats; de∣siring rather to make himselfe terrible to the people by those bad means, than amiable and beloued by any meanes what∣soeuer; and thus daily he grew as in age so in insolencie: hee placed a garrison of men about his pallace, and so fortifying himselfe, presently he shewed himselfe in his colours, namely a cruell tyrant: which when the multitude perceiued, and re∣membred withall, their liberty, which they were like to lose,
they tooke vp armes forthwith, in purpose to beat downe his hautie mind; therefore they first set on fire his house, and caused him to forsake his fortresse, and to betake himselfe to his shifts: but when by reason of the stopping of the passa∣ges he could not escape, they tooke him and his young sonne also which was with him, and put them to a most cruell and suddaine death, and cast their carcasses to be deuoured of dogs. In the Empire of Maximilian, Lewes Sforce,Bemh. lib. 2. of the Ven  historie. a prince of an inconstant and turbulent spirit, ambitious, and one that made no account of his promises nor faith, tooke vpon him the go∣uernment of Millaine, after the death of his brother Galeaz duke of Millaine, who was traiterously slaine: in which acti∣on, the first wrong which he did, was to his brothers widow, whome hee deposed; the second to his young nephew, his brother Galeaz sonne, whome he so brought vp, as if hee ne∣uer meant he should come to honour or goodnes, for hee suf∣fered him not to be trained vp either in learning or armes, but let him runne into all possible occasions that might corrupt and spoile his tender age: thus hee enioyed the principalitie thirteene yeeres, all the while vnder his nephewes raine; to whome when, Alphonsus king of Naples had giuen in mar∣riage one of his daughters, and perceiued what small recko∣ning his vncle made of restoring him his dukedome, after hee had often and instantly entreated him without preuailing, at length he fell to threaten him with warre: he fearing to haue the worse and to loose so great a dignitie, wrought so by his owne shifts and deuices, togither with the helping hand of Pope Alexander, that he put it in the head of Charles the eight of Fraunce to goe and conquer Naples, for the hatred which his heart possessed against Alphonsus, supposing by this meanes the better to accomplish his affaires to his owne desire. The king of France was no sooner entred Italy, but Lewes Sforce ministred an Italian posset to his young nephew Iohn Galeaz, that hee immediatle died vpon it,Guicciard. lib. 1. and then he proclaimed himselfe prince of the Duchie, by the aid of the
principall of the counsell, whome hee had woon to defer that honor vnto him, by deposing the yong sonne of Iohn Galeaz, being then but fiue yeeres old: but he declared presently his inconstant and perfidious nature, in breaking promise with the king of Fraunce, whome hee had induced with so many faire speeches, to vndertake that voyage; and entring a new league with the Venetians both against him and the Pope, although ere long hee serued them with the same measure: but Lewis the twelfth, succeeding in the crowne of France, could not brooke this iniury done to his predecessour, but pretending a title to the Duchie of Millaine, he dispatched an army thitherward, that bestirred it selfe so well, that in short space they brought vnder their subiection, all the cities and townes neere adioyning: which the citizens perceiuing, begun to rebell against their duke, and killed his treasurer; whereupon he (being not able to make his part good with the French abroad, nor daring to put any confidence in his owne at home) left his castle to the charge and custody of a cap∣taine, and fled himselfe with his children to Almaine, tow∣ards the Emperour Maximilians court, hoping to find suc∣cour at his hand, as indeed he did; for hee returned to Mil∣laine with fiue hundred Burgundians, and eight thousand Zwitzers, and was receiued againe into the citie: being thus refortified with these and other moe troupes that came vnto him, he encamped before Nauarre, and by composition, got the city into his hands from the Frenchmen. The French king in the meane while sent a new supply of men into the Duchie, amongst whome were many Zwitzers, who so dealt with their countrimen that were on the dukes side, that they brought them also to fauour the king of France, and to for∣sake the duke: which when he vnderstood, hee presently de∣parted the city, and posting to the campe, hardened his soul∣diers, desiring them to play the men, and not to shrinke, for hee meant to giue battell without delay: but the captaines made answer, That they might not fight against their owne nation without especiall leaue from their lords. Now in the
meane while, whilst these things were in doing, they tooke order that the Frenchmen should approch to Nouare and in∣tercept all the passages, that the duke might not escape, hee therefore laid aside his horse and marched on foot in the squadron of Switzers, now ioyned to the French, in attire and armour like a Switzer, thinking by this tricke to saue his life: but all his counterfaiting could not saue him from being ta∣ken, and from lying ten yeeres prisoner in the Tower of Lo∣ches, where hee also died:Gulcciard. li. 4. and so all his high and ambitious thoughts (which scarsely Italy could containe) were pend vp in a straight and narrow roome. With the like turbulent and furious spirit of ambition haue many Roman bishops bene inspired, who what by their iuggling trickes, cousenages, and subtill deuises, and what by force, haue prospered so well, that of simple bishops (which they were wont to be) they are growne temporall lords, and as it were monarchs; hauing in their possessions, lands, cities, castles, fortresses, hauens, garrisons, and guards, after the ma∣ner of kings, nay they haue exalted themselues aboue kings, (so intollerable is their impudencie) and made them subiect to their wils:Marke. 10. Luke. 22. and yet they call themselues the Apostles pe∣tigree, whome Christ forbad all such domination. But what of that? it pertaineth not to them to succeed in vertue, but in authority the Apostles; for if that charge had concerned them, then Pope Lucius the second,Bal. would neuer haue bene so shamelesse, as to request in right of his popeship, the so∣ueraignty ouer Rome as he did; neither when it was denied him, to haue gone about to vsurpe it by force, and to bring his mind about to haue laid siege to the Senate house with armed men, to the end that either by banishing or murde∣ring the Senatours then assembled togither, he might inuest himselfe with the kingly dignitie: But what got hee by it? mary this: The people beeing in an vprore in the citie vpon the sight of this holy fathers proud attempt, took themselues to armes, and ran with such violence vpon master Pope, that they forthwith stoned his holinesse to death, but not like
Steuen the martyr for the profession of Christ Iesus, but like a vile and seditious theefe for seeking the commonwealths ouerthrow. Pope Adrian the fourteenth, a monkes sonne, succeeding Lucius both in the Papacie,Saboll. Bal. and also in ambition, tooke in hand his omitted enterprises; for hee excommunicated the Romanes vntill they had banished Arnold a Bishop, that gaue them counsell to retaine the power of electing their magistrate, and gouerning their citie in their hands (a thing repugnant to his intent) and after hee had degraded the con∣suls; to make his part the stronger, he caused the Emperour Fredericke to come with an army to the city; whome not∣withstanding hee handled but basely for his paines, for hee did not onely checke him openly for standing on his feet and holding the stirrop of his horse with his left hand, but also denied him the crowne of the Empire, except he would re∣store to him Pouille, which (hee said) pertained vnto him: howbeit hee got the crowne notwithstanding, and before his returne from Rome into Germany, more then a thousand ci∣tizens that would not yeeld nor subscribe vnto the Popes will, were slaine: after Frederickes departure, the Pope see∣ing himselfe destitute of his further aid, first excommunica∣ted the king of Sicilie, that in right of inheritance possessed the foresaid Pouille; but when this serued him to small pur∣pose, hee practised with Emmanuel the Emperour of Greece to set vpon him, which thing turned to his finall confusion: after this (through his intollerable pride) hee fell out with Fredericke the Emperour, and to reuenge himselfe vpon him, discharged his subiects from their fealty to him, and him from his authoritie ouer them: Now marke his end; As hee walked one day towards Auiane, a flie got in at his mouth and downe his throat so farre, that it stopped the conduit of his breath, so that for all that his phisitions could doe, hee was choked therewith. And thus hee that sought by all the meanes he could, to make himselfe greater than hee ought to be, and to get the mastery of euery thing at his owne will
and pleasure, and to take away other mens rights by force, was cut short and rebated by a small and base creature, and constrained to leaue this life, which hee was most vnwor∣thie of. Hither may be referred, that which befell the Emperour Albert, duke of Austria, and one of his lieutenants in Swiz∣zerland, for going about to vsurpe and appropriate certaine lands and dominions to him, which belonged not vnto him. This Emperour had many children whome hee desired to leaue rich and mightie, and therefore by all meanes possible he endeauoured to augment his liuing, euen by getting from other men whatsoeuer hee could: and amongst all the rest, this was one especiall practise wherein hee laboured tooth and naile, to alienate from the Empire the land of the Swiz∣zers, and to leaue it for an euerlasting inheritance to his heires: which although the Swizzers would in no case con∣discend nor agree vnto, but contrariwise sued earnestly vnto his maiesty, for the maintenance of their auncient liberties and priuiledges which were confirmed vnto them by the former Emperours, and that they might not bee distracted from the Empire; yet notwithstanding were constrained to vndergoe for a season the yoake of most grieuous tyrannie and seruirude imposed by force vpon them: and thus the poore comminalty endured many mischiefes, and many grie∣uous and cruell extortions and indignities at the hands of the Emperours officers, whilst they liued in this wretched and miserable estate. Amongst the rest there was one called Grislier that be∣gan to erect a strong fort of defence vpon a little hill neere vnto Altorfe, to keepe the countrey in greater awe and sub∣iection; and desiring to discrie his friends from his foes, hee inuented this deuise: Hee put a hat vpon the end of a long pole, and placed it in the field before Altorfe, where great multitudes of people, with this commandement, That euery one that came by should do obeisance, & vaile bonnet to the hat, and in euery respect shew themselues as dutifull vnto it,
as to his owne person, imagining that his greatest enemies could not endure nor find in their hearts to doe it, and there∣fore vpon this ocasion he might apprehend them, and disco∣uer all their close practises & conspiracies, which they might brew against him: now there was one, a stout hearted man, that passing euery day vp and downe that waies, could in no wise be brought to reuerence the dignity of the worthy hat, (so vnreasonable a thing it seemed in his eies) whereupon being taken, the tyrant commaunded him (for punishment of his open contempt) to shoot at an apple laid vpon the crown of the head of his dearest child, and if hee mist the apple, to be put to death: the poore man after many excuses, and alle∣gations, and entreaties that hee might not hazard his childs life in that sort, was notwithstanding enforced to shoot, and shooting, God so directed his shaft, that the apple was hit & the child vntoucht; and yet for all this, he adiudged him to perperuall prison: out of which hee miraculously escaping, watched the tyrants approch in so fit a place, that with the shaft that should haue bene the death of his sonne, he stroke him to the heart: whose vnluckie end, was a luckie begin∣ning of the Switzers deliuerance from the bondage of ty∣rants,Nic. Gil. vol. 1. and of the recouery of their ancient freedome, which euer after they wisely and constantly maintained. The Emperour Albert, purposing to be reuenged vpon them for his iniury, as also for slaying many more of his men, and breaking down his castles of defence which he had cau∣sed to be builded in their countrey, determined to make war vpon them; but he was slaine ere he could bring that deter∣mination to effect by one of his owne nephewes, from whom (being his ouerseer and guardant for his bringing vp) he with∣held his patrimony against all equity; neither by praiers or entreatie could be persuaded to restore it. These things (ac∣cording to Nicholas Gils report in his 1 volume of the Chro∣nicles of France) happened about the raigne of Saint Lewes.
CHAP. XL. Of Vserers and their thest. IF open larcinies and violent robbe∣ries and extortions are forbidden by the law of God, as wee haue seene they are, then it is no doubt but that all deceit and vniust dealings and bargaines vsed to the dammage of others are also condemned by the same law; and namely Vsurie, when a man exacteth such vnmeasurable gaine for either his mo∣ney or other thing which he lendeth, that the poore borrow∣er is so greatly indammaged, that in steed of benefitting and prouiding for his affaires, which he aimed at, hee hitteth his further losse and finall ouerthrow. This sinne is expressely prohibited in Leuiticus 25,Leuit. 25.36. Deutronomie 23,Deut. 23.19. and Psalme 15,Psal. 15.5. where the committants thereof are held guiltie before Gods iudgement seat of iniquitie and iniustice: and against thē it is that the Prophet EzechiellEze. 18.12.13. denounceth this threat∣ning: That he which oppresseth or vexeth the poore and afflic∣ted, he which robbeth or giueth to vsurie, and receiueth the en∣crease into his bags, shall die the death, and his bloud shall bee vp∣on his pate. Neither truly doth the iustice of God sleep in this respect, but taketh vengeance vpon all such, and punisheth them after one sort or other, either in body or goods, as it pleaseth him: I my self knew a grand vsurer in the country of Vallay that ha∣uing scraped togither great masses of gold & siluer by these vnlawful means, was in one night robbed of fifteene hundred crownes by theeues, that broke into his house. I remember also another Vsurer dwelling in a Towne called Argentall, nigh vnto Anouay vnder the iurisdiction of Tholosse in high Viuaria, who being in hay time in a medow, was stong in the
foot by a serpent or some other venomous beast, that hee di∣ed thereof: an answerable punishment for his often stinging and biting many poore people with his cruell and vnmerci∣full vsurie. Nay it is so contrary to equitie and reason, that all nations led by the instinct of nature haue alwaies abhorred and con∣demned it, insomuch that the condition of theeues hath ben more easie and tollerable then vsurers; for theft was wont to be punished but with double restitution, but vsurie with qua∣druple: and to speake truly, these rich and gallant vsurers, doe more rob the common people and purloine from them, then all the publicke theeues that are made publicke examples of iustice in the world. It is to bee wished that some would exa∣mine vsurers bookes,De offcio prin∣cip. lib. 4. ca. 14. and make a bondfire of their obligati∣ons, as that Laced emonian did when Agesilaus reported that he neuer saw a clearer fire: or that some Lucullus would deliuer Europe from that contagion, as that Romane did A∣sia in his time.Alex. ab Alex. lib. 1. cap. 7. Licurgus banished this Canckerworme out of his Sparta: Amasis punished it seuerely in his Aegypt. Cato exiled it out of Sicile, and Solon condemned it in Athens: how much more should it bee held in detestation among Christians? S. ChrisostomeChrisost. in Mat. cap. 5. compareth it fitly to the biting of an aspe, as hee that is stung with an aspe falleth asleepe as it were with delectation, but dieth ere hee awaketh, so money taken in vsury delighteth and contenteth at the first, but it in∣fecteth all his possessions, & sucketh out the marrow of them ere it be long. Seing thē it is so abhominable both by the law of God and nature, let vs shun it as a toad, and flie from it as a cockatrice, but when these persuasions will not serue, let them turne their eies to these examples following, wherin they shal see the manifest indignations of God vpon it. In the Bishopricke of Coline a notable famous Vsu∣rer lying vpon his death bed readie to die, mooued vp and downe his chops and his lips as if hee had beene eating something in his mouth,D sipul. de tem∣por. and being demaunded what hee ear, hee answered his money, and that the Deuill thrust it
into his mouth perforce, so that hee could neither will nor choose but deuour it: in which miserable temptation he died without any shew of repentance. The same Author telleth of another Vsurer, that a little before his death called for his bags of gold and siluer, and offered them al to his soule, vpon condition it would not for∣sake him: but if hee would haue giuen all the world it could not ransome him from death, wherefore when hee saw there was no remedie but hee must needes die, hee com∣mended his soule to the deuill to bee carried into euerlasting torments, which wordes when hee had vttered hee gaue vp the ghost. Another Vsurer being ready to die, made this his last Will and testament: My soule (quoth he) I bequeath to the Deuill who is owner of it; my wife likewise to the De∣uill who induced mee to this vngodly trade of life;Iohannes. Au∣glus. and my Deacon to the Deuill for soothing me vp and not reprouing me for my faults: and in this desperate persuasion he died in∣continently. Vsurie consisteth not onely in lending and borrowing, but in buying and selling also, and all vniust and craftie bargai∣ning, yea and it is a kind of Vsurie to detaine through too much couetousnesse those cōmodities from the people which concerne the publicke good, and to hoord them vp for their priuate gaine, till some scarsitie or want arise, and this also hath euermore ben most sharply punished, as by these exam∣ples may appeare. About the yeare 1543 at what time a great famine and dearth of bread afflicted the world, there was in Saxony a countrie peasant, that hauing carried his corne to the market, and sold it cheaper than hee loo∣ked for, as hee returned homewards hee fell into most heauie dumpes and dolours of mind with greife that the price of graine was abated, and when his seruants sang mer∣rily for ioy of that blessed cheapenesse, hee rebuked them most sharpely and cruelly, yea and was so much the more tormented and troubled in mind by how much the more
he saw any poore soule thankfull vnto God for it: but marke how God gaue him ouer to a Reprobate and desperate sence: Whilest his seruants rode before hee hung himselfe at the cart taile, being past recouery of life ere any man loo∣ked backe or perceiued him. A notable example for our En∣glish cormorants, who ioine barne to barne, and heap to heap, and will not sell nor giue a handfull of their superfluitie to the poore when it beareth a low price, but preserue it til scar∣sity and want come, and then they sell it at their owne rate; let them feare by this, least the Lord deale so or worse with them. Another couetous wretch, when hee could not sell his corne so deare as hee desired, said the mise should eat it ra∣ther then he would lessen one iot of the price thereof: which words were no sooner spoken, but vengeance tooke them; for all the mise in the countrie flocked to his barnes and fields, so that they left him neither standing nor lying corne, but deuoured all: this story was written to Martin Luther,Luther. vpon occasion whereof hee inueighing mightilie against this cruell vsurie of husbandmen, told of three misers that in one yeare hung themselues, because graine bore a lower price than they looked for, adding moreouer that all such cruell and muddie extortioners deserued no better a doome, for their vnmercifull oppression. D. Pomeranus.Another rich farmer, whose barnes were full of graine and his stackes vntouched, was so couetous withall, that in hope of some dearth and dearenesse of corne, hee would not deminish one heape, but hoorded vp dai∣ly more and more, and wished for a scarsitie vpon the earth, to the end hee might enrich his coffers by other mens necessities, this cruell churle reioiced so much in his abundance, that euery day hee would goe into his barnes and feed his eies with his superfluity: now it fell out as the Lord would, that hauing supped & drunke very largely, vpon a night as hee went according to his custome, to view his ri∣ches with a candle in his hand, behold the wine, or rather the
iustice of God ouercame his senses, so that hee fell downe so∣dainely into the mow, and by his fall set on fire the corne, be∣ing drie and easie to be incensed, in such sort that in a moment all that which he had scraped togither and preserued so cha∣rily, and delighted in so vnreasonably, was consumed and brought to ashes, and scarce hee himselfe escaped with his life. Another in Mifina in the yeare 1559 hauing great store of corne hoorded vp refused to succour the necessitie of his poore and halfe famished neighbours,Iob. Flucel. li. 2. for which cause the Lord punished him with a strange and vnusuall iudgement, for the corne which hee so much cherished assumed life, and became feathered soules, flying out of his barns in such abun∣dance, that the world was astonished thereat, and his barnes left emptie of all prouision in most woonderfull and miracu∣lous maner. No lesse strange was that which happened in a Towne of Fraunce called Stenchansen to the gouernour of the Towne,The same au∣thor. who being requested by one of his poore subiects to sell him some corne for his money, when there was none to be gotten els where; answered hee could spare none, by reason hee had scarce enough for his owne hogs: which hoggish disposition the Lord requited in it owne kind, for his wise at the next lit∣ter brought forth seuen pigs at one birth to increase the num∣ber of his hogs, that as he had preferred filthy & ougly crea∣tures before his poore brethren, in whome the image of God in some sort shined forth, so hee might haue of his owne get∣ting more of that kind to make much of, since he loued thē so well. Equall to all the former both in cruelty touching the person, and miracle touching the iudgement,The same. was that which is reported by the same author, to haue happened to a rich couetous woman in Marchia, who in an extreame dearth of vittailes, denied not onely to relieue a poore man whose chil∣dren were ready to starue with famine, but also to sell him but one bushel of corne when e wanted but a penny of hir price:
for the poor wretch making great shift to borrow that penny, returned to her againe, and desired her hee might haue the corne: but as he paied her the mony, the penny fell vpon the ground by the prouidence of God, which as shee stretched out her hand to reach, it miraculously turned into a ser∣pent, and bit her so fast, that by no meanes it could bee loose∣ned from her arme, vntill it had brought her to a wofull and miserable end. Fulgos. lib. 2. cap 2.Sergius Galba, before hee came to bee Emperour, (being President of Affrica vnder Claudius, when as through penu∣rie of vitailes, corne and other food was verie sparingly shared out and deuided among the army) punished a cer∣taine souldiour that sold a bushell of wheat to one of his fel∣lowes for a hundred pence, in hope to obtaine a new share himselfe, in this maner, he commanded the Quaestor or trea∣surer to giue him no more sustinance, since hee preferred lucre before the necessitie of his owne bodie and his friends welfare; neither suffered hee any man els to sell him any: so that he perished with famine, and became a miserable exam∣ple to all the armie of the fruits of that foule dropsie coue∣tousnesse. And thus we see how the Lord raigned down vengeance vpon all couetous Vsurers and oppressors, plaguing some on this fashion, and some on that, and neuer passing any, but ei∣ther in this life some notable iudgement ouertakes them ei∣ther in themselues or their ofsprings, (for it is notoriously knowne that Vsurers children, though left rich, yet the first or second generation became alwaies beggers) or in the life to come they are throwne into the pit of perdition, from whence there is no redemption nor deliuerance.
CHAP. XLI. Of dicers and card plaiers, and their theft. IF any recreation be allowed vs as no doubt there is, yet surely it is not such as whereby wee should worke the dammage and hurt of one ano∣ther, as when by gaming we draw a∣way another mans money with his great losse, and this is one kind of theft, to vsurpe any mans goods by vnlawfull meanes: wherfore no such sports ought to find any place amongst Christians, especially those wherin any kind of lot or hazzard is vsed, by the which the good blessings of God are contrary to their true and naturall vse exposed to chance and fortune as they tearme it, for which cause Saint Augustine is of this opinion concerning them:Epist. 54. à Ma∣ced. That the gain which ariseth to any partie in play, should be bestowed vpon the poore, to the end that both the gamesters, aswell the winner as the looser might bee equally punished, the one by not carrying the stake being woon, the other by being frustrated of all his hope of winning. Plaiers at dice both by the Elibertine and Constantinoplitane councell vnder Iusti∣nian were punished with excommunication:Can. 79. Can. 50. and by a new constitution of the said Emperor, it was enacted that no man should vse dice play, either in priuate or publicke, no nor ap∣proue the same by their presence vnder paine of punishment; and bishops were there appointed to be ouerseers in this be∣halfe, to espie if any default was made.Cod. li. 3. tit. 43. Horace an Heathen Poet auouched the vnlawfulnes of this thing euen in his time,Od. 24. lib. 3. Lndere doction scu graeco iube∣as trocho seu malis vetita le∣gibus alea. whē he saith that dice playing was for∣bidden by their law. Lewis the eight king of France renowned for his good conditions and rare vertues, amongst all the ex∣cellent lawes which hee made, this was one, That all sports
should bee banished the Commonwealth (except shoo∣ting whether with long bow or crossebow) and that no cards nor dice should either bee made or sold by any, to the end that all occasion of gaming might bee taken away. Surely it would bee very profitable and expedient, for the weale publicke, that this ordinance might stand in effect at this day, and that all Merchants and Mercers what∣soeuer, especially those that follow the reformation of Re∣ligion, might forbeare the sale of all such paltrie wares: for the fault in selling such trash is no lesse than the a∣buse of them in playing at them, for so much as they vpon greedinesse of so small againe, put as it were a sword into a mad mans hand by ministring them the instruments, not onely of their sports, but also of those mischiefes that ensue the same: there a man may heare curses as rife as words, ban∣nings, swearings, and blasphmies banded vp and down; there men fret themselues to death, and consume whole nights in darke and deuillish pastimes, some lose their horses, others their cloakes, a third sort all that euer they are worth, to the vndoing of their houses, wiues and children; and some againe from braulings fal to buffitings, from buffets to bloodsheding, from bloudsheading to hanging: and these are the fruits of those gallant sports. Discipu. de tem∣pr. ser. 12.But this you shall see more plainly by a few particular ex∣amples. In a Towne of Campania a certaine Iew playing at dice with a Christian lost a great summe of money vnto him, with which great losse being enraged, & almost beside him∣selfe, as commonly men in that case are affected, he belched out most bitter curses against Christ Iesus, & his mother the blessed virgin, in the midst whereof the Lord depriued him of his life and sence and stroke him dead in the place; as for his companion the Christian, indeed he escaped sodain death howbeit he was robbed of his wit and vnderstanding,Blasphemy. li.  cap. 31. & sur∣uiued not very long after: to teach vs not onely what a grie∣uous sinne it is to blaspheame God and to accompany such wretches, and not to shun or at least reproue their outrage;
but also what monstrous effects proceed from such kind of vngodly sports, & how grieuously the Lord punisheth them, first by giuing them ouer to blasphemie, secondly to death, and thirdly and lastly to eternall and irreuocable damnation: let our English gamesters consider this example, and if it will not terrifie them from their sports, then let them look to this that followeth, which, if their hearts be not as hard as ada∣mants, will mollifie and persuade them. In the yeere 1553, neare to Belissan a citie in Heluetia,Ioh. Fincel. Andreas Mus∣cabus in diabol. blasphemiae. there were three prophane wretches that plaied at dice vp∣on the Lords day without the wals of the citie, one of which called Vlrich Schraeterus hauing lost much mony, and offen∣ded God with many cursed speeches, at last presaging to him selfe good lucke, he burst forth into these termes,Mandat. 4. Breach of Sa∣both, lib. 1. cap. 35. Mandat 3. Blasphemy, lib. 1. cap. 31. If fortune deceiue me now, I will thrust my dagger into the very body of God as farre as I can; now fortune failed him as before, wherefore forthwith he drew his dagger, and taking it by the point, threw it against heauen with all his strength: behold, the dagger vanished away, and fiue drops of blood distilled vpon the table before them, and without all delay the deuill came in place, and carried away that blasphemous wretch with such force and noise, that the whole citie was amazed and astonished thereat: the other two (halfe beside them∣selues with feare) stroue to wipe away the drops of blood out of the table, but the more they wiped it, the more clearely it appeared: the rumour of this accident flew into the city, and caused the people to flocke thicke and threefold vnto the place, where they found the other two gamsters wash∣ing the boord; whome (by the decree of the Senat) they bound with chaines, and carried towards the prison, but as they passed with them through a gate of the citie, one of them was stroken suddenly dead in the midst of them, with such a number of lice and wormes creeping out of him, that it was both wonderfull and lothsome to behold: the third they themselues (without any further inquisition or triall) to auert the indignation which seemed to hang ouer their heads, put
incontinently to death: the table they tooke and preserued it for a monument, to witnes vnto posterity, both how an ac∣cursed a pastime dicing is, and also what great inconuenien∣ces and mischiefes grow thereby. But that wee may see yet more the vanity & mischieuous working of this sport, I will report one story more out of the same author, though not equall to the former in strangenesse and height of sinne, yet as tragicall and no lesse pitifull. Iob. incel. lib. 2.In the yeere 1550, their liued in Alsatia one Adā Steckman, one that got his liuing by trimming, pruning, & dressing vines: this man hauing receiued his wages, fell to dice, & lost all that he had gotten, insomuch that he had not wherwith to norish his family, so that he fell into such a griefe of mind, & withall into such paines of the head, that hee grew almost desperate withall: one day his wife beeing busie abroad, left the care of her children vnto him, but he tooke such great care of them, that he cut all their throats, euen three of them, whereof one lay in the cradle; and lastly would haue hanged himselfe, had not his wife come in, in the meane while, who beholding this pitifull tragedy, gaue a great outcry, and fell downe dead: whereupon the neighbours running in, were eie witnesses of this wofull spectacle: as for him, by law hee was iudged to a most seuere and cruell punishment; and all these pitiful euents arose from that cursed root of dice-play. Wee ought therefore to learne by all these things that haue bene already spoken, to abstaine not only from this cur∣sed pastime, but also from extortion, robberies, deceit, guile, and other such naughty practises that tend to the hurt and detriment of one another; and in place thereof, to procure the good and welfare of each one in all kindnes and equitie, following the Apostles counsel, where he saith, Let them that stole steale no more,Ephes. 4.28. but rather trauaile by labouring with his hands in that which is good, that hee may haue wherewith to suc∣cour the necessitie of others: for it is not enough not to do euill to our neighbour, but we are tied to doe him good, or at least to endeauour to doe it.
CHAP. XLII. Of such as haue bene notorious in all kind of sinne. WEe haue seene by these foreplaced examples,These exāples of this chapter may be refer∣red to all the commaunde∣ments for the most part. how heauy the iudgements of God haue beene vpon those, that through the vnta∣mednesse of their owne lusts and affections, would not submit themselues vnder the ho∣ly and mighty will of God, but haue coun∣tremanded his commandements, and withstood his precepts, some after one sort and some after another: now because there haue beene some so wicked and wretched, that being wholly corrupted and depraued, they haue ouerflowed with all ma∣ner of sinne and iniquitie; and as it were, maugred God with the multitude and hainousnesse of their offences: wee must therefore spend some time also in setting forth their liues and ends, as of the most vile and monstrous kind of people that euer were. In this ranke, wee may place the ancient inhabi∣tants of the land of Canaan, an irreligious people, void of all feare and dread of God, and consequently giuen ouer to all abominable wickednesse, as to couiurings, witchcrafts, and vnnameable adulteries: for which causes the Lord abhorring and hating them, did also bring them to a most strange de∣struction; for first and formost Iericho (the frontier citie of their country) being assaulted by the Israelites for bindering their progresse into the countrey, were all discomfited, not so much by Iosuah his sword, as by the huge stones which dropped from heauen vpon their heads: and least the night ouerraking them should breake off the small and full destru∣ction of this cursed people, the day was miraculously prolon∣ged, & the sunne made to rest himselfe in the midst of heauen the space of a whole day: & so these fiue kings hiding them∣selues in a caue, were brought but, & their necks made a foot∣stoole to the captains of Israel, & were hanged on fiue trees.
Semiramis, queene of Assyria, was a woman of an ambiti∣ous spirit,Sabell. who through her thirst of raigning, counterfaited her sexe, and attired her selfe like a man, to get more autho∣rity and reuerence to her selfe; shee was the destruction of many thousand people, by the vniust warre which the stirred vp: besides that, shee was a notorious strumpet, and withall, a murderer of those that satisfied her lust, for still as they came from her bed, some lay priuily in watch to kill them, least they should bewray her villany: yea and it is reported, that shee was so vile and past shame, that shee sollicited her owne soone to commit incest with her; who, in detestation of her filthinesse, raised a power against her, and conquering her in one great battaile, caused her to be put to death. The tyrant Periander vsurped the gouernment ouer Co∣rinth,Sabell. after he had slaine the principall of the city: hee put to death his owne wife to the end to content and please his con∣cubine; nay and was so execrable, as to lie with his owne mo∣ther: he banished his naturall sonne, and caused many chil∣dren of his subiects to be gelded: finally fearing some mise∣rable and monstrous end and want of sepulchre, in conscience of his misdeeds, hee gaue in charge to two strong and hardie souldiers, that they should guard a certaine appointed place, and not faile to kill the first that came in their way, and to bury his body being slaine: now the first that met them was himselfe, who offered himselfe vnto them without speaking any word, and was soone dispatched and buried according to his commaundement; but these two were encountred with foure other, whome hee also had appointed to doe the same to them which they had done to him. In this ranke deseruably we may place the second Diony∣sius his sonne,Sabell. that for his cruelties and extortions, was slaine by his owne subiects: who though at the first made shew of a better and milder nature than his father was of, yet after he was installed in his kingdome, and growne strong, his wicked nature shewed forth it selfe; for first he rid out of the way his owne brethren, then his nearest kindred, and lastly all other
that but any way displeased him, vsing his sword not to the cutting downe of vice, as it ought, but to the cutting the throats of his innocent and guiltlesse subiects: with which tyrannie the people being incensed began to mutiny, & from mutinies fell to open rebellion persecuting him so, that he was compelled to flie and to take harbour in Greece: where not∣withstanding he ceased not his accustomed manners, but con∣tinued still freshly committing robberies, and doing all man∣ner of iniuries and outrages, in wronging men and forcing both women and maids, to his filthie lust: vntill hee was brought vnto so low and so base an eb of estate, that of a king, being become a begger and vagabond, he was glad to teach children at Corinth, to get his poore liuing, and so di∣ed in misery. Clearchus another tyrant after hee had put to death the most part of the Nobles and chiefe men of account in the ci∣tie Heraclea, vsurped a tyrannous authoritie ouer the rest:Sabel. a∣mongst many of whose monstrous enormities, this was one, that hee constrained the widdowes of those whome hee had slaine, against their wils to marry those of his followers whom hee allotted them to; in so much that many of them with griefe and anger slew themselues: now there were two men of stouter courage than the rest, who pittying the miserable condition of the whole citie, vndertooke to deliuer the same out of his cruell handes: comming therefore accompanied with fifty other of the same mind and resolution, as though they would debate a priuat quarell before his presence assoon as conuenience serued, they diuerted their swords from them∣selues into the tyrants bosome, and hewed him in peeces in the very midst of his guard. Agathocles, king or rather Tyrant of Sicile,Sabel. from a potters sonne growing to be a man of warre, tooke vpon him the go∣uernment of the countrie and vsurped the crowne, contrarie to the consent of his people: he was one giuen to all maner of filthie and vncleane pollutions, in whome trecherie, crueltie, and generally all kind of vice raigned, and therfore was wor∣thely
plagued by God, first by a murder of his yongest sonne committed by his eldest sonnes sonne, that aspired vnto the crown, and thought that he might be an obstacle in his way for obtaining his purpose: and lastly hauing sent his wife and children into Aegypt for safetie, by his own miserable and lan∣guishing death which shortly after ensued. Romulus the first king of Rome was (as FlorusFlorus. testifieth) transported by a deuill out of this earth into some habitation of his own, for the monstrous superstitions, coniurings, thefts, rauishments, and murders, which during his pompe, hee com∣mitted: and moreouer (hee saith) that PlutarchPlutarch. the most cre∣dible & learned writer among Historiographers, both Greek and Latine that euer writ, auoucheth the same for true: that hee was carried away one day by a spirit in a mightie tempest of thunder and lightning before the view of the whole mul∣titude to their great astonishment, insomuch that they fled at the sight thereof. What shall wee say of Silla, that monster in cruelty, that most odious and execrable Tyrant that euer was, by whom all ciuill order and humane pollicy was vtter∣ly defaced, and all vice and confusion in steed thereof set vp? Did hee not procure the death of sixe thousand men at one clap,Plutarch. at the discomfiture of Marius? and hauing promised to saue the liues of three thousand that appealed vnto his mer∣cy, did he not cause them to be assembled within a parke, and there to haue their throats cut, whilest hee made an oration to the Senate? It was hee that filled the channels of the streets of Rome & other cities in Italy with blood & slaugh∣ters innumerable: and that spared neither altar, temple, or o∣ther priuiledged place or house whatsoeuer, from the pollu∣tion and destainement of innocent bloud: husbands were slain in their wiues armes: infants in their mothers bosomes: and infinite multitudes of men murdered for their riches: for if any were either rich, or owners of faire houses or pleasant gardens, they were sure to die: besides if there were any pri∣uate quarrell or grudge betwixt any citizen and some of his crue, hee suffered his side to reuenge themselues after their
owne lusts, so that for priuate mislike and enmitie, many hun∣dreds lost their liues: hee that saued an outlaw or proscribed person in his house (of which there were too many of the best sort in his time) or gaue him entertainement vnder his roofe, whether hee were his brother, sonne, or parent whatsoeuer, was himselfe for recompence of his courtesie and humanity, proscribed and sold, and condemned to death: and hee that killed one of them that was proscribed, had for reward two talēts (the wages of his murder) amounting in value to twelue hundred crownes, whether it was a bondslaue that slew his master, or a son that murdered his father: comming to Pre∣nest, he began to proceed in a kind of iusticiall form amongst the citizens, & as it were by law and equitie to practise wrong and iniury; but ere long either being wearie of such slow pro∣ceedings, or not at leisure to prosecute the same any further, he caused to meet together in one assembly two thousand of thē, whom he committed al to the massacre without any ma∣ner of compassion: as he was sitting one day in the midst of his pallace in Rome, a souldior to whom he had granted the pro∣scription of his dead brother, as if he had been aliue (whom he himselfe before the ciuill war had slain) presented him in lieu of thāks for that great good turn the head of one Marcus Ma∣rius of the aduerse factiō before the whole city, with his hāds al embrued in bloud, which he also washed in the holy water∣stack of Apolloes temple, being neer vnto that place; and all this being cōmended & countenanced by Sill: he decreed a general disanulment & abrogation of all titles and rights that were passed before his time, to the end to haue more libertie both to put to death whō he pleased, & to cōfiscat mēs goods & also to vnpeople & to repeople cities, & to sack, pull down, & build, & to depose & make kings at his pleasure: the goods which he had thus seazed, he shamed not to sell with his own handssitting in his tribunall seat, giuing oftentimes a faire wo∣man a whole country or the reuenues of a city for her beauty, and to plaiers, iesters, iuglers, minstrels, and other wicked effranchised slaues, great and vnnecessary rewards: yea and to
diuerse married women also, whome (pleasing his eie) he de∣priued their husbands of perforce, and espoused them to himselfe, maugre their wils: being desirous to ally himselfe with Pompey, he commanded him to cast off his lawfull wife, and taking from Magnus Glabrio, his wife Aemilia, made him marry hir, though alreadie great with child by her former husband: but shee died in trauaile in his house. In feasts and banquettings hee was too immoderate, for it was his conti∣nuall and daily practise; the wine that he dranke vsually was forty yeare old, and the company that he delighted to keepe was compact of minstrels, tumblers, players, singers, and such like rascals, and with these hee would spend whole daies in drinking, carousing, dancing, and all dissolutenesse. Now this disordinate life of his, did so augment a disease which was growne in his bodie, to wit an impostume, that in time it cor∣rupted his flesh, & turned it into lice: in such sort that though he had those that continually followed him, to sweepe them off and to louse him night & day, yet the encrease was still so plentiful that al would not serue to cleare him for a moment: in so much that not his apparrell though neuer so new and changeable, nor his linnen though neuer so fresh, nor his bath nor his lauer, no nor his meat and drinke could bee kept vn∣polluted from the flux of this filthy vermine, it issued in such abundance: oftentimes in a day hee would wash himselfe in a bath, but to no great purpose; for his shame increased the more: the day before hee died hee sent for one Granius, who attending his death delaied to pay that which hee ought to the Commonwealth, and being come in his presence he com∣manded him to bee strangled to death before his face: but with straining himselfe in crying after his execution, his im∣postume burst and vomitted out such streames of bloud, that his strength failed him withall, and passing that night in great distresse, the next day made vp his wicked and misera∣ble end. Dion.After that Caligula began to addict himselfe to impietie and contempt of God, presently being not curbed with anie
feare nor shame, he became most dissolute in all kind of wic∣kednesse; for at one time he caused to be slaine a great num∣ber of people, for calling him young Augustus, as if it had beene an iniury to his person to be so entituled: and to say briefly of all his murders, there were so many of his kindred, friends, senatours, and citizens made away by his meanes, that it would be too long and tedious here to recite: where∣fore seeing that hee was generally hated of the people for his misdeeds, hee wished that they all had but one head, to the end (as it might seeme) that at one blow he might dispatch them all. In sumptuousnes and costlinesse of dishes and ban∣quets hee neither found nor left his equall,Sueton. for hee would sup vp most pretious stones melted by art, and swallow downe treasures into his belly: his banquets were often serued with golden loaues and golden meates: in giuing rewards hee was sometime too too prodigall, for he would cast great summes of mony amongst the people certaine daies togither, vntill his bagges were drawne dry: and then new strange shiftes must be practised to fill them vp againe: his subiects hee ouercharged with many new found and vniust taxes, exacting of them a tribute euen for their meat: if there were any mo∣ney controuersies to be decided, the fourth part of the same was his share, which way soeuer the matter inclined: the eight peny of euery porters gaine throughout the city (which with trauell they earned) hee tooke into his purse: yea and that which is more filthy and dishonest, the very whores and common strumpets paid him a yeerely reuenue for their bau∣deries; which act though most villanous and slaunderous, yet is made a sampler to some of our holy popes to imitate, and indeed hath of many beene put in practise: but to our porpose; whereas before his prodigality was so great as to scatter mony like seed amidst the people, now his niggardli∣nesse grew on the other side so miserable, that he would haue the people vpon the first day of the yeere, euery one to giue him a newyeres gift, hee himselfe standing at the dore of his house like a beggar, receiuing the peoples almes: moreouer,
of all that euer gaue their lusts the bridle to abuse other mens wiues hee was most impudent and notorious; for di∣uerse times hee vsed to feast many faire ladies and their hus∣bands, and after his good cheare ended, to ouerview them seuerally apart, as Marchants doe their wares, and to take hir that pleased his fancy best, into some secret place to abuse at his pleasure: neither after the deed done to be ashamed to glory and vaunt himselfe in his filthy and wicked act: Hee committed Incest with his owne sisters, forcing them to his lust, and by one of them had a daughter borne, whome (saith Eutropius) his abhominable concupiscence abused also in most filthy & preposterous maner: at length many conspired his destruction, but especially one of the Tribunes (which office wee may after the custome of our French nation right∣ly tearme the Marshalship and the officer (one of our foure Marshals, as Budeus saith) who shewed himselfe more ea∣gerly affected in the cause than the rest, pursued his enter∣prise in more speedy and desperate maner; for as the Tyrant returned from the Theatre by a by-way, to his pallace (the third day of the feast which hee celebrated in honour of Iu∣lius Caesar) the Tribune presented himselfe as if in regard of his office, to impart some matter of importance vnto him: and hauing receiued a currish word or two at his hands (as his custome was) hee gaue him so sodaine a stroke betweene the head and the shoulders, that what with it and the blowes of his complices, that going for the same entent rushed vpon him, he was slain amongst them, no man stirring a foot to de∣liuer him out of their handes, though many looked on and might haue aided him if they would; hee was no sooner slain but his wise incontinently was sent after, and his daughter al∣so, that was crushed to death against a wall: and thus came his wretched selfe with his filthie progeny, to a wretched and miserable end. Sueton.Nero shewed himselfe not onely an enemie to God in per∣secuting his church, but also a peruerter and disturber of hu∣mane nature in embruing his hands in the bloud of his owne
mother, and grandmother whome hee caused to bee put to death, and in killing his owne wife and sister, and infinit num∣bers of all kind of people: beside in Adulteries hee was so monstrous, that it is better to conceale them from modest eares, than to stir vp the puddle of so stinking and noisome a dunghill, for which his villanies the Senate condemned him to a shamefull and most ignominious death, & his armies and forces forsooke him: which when hee vnderstood he betoke him to flight and hid himselfe in an outway amongst thornes and bushes, which with great paine hauing past through be∣ing weary of his life, he threw himselfe downe into a pit foure foot deep, and when he could get none of his men to lay their hands vpon him, he desperately and miserably slew himselfe. Vitellius for the murders and other outragious misdeedes which he committed,Sueton. was taken in his shirt & drawn through the streetes with a halter about his necke, and his handes bound behind him, and the point of a dagger vnder his chin: the people casting durt and dung vpon him in detesta∣tion, and calling him make-bate and seditious villaine, with other opprobrious reproches, and at last being massacred with many blowes, was drawne with a hooke into Tiber like a carrion. Domitian was a cruell enemy of the Christians,Sueton. hee reie∣cted his owne wife to take a new, and being couertly reproo∣ued by Heluidius for the same, in a play of the diuorce of Paris and Enon, which he presented vnto him; he put him to death for his labor: many worthie Senators and chiefe men, and such as had borne the office of the Consull, without iust cause giuen of reprehension, were murdered by him; he spa∣red not his owne bloud and neerest allies, no nor his own bro∣ther Titus, but what with poyson and sword destroied them all to confusion. But in the end when hee saw that the world hated him for his outragious cruelties, he consul∣ted with the Astrologians and coniurers what death did wait for him: one of the which amongst the rest told him that he should be slaine and that very shortly: wherewithall being
sore troubled, hee first caused him that had prognosticated this euill vnto him to be slaine, then hee compassed himselfe with a strong guard, and to the end to see them that should come neare, he made his gallerie wals where hee walked of such a kind of glistering and shining stone, that he might see in them all about him, both behind and before: when the day and houre which was forecalculated for his death was come, one of the conspiratours came in with his left arme in a scarfe, as if hee had beene sore hurt, feigning that he would bewray the whole treason which he so much feared; and being en∣tred his chamber, presented him with a long discourse in wri∣ting, touching the matter and manner of the conspiracie: and when in reading the same hee saw him most astonished, then he tooke occasion to strike him suddenly into the belly with his dagger, his owne seruants making vp the murder, when they saw him go about to resist: and thus by all his wisdome and prouidence, he could not rid himselfe from being surpri∣sed, nor hinder the execution of Gods iust fore-appointed iudgement. And these were the ends of those wicked Empe∣rours, who in regard of their vile liues, were rather monsters then men, and not only they whome we haue named, but ma∣ny moe also, as Antonius Caracalla, Heliogabalus, and other like, may be worthily placed in this ranke. Tigellinus, one of the captaines of Neros guard, & a chiefe procurer and setter forward of his tyrannie, was the cause of the death of many great personages in Rome; and being en∣riched by their spoile and other such like robberies, after the death of Nero (whome in his extremity he forsooke) plunged himselfe and wallowed in all manner of licencious and disor∣dinate delights: now though he was worthy of a thousand deaths for his cruelties towards many good citizens, yet by the meanes of one Iunius, the Emperour Galba his chiefe mi∣nion, whose fauour he had by great summes of mony bought and obtained (for he gaue vnto his daughter at one time fiue and twenty thousand crownes, and to himselfe at another a carknet worth fifteene thousand crownes for a present) hee
was spared and kept in safetie: but as soone as Otho was instal∣led in the Empire, his downfall and destruction began pre∣sently to follow: for Otho to the end to gratifie the Romans, sent to apprehend him, who was then in his houses of plea∣sure in the field, banketting and sporting with his harlots, and vsing all manner of riot, albeit by reason of a deadly disease which was vpon him, he was euen at deaths dore. When he saw himselfe thus taken, and that no meanes of escape was left, (no not by the vessels which he had prepared at the sea shore for purpose if need were to conueigh him away) & that hee which had commission to take him, would giue him no aduantage of escaping, though he offered him great rewards for the same; he entreated only leisure to shaue his beard be∣fore he went, which being granted, he tooke a rasour, and in stead of shauing, cut his owne throat. CHAP. XLIII. More Examples of the same argument. HIeronymus, a true tyrant of Cicile,Tit. Livius. inured and fashioned to all pride, and of most corrupt and rotten manners, began right after the death of his father Hiero, (that left him a peaceable and quiet kingdom) to shew foorth his arrogancie; for hee quickely made himselfe fearefull to his subiects, both by his stately and proud manner of speech, as also by the hardnes of accesse vnto him, togither with a kind of disdainfull contempt of all men: but most of all did the in∣ward pride of his heart appeare, when he had gotten a guard about his body, for then hee ceased not to bait, bite, and de∣uoure, and to exercise all kind of cruelty against euery man, and all kind of riot and excesse of filthinesse against himselfe: so that hee became so odious and contemptible to his sub∣iects,
that they conspired against him to depriue him both of his life and kingdome: which conspiracie though it came to light, yet for all that wanted not his due effect: for after hee had (through listening to false reports) put to death vniustly his truest and dearest friends, and those that would indeed haue helped him in his necessitie, both with good aduise, & other succour; he was surprised as he walked in a narrow and straight way, and there cruelly murdered: Now there was one Andronodorus his brother in law, that aspiring to the crowne, had corrupted his manners, and thrust him forward to all these misdemeanours; to the end by those practises he might make him odious to his people, that by that meanes he might obtaine his owne purpose, as indeed he did: for af∣ter his death hee seazed vpon the scepter, though with no long enioyance, for through the troubles and commotions which were raised in the countrey by his meanes, both hee, his wife, and whole race, togither with the whole progenie of Hieronymus, whether innocent or guiltie, were all vtterly rooted out and defaced. Andronicus was one of the most wickedst men that liued on the earth in his time, for hee excelled in all kind of euill, in ambition, boldnesse in doing mischiefe, cruelty, whoredom, adultery, and incest; also to make vp the whole number, be∣sides he was so treacherous and disloiall, that he traiterously slew the sonne and heire of the Emperour Emanuel, shutting him in a sacke, and so throwing him into the sea: after which, by violence he tooke possession of the Empire of Constanti∣nople, and like a strong theefe seazed vpon that which was none of his owne: but assoone as hee had gotten his desire, then began his lusts to rage and raue, then hee fell to who∣ring and forcing women and maids to his lust; whome after hee had once robbed of their chastities, hee gaue ouer to his bauds and ruffians to abuse: and that which is more than all this, he rauished one of his owne sisters, and committed in∣cest with her: moreouer, to maintaine and vphold his tyra∣nous estate, hee slew most of the nobilitie, and all else that
bore any shew of honestie or credit with them, and liued al∣togither by wrongs and extortions: Wherefore his subiects (prouoked with these multitudes of euils which raigned in him, and not able to endure any longer his vile outrages and indignities) rebelled against him and besieged him, got him into their mercilesse hands, and handled him on this fashion following: first they degraded him and spoiled him of his im∣periall ornaments, then they pulled out one of his eyes, and set him vpon an asse backeward, with the taile in his hand in steed of a scepter, and a rope about his necke instead of a crowne: and in this order and attire they led him through all Constantinople, the people shouting and reuiling him on all sides, some throwing durt, others spittle, diuers dung, and the women their pispots at his head: after all which banketting dishes, he was transported to the gallowes, and there hanged to make an end of all. Charles king of Nauarre,Froyss. vol. 3. chap. 100. whose mother Ieane was daugh∣ter to Lewes Lutton king of France, was another that oppressed his subiects with cruelty and rough dealing, for hee imposed vpon them grieuous taxes and tributes, and when many of the chiefest of his common wealth came to make knowne vnto him the pouertie of his people, and that they were not able to endure any more such heauy burdens, he caused them all to be put to death for their boldnesse: he was the kindler of many great mischiefes in France, and of the fire wherewith diuers places of strength and castles of defence were burned to ashes: he counselled the Countie of Foix his sonne to poi∣son his father, and not only so, but gaue him also the poison with his owne hands, wherewith to doe the deed:Nich. Gilles. Moreo∣uer aboue all this, leacherie and adultery swaied his powers, euen in his old age, for at threescore yeeres of age hee had a whore in a corner, whose company he daily haunted, and so much, that she at length gaue him his deaths wound; for re∣turning from her company one day (as his vse was) & entring into his chamber, hee went to bed all quaking and halfe fro∣sen with cold, neither could hee by any meanes recouer his
heat, vntill by art they sought to supply nature, and blew vp∣on him with brasen bellows aquauitae and hote blasts of aire, but withall, the fire vnregarded flew betwixt the sheets, and inflamed the dry linnē togither with the aquauitae, so sudden∣ly, that ere any helpe could be made, his late quiuering bones were now halfe burned to death. It is true, that hee liued fif∣teene daies after this, but in so great griefe and torment, with∣out sense of any helpe or asswagement by phisicke or surgerie, that at the end thereof hee died miserably: and so as during his life his affection euer burnt in lust, and his mind was al∣waies hot vpon mischiefe and couetousnes; so his daies were finished with heat and cruell burning. Lugtake, king of Scots, succeeding his father Galdus in the kingdome, was so odious and mischieuous a tyrant, that eueryman hated him no lesse for his vices,Lanques. than they loued his father for his vertues: hee slew many rich and noble men for no other cause, but to inrich his treasury with their goods: he committed the gouernment of the realme to most vniust and couetous persons, and with their company was most de∣lighted: hee shamed not to defloure his owne aunts sisters & daughters, and to scorne his wise and graue counsellours, cal∣ling them old doting fooles: all which monstrous villanies (with a thousand more) so incensed his nobles against him, that they slew him after he had raigned three yeeres: but as the Prouerb goeth, seldome commeth a better, another or worse tyrant succeeded in his kingdome, namely Mogallus, cousen germane to Lugtake, a man notoriously infected with all manner of vices: for albeit in the beginning of his raigne he gaue himselfe to follow the wisdome and manners of his vncle Galdus, yet in his age his corrupt nature burst forth a∣bundantly, but chiefly in auarice, lechery, and cruelty: this was hee that licensed theeues and robbers to take the goods of their neighbours without punishment; and that first or∣dained the goods of condemned persons to be confiscate to the kings vse, without respect either of wiues, children, or creditours: for which crimes he was also slaine by his nobles.
Besides these, there was another king of the Scots, cal∣led Atherco, in the yeere of our Lord 240, who shewed him∣selfe also in like manner a most vile and abominable wretch;The same. for hee so wallowed in all manner of vncleane and effeminate lusts, that hee was not ashamed to go in the sight of the peo∣ple playing vpon a flute, reioycing more to be accounted a good fidlar than a good prince; from which vices hee fell at last to the deflouring and rauishing of maids and women, in so much as the daughters of his nobles could not bee safe from his insatiable and intollerable lust. Wherefore beeing pursued by them, when he saw no meanes to escape, he despe∣rately slew himselfe. The great outrages which the Spaniards haue committed in the West Indies, are apparant testimonies of their impiety, iniustice, crueltie, insatiable couetousnesse and luxurie, and the iudgements wherewith God hath hunted them vp and downe both by sea and land (as late and fresh histories doe testifie) are manifest witnesses of his heauy anger and displea∣sure against them: amongst all which, I will here insert none but that which is most notorious and worthy memory, as the wretched accident of Pamphilus Nauares and his companie: This man with sixe hundred Spaniards making for the coast of Florida to seeke the gold of the riuer of Palme trees,Benzoni Mil. were so turmoiled with vehement winds and tempests, that they could not keepe their vessels from dashing against the shore, so that their ships did all split in sunder, and they for the most part were drowned, saue a few that escaped to land, yet es∣caped not daunger; for they ranne rouing vp and downe this sauage countrey so long, till they fell into such extreame po∣uerty and famine, that for want of vittails, twelue of them de∣uoured one another: & of the whole sixe hundred that went forth, there neuer yet returned aboue ten, all the rest beeing either drowned or pined to death. Francis Pizare, a man of base parentage, for in his youth he was but a hogheard, and of worse qualities and education,Benzoni. for he knew not so much as the first elements of learning, gi∣uing
himselfe to the West Indian warres, grew to some cre∣dite in bearing office: but withall shewed himselfe very di∣sloiall, trecherous, and bloudy-minded in committing many odious and monstrous cruelties, entering Peru with an army of souldiours, to the end to conquer new lands and domini∣ons, and to glut his vnsatiable couetousnesse with a new surfet of riches, (after the true Spanish custome) hee committed many bloudie and traiterous acts, and exercised more than barbarous crueltie: for first vnder pretence of friendship, fai∣ning to parle with Artabaliba King of Cusco, the poore king comming with fiue and twenty thousand of vnarmed men, in ostentation of his greatnesse, not in purpose to resist: he wel∣commed him and his men so nimbly with swords and courte∣laxes, that they had all soone their throats cut by a most hor∣rible slaughter, & the king himself was taken & put in chains; yea and the city after this massacre of men abroad, felt soone the insolences of these braue warriors within: in fine though Pizarre promised Artabaliba to saue his life, in regard of a ransome amounting to more than two Millians of gold, yet after the receit thereof hee traiterously caused him to bee hanged: contrary to both his oth and all equitie and reason, but this cruel perfidie of his wēt not long without punishmēt, for both he and all the rest that were any waies accessary, or consenting to the death of this king came to a wretched end, but especially his foure brethren, Ferdinand, Gonzall, Iohn Martin of Alcantara, and Diego of Almagro; who as they were principall in the action, so were they in the punishment: the first that was punished was Iohn Pizarre, who with ma∣ny other Spaniards was surprised in the citie Cusco and slaine by the men of warre of Mangofrem and Artabaliba: next af∣ter that there arose such a deuision and heartburning betwixt the Pyzarres and Almagro & their partakers, that after they had robbed and wasted and shared out the great and rich countrie of Peru they slew one another by mutuall strokes: and albeit that there was by common consent an agreement accorded betwixt them, for the preseruing of their vnity, and
friendship, yet Francis Pizarre enuying that Almagro should be gouernour of Cusco & he not, interrupted all their agre∣ments by starting from his promises, and rekindled the halfe quenched fire of war by his own ambitiō: for he presently de∣fied Almagro, & sent his brother Ferdinand before to bid him battaile, who so well behaued himselfe that he tooke Alma∣gro prisoner, and deliuered him bound to his brother Francis, who caused him to bee strangled in prison secretly, and after to be beheaded in publicke: now Ferdinand being sent by his brother towards Spaine with a great masse of gold to cleare himselfe of the death of Almagro could not so well iustifie the fact as that all his treasure could saue him frō the prison, & what became of him afterwards knowne it is to God, but not to the world. A while after the fellows and friends of Al∣magro, whose goods the Pizarrists had seazed vpon, tooke counsell with Don Diego Almagro his sonne to reuenge the death of his father, therefore being in number but twelue, with vnsheathed swords, they desperately burst into Francis Pizarres house, (then Marques and gouernor of Peru) and at the first brunt slew a captaine that guarded the entrance of the hall, and next him Martin of Alcantara, with other moe that kept the entrance of the chamber, so that hee fell dead euen at his brother the Marquesses feet: who albeit his men were all slaine before his eies, & himselfe left alone amidst his enemies, yet gaue not ouer to defend himselfe stoutly and manfully, vntill all of them setting vpon him at once, he was stabd into the throat & so sel dead vpon the ground, and thus finished he & his cōplices their wretched daies, answerable to their cruell deserts: but their murderers (though they de∣serued to be thus delt withal) yet for dealing in this sort with∣out authority, were not faultlesse, but receiued the due wages of their furious madnes; for Don Diego himself after he had ben a while gouernor of Peru had his army ouercome & discōfi∣ted by the Emperors force, & was betraied into their hāds by his own lieutenant of Cusco, where he thought to haue saued himself: & right soon lost his head with the greatest captains
and fauourits that hee had, who were also quartered. Now of the fiue brethren wee haue heard foure of their destructi∣on, onely one remaineth (namely Gonzalle Pyzare) to bee spoken of, who being sent for by the conquerors to be their chiefetaine and Protector against the Viceroy, that went about to make them obserue the Emperours lawes and de∣crees, touching the liberty of the Indian Nation, was betrai∣ed and forsaken by the same men that sent for him, and so fell into his enemies hands that cut off his head: the Generall of his army, a couetous and cruell man, that in short space made away aboue three hundred Spaniards, and all as it were with his owne hand, was drawne vp and downe at a horse taile, the space of halfe a quarter of an houre, and then hanged vpon the gallowes, and quartered in foure parts. The Munke of Vauuard called Vincent, who with his crosse & porteise had encouraged Pizarre & his army against Artabaliba, and was for that cause treated bishop of Peru, when Diego came to the gouernement fled into the Island Puna to escape his wrath, but in seeking to auoid him hee fell into as great a snare, for the Islanders assaulted him one night, and knockt him to death with staues and clubs, togither with fortie Spaniards of his fellowship, that accompanied him in his flight and started not from him in his death. And thus the good and holy Monke for medling with and setting forward the murder of so many poore people, was for his paines and good deeds iustly rewarded by the Indians of that Island. Moreouer, after & beside al these troubles, seditions, & ci∣uill wars of Peru, all they that returned from Spaine suffered shipwrack for the most part, for their fleet had scarse attained the midst of their course, whē there arose so terrible a tēpest, that of 18 ships, 13 so perished that they were neuer heard of after: & of the fiue which remained, two were tūbled back to the coast of S. Dominick, al berent & shiuered in peeces: o∣ther three were driuen to Spain; wherof one hitting against the bay of Portugal lost many of hir mē, the admiral hir selfe of this fleet, perished neere vnto S. Lucar de barra meda, with
two hundred persons that were within her: and but one onely of them all got safe into the hauen of Calix without dam∣mage. Here we may see how mightily the hand of God was stretched foorth to the reuenge of those wicked deedes and villanies which were committed by the Spaniards in those quarters. Peter Loys bastard son to Pope Paule the third,Sleidan lib. 19. Bal. was one that practised many horrible villanies, robberies, murders, adulte∣ries, incest, and Sodomitries, thinking that because his father was Pope therefore no wickednesse was vnlawfull for him to commit. He was by the report of all men, one of the most notorious, vildest, and filthiest villaines that euer the world saw: he forced the Bishop of Faence to his vnnaturall lust; so that the poore Bishop with meere anger and griefe that hee should be so abused died immediately: being made Duke of Plaisence and Parme hee exercised most cruell tyrany to∣wards many of his subiects; insomuch that diuerse gentlemen that could not brooke nor endure his iniuries, conceiued an inward hate against him and conspired his death: and for to put in practise the same they hired certaine ruffians and roi∣sters to watch the oportunitie of slaying him, yea and they themselues oftentimes, went apart with these roisters, kee∣ping themselues vpon their guards, as if some priuate and par∣ticular quarrels had beene in hand, one day as the Duke went in his horselitter out of his castell: with a great retinue to see certaine fortifications which he had prepared, being aduerti∣sed by his father the Pope (by the helpe of Magicke which he practised) to looke diligently to himselfe the tenth day of September, in which notwithstanding he was slaine: for as he returned into his castell the conspirators to the number of sixe and thirtie, marched before him as it were to do him ho∣nor, but indeed to doe him villany: for assoone as he was en∣tred the castell, they drew vp the drawbridge for feare of his retinue that were without, and comming to him with their naked swords, cast in his teeth his tyrannie, and so slew him in his litter, togither with a Priest, the maister of his horse, and
fiue Almaignes that were of his guard: his dead body they hung by a chaine ouer the wals, and shaking it to and fro to the view of the people, threw it downe headlong at last into the ditch; where the multitude to shew their hates, woun∣ded it with daggers, and trampled it vnder their feet, and so whome they durst not touch in his life, him being dead, they thus abused: and this befell vpon the tenth day of Septem∣ber in the yeere of our Lord 1547. Some of the Bishops of Rome for their rare and notable vertues, and the glory of their braue deeds, may be honou∣red with this dignity, to be placed in this worthy ranke, for their good conditions and behauiours were such, that no ty∣rant, butcher, theefe, robber, ruffian, nor any other, euer ex∣celled them in crueltie, robbery, adulterie, and such like wic∣kednesse, or deserued more the credit and reputation of his place than they: And hereof we haue a manifest example in Iohn the thirteenth, who pulling out the eies of some of his Cardinals, cutting out the tongues of others, hewing off the hands, noses, and priuy members of others, shewed himselfe a patterne of such crueltie, as the world neuer saw the like: Hee was accused before the Emperour Otho in a synode, first of incest with two of his owne sisters, secondly for calling the deuill to helpe him at dice, thirdly for promoting young in∣fants to bishoprickes, bribed thereto by the gift of certaine peeces of gold, fourthly for rauishing maides and wiues, and lying with his fathers concubine, yea and lastly, for lying with his owne mother, and many other such monstrous villa∣nies; for which cause hee was deposed from the papacie, though reinstalled againe by the sute and cunning practise of his whores, by whome as hee recouered his triple crowne, so he lost shortly after his vicious life, by the meanes of a marri∣ed whore that betraied him. Benno. Bal.Pope Hildebrand sirnamed Gregory the seuenth, was ador∣ned with all these good qualities; namely to be bloody min∣ded, a poisoner, a murderer, a coniurer, also a consulter with spirits; and in a word, nothing but a lumpe and masse of wic∣kednesse:
hee was the stirrer vp of many battels against the Emperor Henry the fourth; and a prouoker of his own son to depose and poyson his father as hee did, but this wicked (I would say holy) Pope was at last banished his Cathedrall ci∣tie to Salernum, where he ended his daies in miserie. Pope Clement the sixt of name contrary to his nature, for his inclemencie, crueltie & pride towards the Emperor Lewis of Bauarie, was intollerable; he procured many horrible wars against the Empire, and caused the destruction of twenty thousand Frenchmen by the king of England, yea and poyso∣ned the good Emperour also so well he wished to him: How∣beit ere long himselfe was stifled to death, and that sodainly, not by any practise of man as it was thought, but by the speci∣all hand of God, in recompence of all his notable acts. Iohn the foure and twentith was deposed by the councell of Constance for these crimes following; heresie, Simonie,Benno. Bal. manslaughter, poysonings, cousenings, adultry, & Sodomitry, and was cast into prison, where remaining three years he fals∣ly made shew of amendment of his wicked life, & therefore was graced with a Cardinals hat, but it was not that which he expected, for which cause with despight & griefe he died. It would bee too long to run ouer the discourse of euery particular Pope of like conditions, and therefore wee will contēt our selues in briefe with the legend of Pope Alexan∣der the sixt, reported by two authors of credite and renowne, & vnsuspected, to wit, Guicciardine a Florentine gentlemā,Guicciardine. lib. 2. Bembus. & Bembus a Venetian cardinall: this man (saith Guicciardine) at∣tained to the Papacy, not by worthinesse of vertues, but by heauinesse of bribes and multitude of faire promises made to the cardinals for his election, promising large recompence to them that stood on his side, whereupon many that knew his course of life were filled with astonishment, amongst whome was the king of Naples, who hearing of this election, cōplai∣ned to his queene with tears, that there was such a pope crea∣ted, that wold be a plague to Italy & al Christēdome: beside, the great vices which swaied in him, of which the same author
speaking, maketh this catalogue and pettigree in his own lan∣guage which followeth.Guitardine. lib. 2. Costum (d it il) oscensimi non sincerita, non verita, non fede, non religione; auaritia, insatiabile, ambitio∣ne, immoderata crudelta pinque barbara, eo ardentissima cupidita di escaltare in qualunque modo, i figli voli: i quali erano molti, (that is to say) He was endued with most filthie conditions, and that neither sincerity, truth, faith, nor religion was in him: but in steed of them couetousnesse vnquenchable, ambition vnmeasurable, more then barbarous crueltie, and a burning desire of promoting his owne children (for he had many) by what meanes soeuer. He persuaded king Charles the eight of Fraunce to vndertake war against Naples; and after hee had brought him to it, presently he forsooke him and entred a new league with the Venetians,Venetian histor. lib. 6. and the other princes of Italy to driue him home again. This was he (saith Cardinall Bembus) that set benefices and promotions to sale, that hee which would giue most, might haue most; and that poysoned Iohn Michell the Cardinall of Venice at Rome, for his gold and treasure which hee abounded with: whose insatiable coue∣tousnesse prouoked him to the committall of all mischiefe, to the end he might maintaine the forces of his son, who went about to bring the whole lands and dominions of all Italy in∣to his possession: in adulteries hee was most filthy and abho∣minable, in tyrany most cruell, and in Magicke most cun∣ning, and therefore most execrable: supping one night with Cardinall Adrian his very familiar friend, in his gardē, hauing foreappointed his destruction that night by poyson; through the negligence and ouersight of his butler to whom hee had giuen the exploit in charge, that was deceiued by mistaking the bottles, hee dranke himselfe the medicine which he had prepared for his good friend the Cardinall: and so hee died (saith Bembus) not without an euident marke of Gods heauy wrath, in that he which had slaine so many Princes and rich men to enioy their treasures, and went now about to murder his host which entertained him with friendship and good cheare into his house, was caught in the same snare which he
had laid, and destroied by the same meanes himselfe, which he had destinated for another; being thus dead, the whole ci∣ty of Rome (saith Guicciardine) ran out with greedines & ioy to behold his carcasse, not being able to satisfie their eies with beholding the dead serpent, whose venime of ambition, tre∣cherie, cruelty, adultry, & auarice, had impoisoned the whole world. Some say that as he purposed to poyson certaine Car∣dinals, he poysoned his owne father, that being in their com∣pany chanced to get a share of his dregs: and that hee was so abhominable to abuse his owne sister Lucrece in the way of filthines. When Gemen the brother of Baiazet the Emperor of the Turkes came and surrendred himselfe into his hands, & was admitted into his protection, he being hired with two hundred duccats by Baiazet, gaue poyson to his new client, euen to him to whom hee had before sworne and vowed his friendship: besides, that he might mainteine his tyranny hee demanded and obtained aid of the Turke against the king of France, which was a most vnchristian and antichristian part; he caused the tongue & two hands of Antony Manciuellus (a very learned & wise man) to be cut off, for an excellent orati∣on which he made in reproofe of his wicked demeanours and dishonest life. It is written moreouer by some that hee was so affectionated to the seruice of his good Lord and master the deuil, that he neuer attempted any thing without his counsel and aduise, who also presented himself vnto him at his death in the habite of a post, according to the agreement which was betwixt them: and although this wretched Antichrist straue against him for life, saying that his terme was not yet finished; yet he was enforced to diflodge and depart into his proper place, where with horrible cries and hideous fearefull grones he died. Thus we see how miserable such wretched and infamous miscreants and such pernicious & cruell Tyrants, haue ended their wicked liues, their force & power being execrable and odious,In his book of the clemencie of a prince. and therfore (as saith Seneca) not able to continue any long time, for that gouernment cannot bee firme and stable,
where there is no shame nor feare to doe euill, nor where e∣quity, iustice, saith, and piety with other vertues are contem∣ned and troden vnder foot; for when cruelty once beginnerh to predominate, it is so vnsatiable that it neuer ceaseth but groweth euery day from worse to worse, by striuing to main∣taine and defend old faults by new, vntill the fear and terror of the poore afflicted and oppressed people with a continuall source and enterchange of euils which surcharge them, con∣uerteth it selfe from forced patience, to willing fury, & brea∣keth forth to doe vengeance vpon the tyrants heads with all violence: whence ariseth that saying of the Satyricall Poet to the same sence, Where he saith; Ad generum ce∣reris sine cede & sanguine pauci: Descendunt re∣ges & sicca morte tyranni.Few tyrants die the death that nature sends, But most are brought by slaughter to their ends. CHAP. XLIIII. Of calumniation and false witnesse bearing. WEe haue seene heretofore what punishments the Lord hath laid vpon those that either vex their neighbours in their persons, as in the breakers of the fift, sixt, and seuenth commandements; or dammage thē in their goods, as in the eight: now let vs looke vn∣to those that seeke to spoile them of their good names and rob them of their credite by slanderous reproches and false and forged calumniations, and by that means goe against the ninth commandement, which sayth, Thou shalt not beare false witnesse against thy neighbour: in which words is condemned generally all slanders, all false reports, all defamations, and all euill speech els whatsoeuer, wherby the good name and cre∣dit of a man is blemished, stained, or impouerished; and this sin is not onely inhibited by the diuine law of the almighty, but also by the lawes of nature and nations, for there is no country and people so barbarous with whom these pernicious
kind of creatures are not held in detestation: of tame beasts (sayth Diogenes) a flatterer is worst, and of wild beasts a backbiter or a slaunderer, and not without great reason; for as there is no disease so daungerous as that which is se∣cret, so there is no enemy so pernicious as hee which vnder the colour of friendship biteth and slandereth vs behind our backes; but let vs see what iudgements the Lord hath shown vpon them, to the end the odiousnesse of this vice may more clearely appeare. And first to begin with Doeg the Edomir,1. Sam. 22.9. who falsly accu∣sed Achimelech the high priest vnto Saul, for giuing succor vn∣to Dauid in his necessity & flight; for though he told nothing but that which was true, yet of that truth, some he maliciously peruerted, & some he kept back: & falshood cōsisteth not on∣ly in plain lying, but also in concealing or misusing the truth; for Achimelech indeed asked counsell of the Lord for Dauid, & ministred vnto him the shew bread & the sword of Goliah, but not with any intent of malice against king Saul, for he sup∣posed and Dauid also made him beleeue that he went about the kings businesse, & that he was in great fauor with the king: which last clause the wicked accuser left out, & by that means not only prouoked the wrath of Saul against the high priest, but also when al other refused, became himselfe executioner of his wrath and murdered Achimelech with al the nation of the priests, and smote Nob the city of the priests with the edge of the sword, both man & woman, child & suckling, oxe and asse, not leauing any aliue (so beastly was his cruelty) saue Abiathar only one of the sons of Achimelech, that fled to Da∣uid & brought him tidings of this bloudy massacre. But did this cruel accuser escape scotfree? No, the spirit of God in the 52 Psalm proclaimeth his iudgement:Psal. 52.1.2.5. Why beastest thou in thy wickednes thou tyrant, thy tongue imagineth mischeife, and is like a sharpe rasor that cutteth deceitfully, &c. but God shall destroy thee for euer, hee shall take thee and pluck thee out of thy taber∣nacle, and root thee out of the land of the liuing. Next to this man,1. Kin. 21. we may iustly place Achab the king of
Israel, & Iesabel his wife, who to the end to get the possession of Naboths vineyard (which being his inheritance hee would not part from) suborned by his wiues pernicious councell false accusers, wicked men, to witnesse against Naboth, that he had blasphemed God & the king, & by that means caused him to bestoned to death: but mark the iudgemēt of God denoūced against them both, by the mouth of Elias for this wicked fact, Hast thou killed (saith he) and taken possession? Thus saith the Lord, In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs euen licke thy bloud also: & as for Iezabel, dogs shal eat her by the wall of Israell, thy house shall be like the house of Ierobo∣am the son of Nebat, I will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, &c. Neither was this onely denounced but executed also, as we may read, 1. Kin. 22.38. & 2. Kin. 9.36.37. &c. & 2. Kin. 10.7, &c. Amos. 7.17.Amaziah the priest of Bethel vnder Ieroboam the wicked king of Israel, perceiuing how the Prophet Amos prophecied against the idolatry of that place, & of the king he falsly accu∣sed him to Ieroboam to haue cōspired against him, also he ex∣horted him to flie frō Bethel, because it was the kings chap∣pell, & flie into Iudah, and prophecy there: but what said the Lord vnto him by the prophet? Thy wife shall be an harlot in the city, thy sons and thy daughters shall fal by the sword, & thy land shall be deuided by liue, and thou shalt die in a polluted land: loe there was the punishment of his false accusation. Ester. 7.10.How notable was the iudgement that the Lord manifested vpon Haman the Syrian for his false accusing of the Iewes, to be disturbers of the Commonwealth & breakers of the laws of king Ahasuerash? did not the Lord turne his mischiefe vp∣on his owne head? The same day which was appointed for their destruction, the Lord turned it to the destructiō of their enemies, and the same gallows which hee prepared for Mor∣decai was he himselfe hanged vpon. Daniel. 6.The mē that falsly accused Daniel to king Darius for brea∣king the kings edict, which was, that none shold make any re∣quest vnto any for 30 daies space, saue only to the king himself
fared no better: for when as hee found Daniell praying vnto God, they presently accused him vnto the king, vrging him with the stability which ought to bee in the decrees of the kings of Medea and Persia, that ought not to bee altered, in such sort that king Darius (though against his will) comman∣ded Daniell to be throwne amongst the lions to be deuoured of them, but when he saw how miraculously the Lord preser∣ued him from the teeth of the lyons, and thereby perceiued his innocency, hee caused his enuious accusers to be throwne into the lyons den with their wiues and children, who were deuoured of the lyons ere they could fall to the ground. Notorious is the example of the two iudges that accused Susanna, both how she was deliuered and they punished: the credit of which history, because it is doubtfull I here omit to speake further of. But let vs come to prophane histories, Apelles that fa∣mous painter of Ephesus, felt the sting and bitternesse of this venomous viper, for hee was falsly accused by Antiphillus a∣nother painter, an enuier of his art and excellent workman∣ship, to haue conspired with Theodota against king Ptolomie, and to haue ben the cause of the defection of Pelusium from him, which accusation hee laid against him, to the end that seeing hee could not attaine to that excellencie of art which he had,Theat. histor. he might by this false pretence work his disgrace and ouerthrow, as indeed hee had effected had not great persua∣sions been vsed, and manifest proofes alledged of Apelles in∣nocency and integrity, wherefore Ptolomie hauing made tri∣al of the cause, and found out the false and wrongful practise, he most iustly rewarded Apelles with an hundred talents, & Antiphillus the accuser with perpetual seruitude: vpō which occasion Apelles in remembrance of that danger painted out calumniation on this maner; a woman gaily attired, and dres∣sed with an angrie and furious countenance, holding in her left hand a torch, and with her right a young man by the hair of the head, before whome marched an euill fauoured slut∣tish vsher quicke sighed and palefaced, called Enuie, at her
right hand sat a fellow with long eares like king Midas, to re∣ceiue tales, and behind her two waiting maids, Ignorance, & Suspition: and thus the wittie painter to delude his owne e∣uill hap expressed the liuely image and nature of that detra∣cting sin.Vide li. 1. ca. 12. example of Nero. Euseb. li. 9. ca. 5. This tricke vsed Maximinus the tyrant to deface the do∣ctrine and religion of Christ in his time, for when he saw that violence & torments preuailed not,Nicep. li. 7. c. 27. but that like the palme, the more it was trodden and oppressed the more it grew, hee vsed this subtlety and craft to vndermine it: he published di∣uerse bookes full of blasphemie of a conference betwixt Christ and Pilate, and caused them to bee taught to children in steed of their first elements that they might no sooner speake thàn hate and blaspheme Christ: moreouer, he con∣strained certain wicked and lend women to auouch that they were Christians, and that vile filthinesse was daily commit∣ted by them in their assemblies, which also he published farre and neer in writing: howbeit for all this the Lords truth quai∣led not, but swum as it were against the streame, and encrea∣sed in despight of enuy; as for these false accusers they were punished one after another with notable iudgements: for one that was a chiefe doer therein became his own murderer, and Maximinus himselfe was consumed with wormes and rotten∣nesse, as hath ben shewed in the former booke. It was a law among the Romans, that if any man had en∣formed an accusation against another,Euse. li. 5. ca. 21. either wrongfully, vn∣lawfully, or without probability, both his legs should be brokē in recompence of his malice:Nice. li. 4. c. 26. which custome as it was lauda∣ble and necessary, so was it put in execution at diuerse times, as namely vnder the Emperor Commodus, when a prophane wretch accused Apollonius (a godly & profest Christiā, & af∣terward a constant martyr of Christ Iesus) before the iudges, of certaine greeuous crimes, which when he could by no co∣lour or likelihood of truth conuince & proue, they adiudged him to that ignominious punishment to haue his legs broken, because he had accused & defamed a man without cause.
Eustathius bishop of Antioch, a man famous for eloquence in speech & vprightnesse of life,Nicep. li. 8. c. 46. whē as he impugned the he∣resie of the Arians, was circumuented by them and deposed from his bishoprick by this meanes: they suborned a naughtie strumpet to come in with a child in her armes, and in an open synode of two hundred & fiftie bishops to accuse him of A∣dultery, & to sweare that he had got that child of her body, which though hee denied constantly, & no iust proofe could bee brought against him, yet the impudent strumpets oth tooke such place, that by the Emperours censure hee was ba∣nished from his bishopricke; howbeit ere long his innocencie was knowne, for the said strumpet being deseruedly touched with the finger of Gods iustice in extreame sicknesse, con∣fessed the whole practise how shee was suborned by certaine Bishops to slander this holy man, and that yet shee was not altogether a lier, for one Eustathius a handy-crafts man got the child as she had sworne, and not Eustathius the bishop. The like slander the same heretikes deuised against Atha∣nasius in a synode conuocated by Constantine the Emperour at Tyrus,Phil. Melanct. chro. lib. 3. Nicep. li. 9. c. 23. for they suborned a certaine leud woman to exclaime vpon the holy man in the open assembly for rauishing of her that last night against hir will: which slander he shifted of by this deuise, hee sent Timotheus the presbiter of Alexandria into the synode in his place, who comming to the woman as∣ked her before them all, whether she durst say that hee had rauished her; to whom she replied, yea I swear and vow that thou hast done it (for she supposed it to haue ben Athanasius, whom shee neuer saw) whereat the whole synode perceiued the cauill of the lying Arrians, and quitted the innocencie of that good man. Howbeit these malicious heretiks seeing this practise not to succeed inuented another worse than the for∣mer, for they accused him to haue slaine one Arsenius whom they themselues kept secret, and that hee carried one of his hands about him, wherewith he wrought miracles by enchāt∣ment: but Arsenius touched by the spirit of God stole away from thē & came to Athanasius, to the end he should receiue
no dammage by his absence, whom he brought into the iud∣ges, and shewed them both his hands, confounded his accu∣sers with shame of their malice, insomuch as they ran away for feare, and satisfied the iudges both of his integrity and their enuious calumniation: the chiefe broker of all this mis∣chiefe was Stephanus bishop of Antioch, but he was degraded from his bishoprick, and Leontius elected in his roome. Histor. tripart.Hetherto we may adde the example of one William Fe∣ming, who accused an honest man called Iohn Cooper, of spea∣king traiterous words against Queene Mary, and all because he would not fell him two goodly bullockes which he much desired, for which cause the poore man being arraigned at Berry in Suffolke was condemned to death by reason of two false witnesses which the said Feming had suborned for that purpose, whose names were White and Greenewood; so this poore man was hanged drawne and quartered and his goods taken from his poore wife and nine children, which are left destitute of all helpe: but as for his false accusers one of them died most miserably, for in haruest time being well and lusty, of a sodaine his bowels fell out of his body, and so hee peri∣shed; the other two what ends they came vnto it is not repor∣ted, but sure the Lord hath reserued a sufficient punishment for all such as they are. Acts and mon. pag 2100.Many more be the examples of this sinne and iudgements vpon it as the pilleries at Westminster and daily experience beareth witnesse, but these that wee haue alledged shall suf∣fice for this purpose: because this sin is cousen Germane vnto periurie, of which you may read more at large in the former booke. It should now follow by course of order if wee would not pretermit any thing of the law, of God to speake of such as haue offended against the tenth commandement, & what punishment hath ensued the same, but for so much as all such offences, for the most part are encluded vnder the former, of which we haue alreadie spoken, and that there is no adultery nor fornication, nor theft, nor vniust-warre, but it is annexed to and proceedeth from the affection, and the resolution of an
euill and disordinate concupiscense, as the effect from the cause: therefore it is not necessary, to make any particular re∣citall of them, more than may well be collected out of the former examples added hereunto, that in simple concupis∣cense and affection of doing euill which commeth not to act, (though it be in the sight of God condemned to euerlasting torments) yet it doth not so much incurre and prouoke his in∣dignation, that a man should for that onely cause be brought to apparant destruction, and be made an example to others, to whome the sinne is altogither darke and vnknowne, there∣fore wee will proceed in our purpose without intermedling in speciall with this last commandement. CHAP. XLV. That kings and princes ought to looke to the execution of Iustice, for the punishment of naughtie and corrupt manners. NO man ought to be ignorant of this, that it is the duty of a prince, not onely to hin∣der the course of sinne, from bursting into action, but also to punish the doers of the same, making both ciuill iustice to be ad∣ministred vprightly, and the law of God to be regarded and obserued inuiolably: for to this end are they ordained of God, that by their means euery one might liue a quiet and peaceable life, in all godli∣nesse and honestie: to the which end, the maintenance and administration of iustice beeing most necessary, they ought not so to discharge themselues of it, as to translate it vpon their officers and iudges, but also to looke to the execution thereof themselues, as it is most needfull: for if law (which is the foundation of iustice) be (as Plato saith) a speechlesse and dumbe magistrate, who shall giue voice and vigour vnto it,
if not hee that is in supreame and soueraigne authority? for which cause the king is commaunded in Deuteronomie,Deu. 17.18, 19 To haue before him alwaies the booke of the law, to the end to doe iustice and iudgement to euery one in the feare of God. And before the creation of kings in Israel, the chiefe cap∣taines and soueraignes amongst them, were renowmed with no other title nor quality, than of Iudges. In the time of De∣borah the Prophetesse, though shee was a woman the weaker vessell, yet because shee had the conducting and gouerning of the people, they came vnto her to seeke iudgement. It is said of Samuel, that hee iudged Israel so long, till being tired with age and not able to beare that burden any longer, he ap∣pointed his sonnes for iudges in his stead: who when through couetousnesse they peruerted iustice,Iudg. 4. 1. Sam. 7.8. and did not execute iudgement like their father Samuel, they gaue occasion to the people to demaund a king, that they might be iudged & gouerned after the manner of other nations: which things sufficiently declared, that in old time the principall charge of kings, was personally to administer iustice and iudgement; and not as now to transfer the eare thereof to others. The same we read of king Dauid, of whome it is said, That during his raigne,1. Chron. 18. he executed iustice and iudgement among his people: and in another place, that men came vnto him for iudgement,2. Sam. 15. and therefore hee disdained not to heare the complaint of the woman of Tekoah, shewing himselfe herein a good prince, and as the angell of God to heare good and euill:2. Sam. 14. for this cause Salomon desired not riches nor long life of the Lord, but a wise and discreete heart to iudge his peo∣ple,1. King. 3. and to discerne betwixt good and euill: which request was so agreeable and acceptable to God, that he graunted it vnto him, so that he obtained such an excellent measure of incomparable wisdome, that hee was commended and repu∣ted more for it, than for all his great riches and pretious trea∣sures beside: there is mention mad in the booke of the kings of his iudiciall throne wherein hee vsed to sit and heare the causes of the people, and execute iustice among them; and
albeit he was the most puissant and glorious king of the earth, yet notwithstanding hee scorned not to heare two harlots plead before him about the controuersie of a dead infant. Ioram, king of Israel, son of Achab,2. King 6. though a man that wal∣ked not vprightly before God, but gaue himselfe to worke a∣bomination in his sight, yet he despised not the complaint of the poore affamished woman of Samaria, when shee deman∣ded iustice at his hands, although it was in the time of warre when lawes vse to be silent, and in the besieging and famish∣ment of the citie: neither did hee reiect the Sunamites re∣quest, for the recouery of her house & lands,2. King 8. but caused them to be restored vnto her. So that then it is manifest, that those kings which in old time raigned ouer the people of God, al∣beit they had in euery city Iudges, yea and in Ierusalem also, as it appeareth in the 19 chapter of the second book of Chro∣nicles, yet they ceased not for all that to giue eare to suites and complaints that were made vnto them, and to decide controuersies that came to their knowledge: and for this cause it is that Wisdome saith, That by her, kings raigne,Prou 8.15. and prin∣ces decree iustice: whereunto also belongeth that which is said in another place, That a king sitting in the throne of iudgement, chaseth away all euill with his eyes.Prou. 20.8. Moreouer, that this was the greatest part of the office and duty of kings in ancient times, to see the administration of iu∣stice, Homer the Poet may bee a sufficient witnesse, when hee saith of Agamemnon, That the scepter and law was commit∣ted to him by God, to do right to euery man; answerable to the which, Virgil (describing the Queene of Carthage) saith, Shee sate in iudgement in the midst of her people: as if there was nothing more beseeming such a person than such an acti∣on. And therefore the Poets not without cause faigne Iupiter alwaies to haue Themis (that is to say, Iustice) at his elbow: signifying thereby, not that whatsoeuer kings or princes did, was iust and lawfull, bee it neuer so vile in it owne nature (as that wanton flatterer Anaxarthus said to Alexander) but that equity & iustice should alwaies accōpany thē, & neuer depart
from their sides. And hereupon it was, that Acacus, Minos, and Radamanthus the first king of Grecia, were so renowmed of old antiquity, because of their true and vpright execution of iustice, and therefore were not honoured with any greater title, than the name of Iudges. Plutarch.It is said of king Alexander, that although he was continu∣ally busied in the affaires of warre, and of giuing battailes, yet he would sit personally in iudgement to heare criminall cau∣ses and matters of importance pleaded: and that whilst the accuser laid open his accusation he would stop one eare with his hand, to the end that the other might bee kept pure and without preiudice, for the defence and answer of the accused. The Romane Emperours also were very carefull and diligent in this behalfe;Sueton. as first Iulius Caesar, who is recorded to haue taken great paines in giuing audience to parties, and in dealing iustice betwixt them. In like manner Augustus Caesar is com∣mended for his care and trauaile in this behalfe, for he would ordinarily sit in iudgement vpon causes and controuersies of his subiects, and that with such great delight and pleasure, that often times night was faine to interrupt his course, before his will was to relinquish it; yea though hee found himselfe euill at ease, yet would hee not omit to apply himselfe to the diuision of iudgement, or else calling the parties before him to his bed. The Emperour Claudius, though a man otherwise of a dull and grosse spirit, yet in this respect hee discharged the dutie of a good prince, for that hee would intermeddle with hea∣ring his subiects causes, and doe right vnto them: He chaun∣ced once to make a very prety and witty end of a sute betwixt a sonne and his mother, who denying and disclaiming him to be her sonne, was by the Emperour commanded to marry him; & so least shee should agree to that mischiefe, was con∣strained to acknowledge and auow him for her sonne: and to be short, it was very ordinary and vsuall among the Empe∣rours, to take knowledge of matters controuerted; but espe∣cially of criminall and capitall causes, by meanes whereof
the Apostle Paul desirous to shew the iudgement and lyings in waight of his enemies the Iewes, appealed from them to Caesar, which he would neuer haue done, if Caesar had not in some sort vsed to meddle with such affaires: and for further proofe hereof, hither may be added the saying which is re∣ported of Nero in the beginning of his raigne, That when he should signe with his hand a sentence of death against a con∣demned person, hee wished that he could neither wright nor read, to the end to auoid that necessary action. The bold answer of an old woman to the Emperour A∣drian is very worthy to be remembred;Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 2. who appealing and complaining to the Emperour of some wrong, when hee an∣swered that he was not at leisure then to heare her sute, shee told him boldly and plainly, That then he ought not to be at leisure to be her Emperour: which speech went so neare the quicke vnto him, that euer after he shewed more facilitie and courtesie towards all men that had any thing to do with him. The kings of Fraunce vsed also this custome of hearing and deciding their subiects matters, as wee read of Charlemaigne the king and Emperour, who commanded that he should be made acquainted with all matters of importance, and their is∣sues, throughout his realme. King Lewes the first treading the steps of his father Charlemaigne, accustomed himselfe three daies in a weeke, to heare publikely in his pallace the com∣plaints and grieuances of his people, and to right their wrongs and iniuries. King Lewes sirnamed the Holy,Aimo. a little before his death, gaue in charge to his sonne that should succeed him in the crowne, amongst other, this precept, To be care∣full to beare a stroke in seeing the distribution of iustice, and that it should not be peruerted not depraued.
CHAP. XLVI. Of such princes as haue made no reckening of punishing vice, nor regarded the estate of their people. IT cannot choose but be a great confusion in a common-wealth, when iustice sleepeth, and when the shamelesse boldnesse of euill doers is not curbed in with any bridle, but runneth it owne swinge: and therefore a Consull of Rome could say, That it was an euill thing to haue a prince, vnder whome li∣cense and libertie is giuen to euery man to doe what him li∣steth: for so much then as this euill proceedeth from the carelesnes and slothfulnesse of those that hold the sterne of gouernment in their hands, it can not be but some euill must needs fall vpon them for the same: The truth of this may appeare in the person of Philip of Macedonie, (whome De∣mosthenes the oratour noteth for a treacherous and false dea∣ling prince:) after that he had subdued almost all Greece, not so much by open warre, as by subtilty, craft, and surprise, and that being in the top of his glory, hee celebrated at one time the marriage of his sonne Alexander, whome hee had lately made king of Epire, and of one of his daughters with great pompe and magnificense: as hee was marching with all his traine betwixt the two bridegroomes, (his owne sonne & his sonne in law) to see the sports and pastimes which were pre∣pared for the solemnitie of the marriage, behold suddenly a young Macedonian gentleman called Pausanias, ran at him, and slew him in the midst of the prease, for not regarding to doe him iustice when hee complained of an iniury done vnto him by one of the peeres of his realme. Plutarch.Tatius, the fellow king of Rome with Romulus, for not do∣ing iustice in punishing certaine of his friends and kinsfolkes that had robbed and murdered certaine Embassadors which came to Rome, and for making their impunitie an example
for other malefactours by deferring and protracting, and dis∣appointing their punishment, was so watcht by the kindred of the slaine, that they slew him euen as he was sacrificing to his gods, because they could not obtaine iustice at his hands. What happened to the Romanes for refusing to deliuer an Embassadour,Tit. Liuius. Plutarch. who (contrary to the law of nations com∣ming vnto them) plaid the part of an enemie to his own coun∣try, euen well nigh the totall ouerthrow of them and their ci∣tie; for hauing by this meanes brought vpon themselues the calamitie of warre, they were at the first discomfited by the Gaules, who pursuing their victory, entred Rome, and slew al that came in their way, whether men or women, infants or a∣ged persons; and after many daies spent in the pillage & spoi∣ling of the houses, at last set fire on all, and vtterly destroied the whole city. Childericke king of France,Paul. Aemil. is notified for an extreame dul∣lard and blockhead, and such a one as had no care or regard vnto his realme, but that liued idly and slothfully without intermedling with the affaires of the common wealth, for he laid all the charge and burden of them vpon Pepin his lieu∣tenant generall, & therefore was by him iustly deposed from his roiall dignity & mewed vp in a cloister of religion to be∣come a monke, because he was vnfit for any good purpose: & albeit that this sudden change & mutation was very strange, yet there ensued no trouble nor commotion in the realme thereupon; so odious was hee become to the whole land for his drowsie and idle disposition.Paul. Aemil. For the same cause did the princes Electours depose Venceslaus the Emperour from the Empire, and established another in his roome. King Richard of England, amongst other foule faults which he was guilty of, incurred greatest blame for this, because he suffered many theeues and robbers to roue vp and down the land vnpunished: for which cause the citizens of London cō∣menced a high sute against him, & cōpelled him hauing raig∣ned 22 yeres, to lay aside the crown, & resigne it to another, in the presence of all the states, & died prisoner in the Tower.
Moreouer, this is no small defect of iustice, when men of authority do not only pardon capitall and detestable crimes, but also grace and fauour the doers of them: and this neither ought nor can be done by a soueraigne prince, without ouer∣passing the bounds of his limited power, which can in no wise dispence with the law of God,Exod. 21. whereunto euen kings them∣selues are subiect: for as touching the willing and conside∣rate murderer,Dut. 19. Thou shalt plucke him from my altar (saith the Lord) that hee may die, thy eye shall not spare him, to the end it may goe well with thee: which was put in practise in the death of Ioab,1 King. 2. who was slaine in the Tabernacle of God, holding his hands vpon the hornes of the Altar: for hee is no lesse a∣bominable before God that iustifieth the wicked,Prou 17. than hee that condemneth the iust: and hereupon that holy king S. Lewes when hee had granted pardon to a malefactour,Nich. Gilles. reuo∣ked it againe after better consideration of the matter, saying, That hee would giue no pardon, except the case deserued pardon by the law, for it was a worke of charitie and pittie to punish an offender; and not to punish crimes was as much as to commit them. In the yeere of our Lord 978, Egebrede the sonne of Edgare end Alphred, king of England, was a man of goodly outward shape and visage, but wholly giuen to idlenesse and abhorring all princely exercises: besides, he was a louer of riot & drun∣kennesse, and vsed extreame cruelty towards his subiects, ha∣uing his eares open to all vniust complaints; in feats of armes of all men most ignorant: so that his cruelty made him odi∣ous to his subiects, and his cowardise encouraged strange ene∣mies to inuade his kingdome: by meanes whereof, England was sore afflicted with warre, famine, and pestilence. In his time (as a iust plague for his negligence in gouernment) de∣caied the noble kingdome of England, and became tributary to the Danes: for euer when the Danes oppressed him with warre, he would hire them away with sommes of mony, with∣out making any resistance against them: in so much that from ten thousand pounds by the yeere, the tribute arose in
short space to fiftie thousand, wherefore hee deuised a new trick, and sought by trechery to destroy them, sending secret commissioners to the Magistrats throughout the land, that vpon a certaine day and houre assigned, the Danes should so∣dainly and iointly bee murdered: which massacre being per∣formed, turned to bee the cause of greater misery, for Swaine king of Denmarke hearing of the murder of his countrymen, landed with a strange armie in diuerse parts of this Realme, and so cruelly without mercy and pitty spoiled the countrie, and slew the people, that the Emglishmen were brought to most extreame and vnspeakeable miserie: and Egelrede the king driuen to flie with his wife and children to Richard duke of Normandie, leauing the whole kingdome to be possessed of Swaine. Edward the second of that name,Stow. chron. Phil Com. may well bee placed in this ranke, for though hee was faire and well proportioned of body, yet he was crooked and euill fauoured in conditions, for he was so disposed to lightnesse and vanity, that hee refused the company of his Lords and men of honor, and haunted a∣mong villaines and vile persons; he delighted in drinking and riot, and loued nothing lesse than to keepe secret his owne counsailes though neuer so important, so that he let the af∣faires of his kingdome run at sixe and at seuens: to these vices he added the familiarity of certaine euill disposed fellows, as Peirce de Gaueston, and Hugh the Spencers; whose wanton counsel he following, neglected to order his Commonwealth by sadnesse, discretion and iustice, which thing caused first great variance betwixt him and his nobles, so that shortly he became to them most odious, and in the end was depriued of his kingdome: for the Scots that were so curbed in his fathers daies, now plaied reakes through his negligence, and made many irruptions into his land, killing & discomfiting his men at three sundry battels: besides Charles of Fraunce did him much scath vpon his lands in Gascoin and Guyan, and at last Isabell his own wife with the help of Sir Iohn of Henault and his Henowaies (to whō the nobles & commons gaue their as∣sistance)
tooke him and depriued him of his crowne, installed his young sonne Edward in his place, keeping him in prison at Barteley, where not long after hee was murdered by Sir Ro∣ger Mortimer. CHAP. LXVII. How rare and geason good Princes haue ben at all times. IT appeareth by all these former histories, what a multitude there hath ben of dissolute, prowd, cruell, and vicious princes, and of tyrants & op∣pressors, so that the number of good and vertu∣ous ones seemeth to haue beene but small in comparison of them: which is also intimated by the tenour of the histories of the kings of Iuda and Israell, of whom (being in number forty) but tenne onely were found that pleased God in their raignes, and they of Iuda; & yet of them ten, one was corrup∣ted in his old age, & fell away to vile iniquities: but of Israel, ther was not one that demeaned not himself euil in his estate, and dealt not vniustly and wickedly before the Lord: as for the first Emperors what maner of mē they were for the most part, we haue already sufficiently declared. Wherefore it was not vnfitly spokē of him that iesting wise told the Emperour Claudius, that al the good Caesars might be engrauē in one litle ring they were so few: so that thē a king or prince indued with vertue, bounty, & clemēcy, & that loueth his subiects, endeth strifes & kindleth concord, is an especiall note of Gods fauor, & a gift inestimable; and that people that haue such a prince for their support & stay, are infinitly blessed; they lie as it were vpon a sunny banke, and ride in a most safe and quiet hauen, whilst other are exposed & laid open to the cruelty of time, and are tossed & turmoiled with the waues of calamity & op∣pression; therfore this may be their song of mirth & reioicing, whilst other nations sing nothing but welladaies. A sad afflicted soule all pale with griefe and wrong, Being easd from sence of dole, doth straightway change his song
From mone to mirth; for why, his thicke and cloudie night Is turnd to purity of Ttans glorious light. The raging storme is past, and feare of shipwrack gone, Their weary ships at last a calmy shore haue wonne. The pilot safely lies reposed vnder lee, Not fearing frowne of skies or other miserie. The strong and mighty blast of furious winds are still, They doe no more downe cast huge firr trees at their will: A pleasant gale succeeds of fruitfull Zephirus, Which recreates the seeds of spring voluptuous. Pack hence you wicked ones with all your equipage Of murdering champions enuenomed with rage: Your horse are tir'd with toile and all your strengths pluckt down, Your swords haue caught a foile by louely peaces crown. O blessed glorious peace (that beautifiest ech land, And mak'st all dangers cease whereof in feare we stand) Distill thy fauours pure (which are immortall things) On vs that lie secure in shadow of thy wings. Euen those thy holy traine which still attendance yeeld, Let them wax yong againe and flourish in our field: Iustice and veritie which ballance right from wrong, Let them attend on thee with equitie among. Then shall the Swaines reioice vnder a figtree lien, And sing with chearefull voice vntill the suns decline: And all the world shall ring with ecchoes of our praise, Which to the Lord our king we warble out alwaies. The simple harmlesse lambe no greedy wolfe shall feare, Nor kid new wean'd from dam shall stand in awe of beare: But sheepe and wolfe shall make like friends one flock & fold, A fearelesse child shall take the rule of tygres old. You flockes of Sion hill which through so many feares Of war and crosses, still haue sowne your field with teares,
Take comfort to your hope, straight comes the ioifull houre, To reape a fruitfull crop for all your torments soure. But alasse it commeth to passe through the sins and wic∣kednesse of men, that realms are oftentimes scarred with the alarmes and assaults of foes, and strangely afflicted with ma∣ny euils,Esay. 3. when as the state of gouernment is troubled and changed by the iniquities of the people. CHAP. XLVIII. That the greatest and mightiest cities are not exempt from punishment of their iniquities. WHereas great and populous cities are as it were the eies of the earth (as Athens and Sparta were said to be of Greece) there is no question but that they are so much the more blameable for glutting and ouercharging themselues with sins, by how much the more they abound with temporable goods and commodities, and that at length they tumble into vtter ruin and desolation; for in steed of being a patterne and direction vnto others of wis∣dome and good gouernement, as they ought, they are for the most part examples of folly and vanity: for where is there more euils and dissolutenesse raigning, than in them? the prin∣cipall cause whereof is that greedy worme Auarice, which begetteth in al estates much fraud, coosening, & other naugh∣tie practises, with many such like children: for through it e∣uery man looketh to prouide for his owne affaires, and to get any commoditie or ease whatsoeuer to himselfe, euen with all his power, not caring who be damnified so he be enriched: the plenty of riches which there aboundeth, instilleth pride and haughtinesse of mind into some, maketh others dissolute and effeminate, and besotteth others with carnall and vnho∣nest pleasures; from which head, spring riuers of euils, as en∣uies, quarrels, dissention, debates, and murders, all which things happē to thē that being transported & distracted with
the furious contrariety of their disordinate affection, can find no contentment nor agreement with themselues, but must needes burst out into some outward mischiefes: hence is that wonderfull pompe and brauery, aswell of aparrell as other things: hence all gourmandise and drunkennesse are so com∣mon, yea and adulteries so much frequented: wherefore the anger of the almighty must needs be kindled, to consume thē in their sins. One of the notablest cities of the world for greatnesse and antiquity was Niniue, the capitall and chiefe citie of the As∣syrian Empire, howbeit her greatnesse and power could not so protect her, but that after she had once been spared by the means of the Prophet Ionas, who foretold her of her destru∣ction, being returned to her former vomit againe, to wit, of robberies, extortions, wrongfull dealings and adulteries, shee was wholly and vtterly subuerted, God hauing deliuered her for a prey into the hands of many of her enemies, that spoi∣led and pilled her to the quicke; and lastly into the hands of the Medes, who brought hir to a final & vnrecouerable deso∣lation, as it was prophecied by the prophet Nahum. Babilon was wont to be the seat of that puissant monarchy vnder Nabuchadnezzar, where flourished the famous Astro∣logers and notable wise men of the world, where the spoiles and riches of many nations and countries were set vp as tro∣phies & kept as the remembrance of their victories, where al∣so vices raigned, & al maner of excesse and villany ouerflow∣ed:Lib. 5. of the actes of Alex∣ander. for by the report of Q. Curtius the city did so exceed in whoredome and adulteries, that fathers and mothers were not ashamed to bee bauds vnto their daughters, no nor hus∣bands to their wiues, a thing most strange & odious;Oros. lib. 2. where∣fore it could not chuse but in the end to bee sacked and quite destroied with an extreame ruin & destruction,Paul. Jou. com. 2. lib 33. the signs and & appearance whereof yet are seene in the ruine of old wals and ancient buildings that there remaine. Amongst sea-bordring cities, & for renown of merchandise, Tire in former ages was most famous, for thither resorted the
marchants of al countries for trafficke of Palestina, Siria, Ae∣gypt, Persia, & Assyria; they of Tarshis brought thither yron, lead, brasse, & siluer; the Sirians sold their Carbuncles, purple, brodered worke, fine linnen, corrall, & pearle; the Iewes ho∣ny oile, triacle, Cassia, and Calamus; the Arabians trafficked with lambs muttons, & goats; the Sabeans brought merchan∣dise of all exquisit spices and apothecary stuffe, with gold and pretious stones; by means where it being grown exceeding wealthy, enriched by fraud & deceit, & being lifted vp to the height of pride & plunged in the depth of pleasures, it was at lēgth by the iust iudgemēt of God so sacked & ruinated,Sabel. that the very memory thereof at this day scarce remaineth. The like iudgemēt fell vpon Sidon, & vpon that rich & re∣nowned city of Corinth, which through the cōmodiousnes of the hauen was the most frequented place of the world for the entercourse of merchants out of Asia & Europe;Thuciaides. for by reason of hir pride & corruption of maners (but especially for her de∣spising & abuse of thy heauenly graces of Gods spirit) which were sowed & planted in hir,Contempt of the word. lib. 1. cap. 34. Eutrop. Oros. lib. 9. she vnder went this punishment, to be first finally destroied, and brought into cinders by the Romans; and then after her reedification, to be debased into so low and vile an estate, that that which remaineth is no wise comparable to hir former glory. Again Athens the most florishing & famous city of Greece for hir faire buildings, large precincts & multitude of inhabi∣tants, but especially for hir philosophy, by means whereof re∣course was made from all parts to her as the fountaine & wel∣spring of arts, & the schoole & vniuersity of the whole world: whose pollicy and manner of gouernment was so much estee∣med by the Romans, that they drew from thence their laws, but now she lies dead and buried in forgetfulnesse, not carry∣ing any of hir former proportion or appearance. Carthage that noble city, mistresse of Africa, and Paragon to Rome, may not brag of any better issue than hir fellowes: for though shee resisted and made her part good with Rome for many yeares, yet at length by means of hir own inward &
ciuill iars, shee was vtterly destroied by thē; for the inhabitāts not able to stand any longer in defence,Oros. Eutrop. were constrained to yeeld thēselues to the mercy of their enemies: the women to the number of 25 thousand marching first forth, & after thē the mē in number 30 thousand following, al which poor cap∣tiues were sold for bondslaues, a few only of the principal ex∣cepted, & then fire was put to the city,Eutrop. which burnt 17 daies without ceasing, euē till it was clean consumed. It is true that it was reedified after this, but which lasted not long, for it was againe brought to destruction, that at this day there re∣maineth nothing but old & rotten ruins, and thus fared many other cities,Nunc seges est vbi Troia fuit. of which may be verified that which was spoken of Troy, that fields and corne are where cities were. Numantium in Spain being besieged by the Romans after it had borne the brunt of war and sacking, a long while made many desperate sallies vpon their enemies, and lastly seeing thēselues consumed with famine, rather thā they would bow their neckes to the yoke of seruitude, barring their gates, set fire on all; and so burning themselues with their whole citie, left the enemy nothing but ashes for his prey and triumph:Titus Liuiu. as the Saguntines not long before serued Anniball. It is a maruellous and strange thing to consider, how that prowd citie hath lifted vp her head aboue all others, and v∣surped a tyranny ouer nations; and which Lactantius, Hierom,Rome he mea∣neth. and Augustine, three learned fathers entituled Babylon, how I say she hath been humbled for all her pride, and empoueri∣shed for all her riches and made a prey vnto many nations. It was sacked & ransacked twice by the Visigothes, takē once by the Herulians, surprised by the Ostrogothes, destroied and rooted vp by the Vandales, annoied by the Lumbards, pilled and spoiled by the Grecians, and whipped and cha∣stised by many others; and now like Sodome and Gomorra it is to expect no more punishment, but the last blow of the most mightiest his indignation to throw it headlong into e∣uerlasting and horrible desolation.
CHAP. XLIX. Of such punishments which are common to all men in re∣gard of their iniquities. THese and such like effects of Gods wrath ought to admonish & instruct euery man to look vnto him∣selfe for doing euill, and to abhorre and detest sin, since it bringeth forth such soure and bitter fruits; for albeit the waies of the wicked seeme in their owne eies faire and good,Prou. 22. yet it is certaine that they are full of snares & thorns to intrap and pricke them to the quicke: for after that being fed with the licourous & deceitfull sweetnesse of their owne lusts, they haue sported themselues their fils in their pleasures & wicked affections; then insteed of delights and pastimes, they shall find nothing but punishment & sadnesse: their laughter, ioy, pompe, magnificence and glory shall bee turned into torments & dolors, weepings, opprobries, ignomi∣nies, confusion and misery euerlasting: for if God spared not great cities, Empiers, monarchies, and kings in their obstinate misdeeds, shall we thinke hee will spare little cities, hamlets, and villages, & men of base estate, when by their sins, they prouoke him to anger? No it cannot be, for God is alwaies of one & the same nature, alwaies like vnto himselfe: A God ex∣ecuting iustice and iudgement vpon the earth;Ierem. 9. Psal. 5. A God that lo∣ueth not iniquitie, with whom the wicked cannot dwell, nor the fooles stand before his presence. It is hee that hateth the workers of vnrighteousnesse, and that destroieth the liers, & abhorreth all deceitfull, disloiall, periurous & murdering per∣sons, as with him there is no acception of persons, so none of what estate or condition soeuer, be they rich or poor, noble or ignoble, gentle or carterlike, can exempt themselues from his wrath and indignation when it is kindled but a little,Rom. 2.9. if they delight and continue in their sinnes; for as S. Paul saith, Tri∣bulation & anguish is vpon the soule of euery man that doth euill.
Now according to the variety and diuersity of mens offen∣ces, the Lord in his most iust and admirable iudgement, v∣seth diuersity of punishments: sometimes correcting them one by one in particular, other whiles altogither in a heape; sometimes by stormes and tempests both by sea and land, other times by lightning, haile, and deluge of waters; often by ouerflowing and breaking out of riuers, and of the sea also; and not seldome by remedilesse and sudden fires, heauen & earth and all the elements beeing armed with an inuincible force, to take vengeance vpon such as are traitors and rebels against God: sundry times he scourgeth the world (as it well deserueth) with his vsuall and accustomed plagues, namely of warre, and famine, and pestilence, which are euident signes of his anger, according to the threats denounced in the law touching the same: and therefore if at any time he defer the punishment of the wicked, it is for no other end, but to ex∣pect the fulnesse of their sinne, and to make them more inex∣cusable, when contrary to his bountifulnesse and long suffe∣ring (which inuiteth and calleth them to repentance) they harden themselues and grow more obstinate in their vices and rebellion, drawing vpon their heads the whole heape of wrath the more grieuously to assaile them. And thus the ven∣geance of God marcheth but a soft pace (as saith Valerius Maximus) to the end to double and aggrauate the punish∣ment for the slacknesse thereof. CHAP. L. That the greatest punishments are reserued and laid vp for the wicked in the world to come. NOtwithstanding all which hath bene spoken, and howsoeuer sinners are punished in this life, yet is certaine, that the greatest and terriblest punishments are kept in store for them in ano∣ther world: and albeit that during this transi∣tory
pilgrimage, they seeme to themselues often times to liue at their ease, and enioy their pleasures and pastimes to their hearts contentment: yet doubtlesse it is so, that they are in∣deed in a continuall prison, and in a dungeon of darkenesse, bound and chained with fetters of their owne sinne, and very often turmoiled and butchered with their owne guiltie con∣science, ouercharged with the multitude of offences, & fore∣feeling the approch of hell: and in this case many languish away with care, feare, and terror, being toiled and tired with vncessant and vnsupporrable disquietnesse, and tossed and di∣stracted with despaire, vntill by death they be brought vnto their last irreuocable punishment: which punishment is not to endure for a time and then to end, but is eternall and euer∣lastingly inherent both in body and soule: I say in the bodie, after the resurrection of the dead; and in soule, after the de∣parture out of this life till all eternity: for it is iust and equall that they which haue offended and dishonored God in their bodies in this life, should be punished also in their bodies in the world to come with endles torments: of which torments, when mention is made in the holy scripture, they are for our weake capacity sake called gehenna, or a place of torment, vt∣ter darkenesse and hell fire, where there is weeping and gna∣shing of teeth, &c: againe, eternall fire, a poole and pit of fire and brimstone, which is prepared for the deuill and his dar∣lings: and how miserable their estate is that fall therein, our Sauiour Christ giueth vs to know in the person of the rich glutton,Luk. 16. who hauing bathed himselfe in the pleasures and de∣lights of this world, without once regarding or pittying the poore, was after death cast into the torments of hell, & there burneth in quenchlesse flames without any ceasing or allay∣ing of his griefes: therefore whatsoeuer punishments the wicked suffer before they die, they are not quitted by them from this other, but must descend into the appointed place to receiue the surplus of their paiments which is due vnto them: for what were it for a notorious and cruell tyrant that had committed many foule and wicked deeds, or had most
villanously murdered many good men, to haue no other pu∣nishment but to be slaine, and to endure in the houre of death some extraordinarie paine; could such a punishment bal∣lance with his so many and great offences? whereas there∣fore many such wretches suffer punishment in this world, wee must thinke that it is but a tast and a scantling of those tor∣ments and punishments which are prepared and made readie for them in the world to come. And therefore it often com∣meth to passe, that they passe out of this life most quietly without the disturbance of any crosse or punishment; but it is, that they might be more strangely tormented in another world. Some not considering this point, nor stretching the view of their vnderstanding beyond the aspect of their carnal eies, haue fallen into this foolish opinion, to thinke that there is neither iustice nor iudgement in heauen, nor respect of e∣quitie with the highest: when they see the wicked to florish in prosperity, and the good and innocent to be ouerwhelmed with aduersity, yea and many holy men also haue fallen into this temptation, as Iob and Dauid did,Iob. 12. & 21. Psal. 73. who when they consi∣dered the condition of the wicked and vniust, how they liued in this world at their hearts ease, compassed about with plea∣sures and delights, and waxing old in the same, were carried to their sepulchres in peace, they were somewhat troubled and perplexed within themselues, vntill being instructed and resolued by the word of God, they marked their finaend and issue, and the euerlasting perdition which was pr for them, and by no meanes could be escaped. And thus it commeth to passe (saith S. Augustine) that many sinnes are punished in this world,Epist. 5. that the prouidence of God might be more apparant; and many, yea most reserued to be punished in the world to come, that wee might know that there is yet iudgement behind.
CHAP. LI. How the afflictions of the godly, and punishments of the wicked differ. WHich seeing it is so, it is necessary that the wic∣ked and peruerse ones should feele the rigor of Gods wrath for the presumption and re∣bellion wherewith they daily prouoke him against them: and although with those that feare God, and striue to keepe themselues from euill, and take paines to liue peaceably and quietly, it often times goeth worse here below than with others, being laid open to millions of iniuries, reproches, and cruelties, and are as it were sheepe appointed to the slaughter; whereof some are massacred, some hanged, some hedded, some drow∣ned, some burned, or put to some other cruell death: yet not∣withstanding their estate and condition is farre happier than that of the wicked, for so much as all their sufferings and ad∣uersities are blessed and sanctified vnto them of God, who turneth them to their aduantage, according to the saying of S. Luke,Rom. 8.28. That all things worke for the good to them that feare God: for whatsoeuer tribulation befalleth them, they cannot be separated from the loue of God, which hee beareth vnto them in his well beloued sonne Christ Iesus: be it then that God visiteth them for their faults (for there is none that is cleare of sinne) it is a fatherly chastisement, to bring them to amendment: be it that he exerciseth them by many afflicti∣ons, as he did Iob, it is to prooue their faith and patience, to the end they may be better purified like gold in the furnace, and serue for examples to others. If it be for the truth of the Gospell that they suffer, then they are blessed, because they are conformed to the image of the sonne of God, that they might also be partakers of his glory, for they that suffer with him, are assured to raigne with him: hence it is, that in the
midst of their torments and oppressions, in the midst of fires and fagots flaming about them, beeing comforted with the consolations of Gods spirit through a sure hope of their hap∣pie repose and incorruptible crowne which is prepared for them in the heauens, they reioice and are so chearefull: con∣trariwise the wicked, seeing themselues ensnared in the euils which their owne sinnes brought vpon them, gnash their teeth, fret themselues, murmure against God, and hlaspheme him, like wretches, to their endlesse perdition. There is ther∣fore great difference betwixt the punishments of ech of these, for the one tendeth to honour and life, the other to shame and confusion: and euen as it is not the greatnes of torments that maketh the martyr, but the goodnes of the cause; so the infliction of punishment vniustly, neither maketh the partie afflicted guilty, nor any whit diminisheth his reputation: wheras the wicked that are iustly tormented for their sinnes, are so marked with infamie and dishonour, that the staine thereof can neuer be wiped out. Let euery one therefore learne to keepe himselfe from euill, and to containe himselfe in a kind of modestie and inte∣gritie of life, seeing that by the plagues and scourges where∣with the world is ordinarily afflicted, Gods fierce wrath is clearely reuealed from heauen vpon all impiety and iniustice of men, to consume all those that rebell against him. Thinke vpon this you inhabitants of the earth, small and great, of what qualitie or condition soeuer you be. If you be mighty, puissant, and fearfull, know that the Lord is greater thā you; for he is almighty, all-terrible, & al-feare∣ful; in what place soeuer you are, he is alwaies aboue you, rea∣dy to hurle you downe and ouerturne you, to breake, quash, & crush you in pieces as pots of earth; he is armed with thun∣der, fire, and a bloody sword to destroy, consume, and cut you in peeces: heauen threatneth from aboue, and the earth which you trample on from below, shaking vnder your feet, and being ready to spue you out from her face, or swallow you vp in her bowels: in briefe, all the elements & creatures
of God looke a skew at you in disdaine, and set themselues against you in hatred, if you feare not your Creatour your Lord and Master,Esai. 40. of whome you haue receiued your scepters and crownes, and who is able (when he please) to bring prin∣ces to nothing, and make the rulers of the earth a thing of nought: Forsake therefore if you tender the good, honour, and repose of your selues and yours; the euill and corrupt fa∣shions of the world, and submit your selues in obedience vn∣der the scepter of Gods law and gospell, fearing the iust retribution of vengeance vpon all them that doe the contra∣rie;Heb. 10.31. for it is a horrible thing to fall into the hands of the Lord. And you which honour and reuerence God alreadie, be now more quickened and stirred vp to his loue and obedience, and to a more diligent practising of his will and following his commaundements, to the end to glorifie him by your liues, looking for the happie end of your hope reserued in the heauens for you by Christ Iesus our Lord, to whome be glorie euerlastingly, Amen.
A Table of all the principall points contai∣ned in the first and second Booke. AS touching the corruption and peruersitie of this World, how great it is. Pag. 1 What the cause is of the great overflow of Vice in this age. Pag. 3 That great men which will not abide to be admonished of their faults can not escape punishment at Gods hand. Pag. 5 How all men both by the law of God & Nature, are inexcusable in their sins. Pag. 9 How the greatest monarchs that are in the world ought to bee subiect to the law of God, & consequently the lawes of man and of nature. Pag. 12 Of those that persecuted Christ and his Church, and their issues. Pag. 18 Of those that in our age haue persecu∣ted the Gospell in the person of the faithfull. Pag. 45 Of Apostataes and Backsliders, that tho∣rough infirmity haue fallen away. Pag. 59 Of those which haue willingly fallen a∣way. Pag. 66 Of Apostataes through Malice. Pag. 70 Of Heretikes. Pag. 95 Of Hypocrites. Pag. 106 Of Coniurers and Enchanters. Pag. 113 Of those that through pride and vaine-glory, stroue to vsurpe the honor due vnto God. Pag. 125 Of Epicures and Atheists. Pag. 139 Touching transgressors by Idolatry. Pag. 19 Of many euils that haue come vpon Christendome for Idolatry. Pag. 153 Of those that corrupted and mingled Gods religion with humane inuenti∣ons, or went about to disquiet the dis∣cipline of the Church. Pag. 157 Of Periurers. Pag. 160 Of Blasphemers. Pag. 174 Of those that by cursing and denying God, giue themselues wholly to the deuil. Pag. 179 Punishments for the contempt of the word and Sacraments: and the abuse of holy things. Pag. 189 Of those that prophane the Sabbath day. Pag. 193 The second Booke. OF rebellious and stubborne chil∣dren towards their parents. Pag. 199 Of those that rebell against their Superiours. Pag. 211 Of such as haue murdered their rulers or princes. Pag. 225 Of such as haue rebelled against their Superiours, because of subsidies and taxes imposed vpon them. Pag. 230 Of Murderers. Pag. 236 Their seuarall punishments. Pag. 262 Of Paricides or parent murderers. Pag. 271 Of Subiect murderers. Pag. 27 Of those that are both cruell and dis∣loiall. Pag. 288 Of Queenes that were murderers. Pag. 292
Of such as without necessitie or confe∣e, vpon euery light cause, mooue  Pag. 294 please themselues ouermuch  cruelties. Pag. 298 xercise too much rigor and tie. Pag. 302 erers. Pag. 305 Of Rapes. Pag. 307 aples of Gods Iudgements vpon Adulterers. Pag. 316 That Stewes ought not to be suffered a∣mongst Christians. Pag. 318 Of whoredomes committed vnder the colour of Marriage. Pag. 321 Of vnlawfull marriages, and their is∣sues. Pag. 323 Touching incestuous marriages. Pag. 327 Of Adulterie. Pag. 330 Of such as are diuorced without cause. Pag. 350 Of those that either cause or authorize vnlawfull diuorcements. Pag. 354 Of Incestuous persons. Pag. 356 Of effeminate persons, Sodomites, and other such like monsters. Pag. 359 Of the wonderfull euils arising from this greedinesse of lust. Pag. 363 Of vnlawfull gestures, Idlenesse, Glutto∣nie, Drunkennesse, Daunsing, and o∣ther such like dissolutenesse. Pag. 365 Of Theeues and Robbers. Pag. 376 Of the excessiue burdenings of the Comminaltie. Pag. 386 Of those that haue vsed too much cruel∣tie towards their subiects in Taxes & Exactions. Pag. 389 Of such as by force of armes haue taken away, or would haue taken away, the goods and lands of other men. Pag. 397 Of Vsurers, and their theft. Pag. 411 Of such as haue beene notorious in all kind of sinne. Pag. 421 Of calumniation and false witnesse bea∣ring. Pag. 444 That kings and princes ought to looke to the execution of Iustice, for the pu∣nishment of naughty & corrupt man∣ners. Pag. 451 Of such princes as haue made no recke∣ning of punishing vice, nor regarded the estate of their people. Pag. 456 How rare & geason good princes haue beene at all times. Pag. 460 That the greatest and mightiest princes are not exempt from punishment for their iniquities. Pag. 462 Of such punishments which are commō to all men in regard of their iniqui∣ties. Pag. 466 That the greatest punishmentes are laid vp for the wicked in the world to come. Pag. 467 How the afflictions of the godly, and the punishments of the wicked dif∣fer. Pag. 470 Finis.
