17690 99836478 755
THE Churches Sleepe, expressed in a Sermon Preached at the Court, in the Celebration of the Kings Maie∣sties most ioyfull and happie entrance into this King∣dome, the 24. of March last. BY Anthonie Maxey, Batchelar in Diuinitie, and Chaplaine to his Maiestie in ordinary. HEBREWES. 10.24.25. Let vs consider one another, to prouoke vnto Loue and to good workes. Not forsaking the fellowship that we haue among our selues (as the manner of some is) but let vs exhort one an other. LONDON Printed by T. Este. for Clement Knight, dwelling in Paules Church-yard at the signe of the holy Lambe. 1606.
Cant. Chap. 2. Ver. 7. I charge you O yee daughters of Ierusalem, by the Roes and Hindes of the field, that ye stir not vp, nor waken my Loue, vntill she please. FOr the readier and more perfect vn∣derstanding of this verse, it shall bee requisite, very briefely, to set downe the order in placing this Booke, the Title, the Subiect matter, and so consequently the Occasion whereupon this Scrip∣ture is inferred. Touching the placing and order of this Booke: in the first of Kings. 6. King Salomon in building the materiall Temple, hee framed three Courts: the outtermost, a great and large Court for the common people; next to that, an inner roome for the Priestes and Leuites, and last of all Sanc∣tum Sanctorum, the holiest of holies, onely for the high Priest to enter in. The same Salomon, in building vp the spirituall Temple of the Soule, he hath likewise framed three courts. First the booke of the Prouerbs, as a great and outter∣most Court, wherein common people, and all sorts of men, may learne, the ciuill and godly course of manners and discipline; next to that
Ecclesiastes or the booke of the Preacher, as an inner court, leading vs on farther, and teaching vs to contemne the world; last of all, he brings vs into Sanctum Sanctorum, to this Song of Songs, wherein not euery one, but such as are con∣uersant in diuine misteries, and delight in hea∣uenly contemplation, they may heere behold, the sweet and misticall coniunction betweene Christ and his Church, betweene God and the soule. For the Title. As there is Sabatum Sabati, and Sabatum Sabatorum, so , this is called the Song of Songs. The Song of Songs, for that it is soung to the King of Kings; The Song of Songs, for that it contayneth the highest misterie of all mi∣steries: The Song of Songs, because of a thousand & fiue sonets,1. Kin. 4 32 which Salomon did endite, of them all this is most diuine most excellent. For it con∣cerneth not any particular occasion, as the songs of Moses and Debora, but the publicke and flou∣rishing estate of the Church, and therevpon for the excellencie, the ancient fathers cal it, the hea∣uenly treasure, the hidden Manna, and Paradise of the Soule. In the Matter, our Subiect, the holy Ghost by sweet and comfortable allegories, doth liuely and affectionately expresse, the holy and perfect loue between Christ and his blessed spouse. So as Pliny
writeth,Plin. lib. . Cap. 25. that the Bees doe make outtermost part of their combs with the basest hony, but doe inclose the finest and purest hony within: So the outward duties of Religion, they are contained in the mor∣rall Precepts of the Prouerbs and Ecclesiastes, but the diuine and heauenly misteries, betwixt Christ and his Church, they lie hidden and are closely chouched in these Parables. The Occasion where-vpon this Scripture is infer∣red, is this. The holy spouse, the Church of God being in this world, as a Lilly amongst Thornes,2. & 3. ver. and as an Apple tree in the wilde forrest, that is, oppressed with enimies, molested with Schisme, Contention, and Heresies, she doth long to enioy the blessed presence of Christ; at length vnder the peaceable and glorious raigne of King Salomon, comforted with his gratious spirit, shadowed vn∣der his protection, and satisfied with his loue,Honorius with quiet rest of heart and much content of minde, shee taketh her repose, and peaceably falles a sleepe. Wherevpon as S. Bernard saith, Christus digna∣tur esse custos ac vigill sponsae, Christ vouchsafeth to become the Brides watchman or keeper. Allud∣ing therein to the manner of mariages in those times, where at, were vsed to be sung, two kinde of verses, , and ,Scoliast. Thocriti. in Epitha∣lamium, Helen. euening verses to bring a sleepe, and morning verses to waken the Bride.
But Christ in ardent affection,Cap. ver. 2.3.8.7.5.4. and tender care ouer his Church, in three seuerall places hee gi∣ueth this great and solemne charge, that his Spouse now being asleepe, his Church being now in blessed rest and proseritie, no man waken her, no man cause any stir or trouble to bee raised. I charge you O yee daughters of Ierusa. &c. In these words, there is a Praecipe Christianis, an high Commission graunted out, for to esta∣blish and settle the good estate and peace of the Church. Wherein are to bee considered 1. The Persons. First, who sendeth— I, Lastly, the date. 2 to whom — Daughters of Ierusalē. Lastly, the date. 2. Charge. 1. Manner — By the Roes and Hindes. Vntill she please. 2. Substance—not to stir waken Christs loue. Vntill she please. The Person who chargeth. FIrst, for the Person who it is that chargeth, and to whom this com∣mission is directed, it is requisite to aske as the Spouse doth in the fift Chapter and ninth verse, Who is this beloued more
then another louer, that hee doth so charge. To di∣rect and perswade in matters of great weight and consequence, there are these three required, , Wisedome, Loue,Aristo. Rhet. li. 2. ca. 1. and Au∣thoritie. Wisedome to bee beleeued; Loue to be respected; Authoritie to be feared. First, Wis∣dome, for that is nimbler then all thinges,Wis. 7.24. and searcheth throughly, by reason of her purenesse. Secondly, Loue is requisite,Cant. 8.. for it is strong as death, there is nothing but a man will vndertake at the perswasion of a wiseman, who doth intire∣ly loue him. Lastly, Authority is required,Aug. for Etsi meliores sunt quos ducit amor, tamen plures sunt quos corri∣git timor; the better sort are wonne by Loue, but the greater number are ouercome by Feare. Hee that giueth this charge it is our blessed Saui∣our, so saith the Spouse in the next verse, it is the voice of my well beloued: it is hee against whom for his Wisedome to direct, for his Loue to comfort, for his Authoritie to punish, there is no exception to be taken, for Dominus locutus est, & ego adiuro they are all one. And whereas hee begins with a charge, wee are to obserue the Dialect and Acrimonie of the holy Ghost in chargeing.Soto∣maior. For adiuratio est iura∣tionis quoddam genus, this adiuring and charg∣ing is a kinde of swearing.Gen. 24.3. So that as Abraham caused his seruant to sweare, and then charged
him not to take a wife for his Sonne of the wo∣men of Canaan, so heere is an oath of Canoni∣call obedience required, that no man affiance himself, to any schismatical or hereticall Church, but onely the true Spouse of Christ, she must be, as the louing Hinde,Prou. 5.1. and pleasant Roe in thy sight to delight in her loue continually. The words of Gods spirit, they are not otiosa supplementa verborum, nor as Iob saith, words of the winde; but wher the holy Ghost fals on charg∣ing, without question there is some waightie mat∣ter in hand;Iob. 6.26. and therefore in regard of the person who doth adiure & charge, when the assemblie is broken vp, this charge must be thought vpon to be performed. Daughters of Ierusalem. THE persons to whome this charge is directed, is to the Daughters of Ierusa∣lem, that is, by the iudgement and con∣sent of all interpreters, to the Magi∣strates and to the Ministers, especially to the holy Priestes, who are attending vpon the Church, as waighting women on a Queene, or as louing daughters vpon their mothers.
They are named Daughters of Ierusalem, be∣cause : Daughters in their qualities resemble their mother.Arist. de ge. 4. cap. 3 Ierusalem by Dauid it was made , the mother citie in all Iudea, in the 12. of the Reuel: shee is said to trauaile in birth, and in the 4. to the Galath. 26. it is called  the mother of vs all; a plaine periphrasis of the Church. Ierusalem as appeareth in the 18. of Ioshua, 28. it first tooke the name of Iebuseus the sonne of Chana, and was called Iebus,Iosephus Arqueri. after it was enlarged by Melchisedech and called Salem, which signifies Attonement, or the vision of Peace; Hebr. 7. and 2. King of Salem; that is King of Peace. Thus then daughters of Ierusalem, are to bee vnderstoode, Daughters that resemble their mother, Daugh∣ters of Peace. What? and is it to be feared, that Ierusalem, shall be disturbed of her owne Daugh∣ters? they that professe themselues, to be children of the holy Citie, and should continually pray for the peace of Ierusalem, are they such stirrers that they must bee charged? I verely: the holy Ghost knew right well, both how & to whom to speake. For ,Act. 20.30 euen from among your selues shall men arise, speaking peruerse things, and seeking to draw Disciples after them. When the Diuell saw, his Temples forsaken and his Oracles put to silence, hee deuised this as a speciall supply to haue alwaies his agents in
or about the Church,Aug. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 18. c. 51 Qui sub vocabulo Christi∣ano, doctrinae resisterent Christianae, who vnder the title of a Christian name, might euer be ready to resist the Christian doctrine. Inimici hominis do∣mestici eius, our owne calling and countrymen, are our most vnkinde and cruell enimies. Had not diuers of vs, like vnnaturall children shaken off that reuerend obedience due to the Church our mother, but had shewed our selues (as heere we are named) Daughters of Ierusalem, the holy spouse of Christ, had neuer been so wounded at the heart, nor her patrimonie, so bouldly beene made a pray to sacrilegious Atheists. Whereas we should preach Christ Iesus cru∣cified, that is, reconciliation by his bloud, holy life, repentance and good works, christian Chari∣tie, and such like, still there is much a doe, about such points, as make not to the furtherance of the people in good life and deuotion, but to the ouer∣throw of the state Ecclesiasticall, & to the distur∣bance of the Church of God. It is a wofull of∣spring, when the birth of the childe is the death of the mother. If It is run to his mother Progne, and bee betraied in her bosome: if when the childe aske bread, the father giue a Scorpion; if the Phisition minister poison; if there bee no suc∣cour in the iudge, Contra solitudinem & inopiam, if one truth bee not generally taught of vs all, et locum vbi consistat reperire non potest; if still
there be a difference made betweene the Refor∣med and the Formalistes; and affirmed, that the Reformed though they lose their liuings, yet they will keepe a good conscience, but the Formalists will euer be of the same religion the king is of? If when we celebrate the Lords Supper, we play (as they say) a pageant of our owne, and make poore silly soules beleeue, they haue an English masse; if Church men affirme, that our Church hath in it still, so many black marks, that the na∣turall children of the Church cannot discerne it? what hope can be conceiued, that the blessed Spouse shall euer attaine, vnto any setled and ioy∣full rest? The people in all ages, they haue euer de∣lighted to heare of the faultes and frailties both of their gouernours & of their teachers; it hath e∣uer beene laughing cheere to the ignorant multi∣tude, to see strange innouations, change in the course of religion, and men of the Church, at variance and contention, yet all this is not suffici∣ent to aduise, but still, euen vpon no occasion, di∣uers are euer troubling the state, and murmuring against the gouernment established. Our Sauiour Christ, he directeth this charge, es∣pecially vnto vs, & calleth vs Daughters of Ierusalē,Bernard. piè blanditur, ac suauitèr allicìt, Daughters for loue, Ierusalē for peace; teaching vs thereby, humilitie, obedience to the christian Maiestrate, peace, low∣lines and submission to the Church our mother?
so that, if wee doe ioy in the prosperitie of our country, if we doe long after the florishing estate of the Church (aboue all others) we must be knit together in vnitie and peace.Gel. 5.15. For if we bite one an other, wee shall be consumed one of another. Surely, the Lord is with King Salomon, God is with our King, hee hath giuen him wisedome, riches, and honour, hee hath built him a glorious pallace,Cant. 3.9. the timber is of Lebanon, the pillers of siluer, the ornaments of gold, the worke doth pros∣per in his hands, and there remaines nothing but that it may bee paued throughout, with the loue of the Daughters of Ierusalem. Therefore you that bee Magistrates, Parlament men, flowers of the land, and ornaments of your Countrie, heere also called Daughters of Ierusalem, doe you by all good meanes procure the Peace of the Church. Giue no encouragement to humorous men; doe not fauour their disorderly proceed∣ings; win them by your authoritie, perswade them in your loue, to peace and conformitie. It is said of Saint Ciprian, that with teares he bewai∣led those, who in the time of persecution denied Christ; much more is their contempt and per∣uersenes to be lamented, who in the time of the Churches prosperitie doe wilfully forsake Christ: for what is it else to forsake Christ, but without iust cause, with out any sure ground, to forsake
that blessed calling, wherof before God and men, before Saints and Angels, they haue made pub∣like profession before the Church. Is this integritie? is this humblenesse of mind, and an heart truely knit and deuoted vnto God? No verily. Is in amore Dei maior erit, qui pluri∣mos ad eius amorem trahit.Greg. in hom. That man shall bee accepted most in Gods loue, who doth win most to the holy loue of God. It is a blessed thing, to be euen a doore keeper in the house of God: and it sauours of an humble minde, of a sweet spirit, to become all things to all men, by all possible meanes to win some. Thus did Christ teach in his life, and thus did he performe in his death. Perdidit vitam potiùs quam perdidit obedientiam. But, if it be so, that nothing can preuaile with these men, and that they will needes leaue of to be Daughters of Ierusalem: then here is not one∣ly a charge giuen to fore-warne them by word, but in the 15. ver. there followes an attachment. If I charge will not serue, the take vs the foxes,Cant. 2.15 that destroy the vines, must follow: If Arons rod cannot sway, Moses must stinge: Fitches are to be beaten with a staffe, and cummin with arod. Who∣soeuer will not doe,Eza. 7.6. the Law of thy God and the Kings law, let him haue iudgement without delay. S. Basile saith, that Magistrate is  with out bowels and compassion, who suffereth disor∣ders in the church vnpunished. Diuers questions,
beginning onely to arise, betweene the Disciples of Saint Iohn, and our Sauiour, holy writers haue this obseruation, that God in his wisedome, did suffer the death of Saint Iohn to hasten,Iohn. 3 25. that there might be no sects nor diuision in the Church.Chrisost. Theodo. Very loth haue I euer beene, to be seene at any time to meddle in these troubles of the Church, and therefore (the Lord knoweth my heart) I speake not in bitternesse to exasperate any mans thoughts against them. But in this case, who is offended, and I burne not? by lamentable experi∣ence doe I know, what strange and wofull effects, these disordered courses haue brought forth. Di∣uers, in whose vertuous and louely societie, my heart hath often ioyed, and some, for whom na∣ture would cause a man to cry out, (would to god I had dyed for thee my brother;) some of these haue forsaken both friends and country, and o∣thers, (men of excellent parts in humaine lear∣ning, whereas they had purposed to take holy or∣ders, by reason of these contentions, they fell a∣way, and embraced this present world. Therefore in those things, which concern the glory of God, the peace and prosperitie of the Church:Plutarch. Optima legum institutio, vt non solùm sint, sed vt latis pu∣reatur. As it is a blessed thing to haue begun well, so it is the crowne of glory to perseuere in well doing, to persist by all good meanes, that as much as possible may bee, from the Orcades to the
South seas, from the Irish pale to the Westerne bounds, there may bee one publike, perfect, and Christian Peace amongst vs: for feare least as by the discord of the Arians innumerable people fell away,Dluus. Hilar. lib. contra Const. August. from Christianitie to Gentilisme and infi∣delitie, so by reason of our discord, they neuer cease, to fall away as fast to Atheisine & impietie. Roes and Hindes. OF the Persons you haue heard, novv commeth in the charge it selfe: where∣in first we are to consider the Manner, which is very sweet and proper. For being in the fieldes and alluding to shepheards according to the tenor of the Canticle, hee doth charge by the Roes and Hindes of the field. Why wee should bee charged by Roes and Hindes, (such a strange kinde of adiuration) and what is ment by them, there is great varietie of inter∣pretations, amongst all writers. In the originall tongue, Tzeboath and Ailoth, the Hebrew words they doe signifie exercitus & virtutes, wherevnto the Septuagints agreeing, doe translate it . O yee Daugh∣ters
I charge you, by the royall armies, and strength of the field. Aponius in his 4. booke,Aponius. saith, we are adiured by Roes and Hindes. For example sake, quòd horū est amor ardentissimus, because of all other beasts, their loue, in feeding, and keeping quietly one with an other, is most peaceable and affectionate: Per Hinnulos & Capreas,Rupertus. that is, saith Rupertus, by the holy Patriarks; Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, who in their generations were men of peace: Thomas Aquinas hee expoundeth it,Tho. Aqui Lyra. by the holy Prophets & Apostles, Lyra saith we are charged by Roes and Hindes for that these beasts are ene∣mies to poyson, and fellow helpers against such as hurt them. Saint Bernard,Bernard serm. 53. Beza. hee adiureth by the holy An∣gels, who are as swift as Roes and Hindes, Beza, (whose exposition is very good) he saith; the spirit of God, doth call the very dum creatures to wit∣nes against stirrers in the Church. Some expound Roes and Hindes to bee the chiefe theologicall vertues, adiuring vs by our faith, hope, and cha∣ritie. Others they say wee are adiured amore quo tenemini Sanctis,Hugo. Cand. by that loue and reuerend du∣ty, which we doe owe to the Saints and reuerend Fathers of the Church. To bee short: Gregory, Gorrhan, Cassiodore, Ambrose, Origen, Honorius, Anselmus, Angelomus, almost euery author doth differ in his exposition. So that as the Poet cryed
out, Quid clamem? quae fata vocem? quae numina poscam? so all authors are at a stande, and cannot tell, either in heauen or in earth, or amongst the creatures, what to call to witnesse, that they might sufficiently charge. But that they might be sure to make all men fearefull to stirre or trouble the Churches peace, euery one doth adiure by that which in his senerall iudgement is most forcible. Amongst the rest,Venerab. Beda. the exposition of Venerable Be∣da, is very significant and religious. I charge you by the Roes and Hindes, that is saith he, per deliti∣as agri, by the soules and tender consciences of the ignorant and simple people, they are the Roes and Hindes which we must hunt after, and study to take. And very fitly are they compared to Roes and Hindes, because as, Pliny,P li. lib 8. cap 53. Solinus. lib 3. Philostratus and Solinus writeth, they are most tender and fearefull of all beasts, affrited with any noise, checked with the least foile, tourned out of course with the cracking of a sticke, presently make head another way, and when they are once out of their wonted walke, Erranti in via, nullus est ter∣minus, they run they know not whither, euen to their owne death: Such is the nature and dispo∣sition of common people, soone stird vp, quick∣led awry, sometimes running full head one way, on a sodaine turned as much an other.1. Sam. 15.24. Act. 12.2. Therefore it is a seruile course, and bewraies a vaine and proud spirit for any, especially men of religion
and vnderstanding, to fit the fancies, and seeke to win vnto themselues the applause of common people.Plato de Rep. Plato in his common wealth forbids men, to tange vp and downe, to ring away other mens Bees, yet the onely glory of some men is, to get, flockers, and followers after them, by tanging and iangling in matters of no importance. Surely, as a weake and feeble braine, followeth the waxing and waining of the Moone, so the braine-sicke humour of the multitude is subiect and pliable to euery change and reuolution. Whereupon Homer compares the disposition of common people to the standing corne,Homer. ther comes a puffe, and blowes it all on the one side, there comes an other blast, and swayes it as much on the other side. It is a fit comparison made by the Kingly Prophet.Psa. 65.7. It is the Lord that stilleth the rage of the Sea, the noise of the Waues, and the madnesse of the people; iumping therein with the Prophet Esay 17. Chapter, where the nature of the people is compared vnto the billowes , of the trouble some and work∣ing Sea. So easily set a gog, so delighted with nouelties, so full of alteration and change are the affections of common people. In the 28. of the Acts. Saint Paule whilest the Viper hung vpon his hand, he was a murderer, againe, the Viper shaken off, in the turning of an hand, he was a God. In the 3. of Ezra and the 12.
the people wept because they had no Temple: af∣ter when the Temple was builded, then they wept as fast againe, because the glory of the second was not like the first. In the time of queene Mary, there was lamentation, and crying out, that I do∣latry was set vp, the Church polluted, and the Gospell taken away: afterward when through the great mercie of God, the Gospell was aduan∣ced, and the light thereof did comfortably shine throughout the whole kingdome, then they mur¦mured and cryed out as fast againe, that wee had no Church, no Ministry, truth was wrapt vp in Ceremonies, and all was Antichristian. In the 19. of the Acts, Demetrius and other subtill heads of the tradse men of Ephesus, (meer∣ly for their owne gaine) raised a great tumult, and getting the people together, cryed out, great is Diana of the Ephesians; presently the people were carried with such a tempest of fury, that the cittie was all in an vprore, they can and rush∣ed whether they list in great confusion, much violence was offered, and yet at last as appearerh in the 32. verse, the most part knew not wherefore they were come tog ther. In like sort,Nobiles quiam praeciu uis eg∣merum ge unt  ann, 1583. not many yeeres agone, diuers personages of great credit and countenance (they and their predecessurs being long since enriched, by the reuenues of the Church and fearing to lose them) apprehending presently the successe, inuegled many weake
men, young diuines, trades-men, artificers, and such like, and they all cryed out, for the Geneua discipline, and Scottish reformation in the Churh. The ignorant multitude once stirred vp, the whole land was in sects and tumults, the state was trou∣bled, the Prince was disobeyed, good lawes were neglected, by Libels, Pamphlets, by conseale∣ments, by treacheries, by sundry foule disorders, violence and disgrace was offered,A booke of disci∣pline compiled after the Geneua fashion by M. Knox, & others, reiected of the dis∣ciplinari∣ans and termed a deuout i∣maginati∣on. Another booke cal∣led Disci∣ph eccle∣siae sacra verbo Dei discripta, correct d altered & amended about. 1587. to many socie∣ties and worthy callings in this land, and yet I dare say, the most part neuer knew what they did desire. Nay, I dare confidently affirme, that the chiefest & learnedst sectaries of those times, and euen at this day, not sixe of them, did euer fully and soundly agree, in the maine points, and man∣ner of erecting, this their Goddesse Diana, this af∣fected discipline and reformation. Yet behold and obserue the effects. These silly Roes and Hindes once stirred vp, they flockt together and assembled in woods; they haunted priuate conuenticles in the night; they had secret Printers in euery corner, the publike congregation grew odious, the holy word and Sa∣craments were despised: at length they affirmed plainely there was no true Minister in the Church of England, and so some fled beeyond Seas, o∣thers gaue vp their calling, lurking idly in other mens ho ses, seducing their mindes, and wasting their estaes. While these reformers thus ranne
their course, honest plaine men, simple people, beholding such parts taking and contention, see∣ing such acceptions of persons, and varietie of o∣pinions, they in their ignorance stood at a gaze: some fell away to the Church of Rome, others waxed neither hot not cold, Athisme crept in, de∣uotion was laid aside, God exceedingly dishono∣red, and the estate both of Church and common wealth very much defaced, I say no more of these Roes and Hindes, . If then we regard the saluation, of simple peo∣ple, by rooting out all Athisme and Superstition, if wee tender their peaceable and Christian life, who are , misse-led vpon euery light occasion, then we must wholy lay aside, all con∣tention and difference whatsoeuer: with one hart, with one consent, we must all preach one and the selfe same doctrine, all vse the same ceremonies, thereby to win the people to Godlines of life, and holy reuerence; and alwaies (in regard of their weaknes) we must be shie and fearefull of stirring in the Church. The very Heathen haue taught vs discreation in this point. Amongst the wise Grecians the difficult points of their religion,Aug. de ciui. Del. li. 4. cap. 38 were neuer laid open to the dis∣cussing of the ignorant people, but closed vp with silence. Varro that notable, and learned writer, remoued those bookes which he wrote, touching
the deepest questions & misteries in Theologie, from the sight and knowledge of the multitude, Scholis verò ac parietibus clausit,Aug. de ciui. Dei. li. 6. cap. 5. he reserued them priuate to the learned Schooles. Aboue all others, the holy Apostles and aun∣ciant Fathers of blessed memory, were so chary in this point, hat if any doubt arose, f any que∣stion or controuersie fell out among them: they did not by and by set forth bitter inuectiues and sedicious Phamphlets, they did not put vp cla∣morous bils to temporall courts, they did not creepe and couch to lay men, for the boulstring and bearing out of any disorders in the Church, they did not haunt & trouble Christian Princes, with bould and vnaduised petitions, but as wee may see,Act. 15. by the Apostles Acts. 15. A matter of great consequence, was orderly and louingly dis∣oussed at Ierusalm, (the Schoole of the Prophets) and so peaceably ended by the chiefe and most excellent Apostles. This president and worthy ex∣ample, was truely followed by Saint Hierome and Ruffmus, by Saint Augustin by Chrysostome and Epiphamus, by the good Bishop of Alexandria, in the time of Arrius,Niceph. eccle hist. lib. 8 50. Paulus Diaco. by Thooe who sent priuate∣ly to Paule Patriarch of Constantinople: thus they conferred peaceably together, they wrote priuately one the each other, and so (neuer ma∣king the people acquainted) doubts being resol∣ued and controuersies ended euery man did rest
satisfied in his obedience and went peaceably on in his seuerall calling. These holy and graue men considered well, that the soules of the ignorant people were precious, their mindes like Roes and Hindes, easily missecaried, soone stirred vp, and quickly driuen from their wonted layer, there∣fore as the good shepherd in the 23. Psalme, they fed them peaceably in greene pastures, they led them not vnto torrentes, to troublesome whirlepooles, but  to the waters of rest,Heresbaci in Psal. 23. and as the originall doth infer to the sweete streames that run quietly. Stir not. THe substance of this charge, is dou∣ble: First, not to stir in respect of the danger: Secondly, not to waken, in re∣gard of the Spouse, who is fallen a∣sleepe, and peaceably taking rest. It is dangerous to stir, for that a rent or schisme in the Church, is like a wound in the Soule, or a great breach in the Sea, there is almost nothing able to close it vp againe. Howsoeuer at the first it seemes of small reckning, and of no importance, yet, it ne∣uer shewes it selfe at the beeginning in the right colors, but crescit eundo, it creeps on and gathers strength, and we shall neuer read, that the prima∣tiue
point of any Schisme, did euer rest, or stay it selfe, vntill it came to a full periode, of a plaine heresie.Hieron. Eccli. 11 32. Niceph. eccle. hist. li. 8. cap. 5. Nullum schisma, non sibi aliquam posted confingit haeresim. Of one little sparke is made a great fire. Arrian his heresie, it was but a sparke (as Ni∣cephorus doth write) first raised by one Alexan∣der Bancalis, because an other was preferred be∣fore him, yet this sparke set all Asia, Africke, and Europe on fire, & so poysoned the spawne of the Church,Cassiod. li. 1. cap. 12 in the florishing spring of worthie Con∣stantine, that euen to this day, it neuer recoue∣red the losse againe. Mahomet that Antichristian infidell, first, began his sect with a few followers, and because Heraclius the Emperour let him run on,Carion. anno. Do. 641. neglecting him as not worthy to be defeated, shortly after vnder colour of his religion, hee o∣uer ran Asia, defaced the East Church, subuer∣ted the glorious Empire of Constantinople, and so continues to this day the scourge of all Chri∣stendome. Bleidan. Bellū ru∣sticanum absumpsit Germano. rum. 150000. vei est in vita Cle∣mentis Rom. Pontificis▪Did not the Anabaptistes of late yeares. 1525. euen of a small sparke, raise such a flame in Ger∣manie, that growing at length to parts taking, by the base multitude, Temples, and cities were set on fire, banishment and proscription inflicted vpon the innocent, and at length a butchery mas∣saker made of fiftie thousand people slaine at one time, and an hundred thousand Christians mur∣dered at an other. They began with the Bishops,
and Clergie,Bullinger. but they ended with the deposing of ciuill Magistrates and destruction of the peo∣ple. The ground and primatiue cause of all the contentions raised heretofore in our Church, was at the first a small discontentment, a matter of priuate grudge, a little sparke: but by a bould admonition giuen at that time to the high court of Parliament, it wakened all England,Admoni∣tion. and set a number of tongues and pens on fire, (not with such fire as fell on the Alter, and sanctified the Sacrifice) but with the fire of bitternes, schisme, & contention, which could neuer yet be through∣ly quenched to this day. From this sparke, as from Hydra, what a num∣ber of poysoned heades sprong vp: Anabap∣tists, Brownists, Puritaines, Catharists, Atheists, the famille of loue, and such like. And notwith∣standing those worthy and learned men, who fled in queene Maries time (as Iohn Bale, Richard Cox, Iohn Pakhurst, William Burloe, Alexander Nowell; Iohn Iewell; Edwin Sands, Edmond Grindall, and very many more) maintained the gouernement of the Church of England, vsed in their holy as∣semblies, the forme of seruice, and order of cere∣monies which were established in King Edwards time, & ratified againe by good queen Elizabeth, yet behold, contrary to the iudgement & course of these learned and holy men, what strange,
what fiery and stirring conclusions were raised. That the choise of Ministers should stand vpon the approbation of the people,Cart. wright. Admoni∣tion Sup∣pli. to the Parlia. 56. and that they are all of equall authoritie: that the Church gouer∣ment was vtterly vnlawfull and Antichristian: That the Article of our faith, touching Christs descention into hell was foisted into the Creede: ThatHacket executed. Festidies. sunt com∣modè a∣bolendi. the Lords prayer, by our Sauiour himselfe commaunded, was not to be vsed: ThatSchis∣matiks in Berry. no ho∣liday might be obserued, but onely the Saboth: That noDefēded openly in the Vni∣uersitie. father or humaine writer might be al∣leadged in the Pulpet: That the Booke of com∣mon Prayer, was to bee abolished: That all the Ceremonies of our Church were Popish, and to be swept away:Mart iu. r. Adm. pa. 25. That the callings of Bishops, was an Antichristian & diuellish hierarchy: That reformation of Religion, belongeth to the com∣minaltie:Buccha de iure regni. Page. 61. & that the people are better then the King, and of greater authoritie: ThatScottish presbetary in prison at this day. the Pres∣bitery and not the Prince was to bee supreme gouernours in matters Ecclesiasticall. This sparke, what a number ofMartin iunior. Martin senior. Martin prote. Martinus Epist. His Epitome. Hay any work. seditious books, biting Libels, and slanderous Pamphlets, did it raise? This sparke amongst our selues, what heart burning, what boyling and secret grudges (by the neglect of some, and applauding of o∣thers,) did it breede? This sparke amongst great
personages, what palpable hypocrisie,Bishop∣ricks, spoi∣led, dis∣nembred. what soule sacriledge did it cause to bee committed? This sparke, what a gap did it open, and what way did it make into the hearts of many men, first, to doubt of the truth, and so after to bee won to the Church of Rome? amongst the Roes and Hinds; what disordered conuenticles,In Londō. soswich. Couentre Cābridge what prophane actions, what secret whisperings, what vile trea∣cheries did this sparke procure, Townes, Cities, Vniuersities, the whole Land was on flame with this sparke. In the peaceable estate of any Church, to re∣nue any old point of heresie, to set on soote a∣ny new opinion, any schisme, or intricate questi∣on, it proues like the cloud that Elias saw,1. Kin 18.44. at the first his seruant looked, and hee saw nothing; by and by hee bad him looke againe, and it bee∣gan to arise as big as a mans fist, at length it co∣uered the whole skie with darkenesse, and imme∣diately there followed a storme. In like sort the most dangerous heresies that euer were, at the first they haue beene raised of a small matter, and seemed nothing, but in the ende they haue shadowed the face of the Church, and caused immesurable bloudshed. Nay, it is to bee obser∣ued, in the course of all ages and times, that the greatest Monarchies, and most florishing King∣domes of the world, haue neuer receiued such fearefull blowes, and vnexpected downe-fals by
open and forraine enemies, as they haue done by stealing innouations and secrettreasons, first, raised by sects and heresies, in religion. There is nothing doth so knit together the hearts of men, as the band of Faith: againe, there is nothing doth cause such deadly hatred, and mortall ho∣stilitie, as difference and discord in religion. In a word, Dissention is the ordinarie gate, whereat destruction entreth in. The destruction of Ierusa∣lem, it first began with the ciuill discord of Simon and Eleazer: By the dissention of the Christi∣ans in the East Church, the Turke first entred into Hungary: and so generally discord hath euer wrought the translating of Kingdomes, & finall desolation. Therefore beloued Fathers, and Bre∣thren all, I humbly beseech you in the name of the liuing God, Submit your selues, to all manner ordinance of man,1. Peter, 2.13. Tit. 3.1. 1. Tim. 2.1 Rom. 13.1. for the Lords sake: euery man stand fast in loialtie and faithfull obedience, goe peaceably on in that calling, wherein God hath placed you, cease to be contentious, and with an humble spirit, striue to walke before the Lord in truth, and with a perfect heart. That so, the God of consolation, and peace, who hath plan∣ted amongst vs the Gospell of peace, and hath set ouer vs a religious King, a louer of peace, and hath setled in his dominions a ioyfull peace, may giue vnto his Spouse & graunt vnto his Church, loue, vnitie and a perpetuall peace, for his owne
name and glory sake. Waken not. THe second part of this charge, is not to waken Christs spouse,Cant. 8.9. for ielousie is cruell as the graue, and if any man be so hardy and bould as to waken his Loue, it shall surely bee reuenged. In the 54. of Esay. and the 5. as Christ is there called the Hus∣band, he that made thee is thy Husband, euen the Lord of Hostes: so Reuel. 29. & 9. the Church is called the pride or the Lambs wife, and here very gratiously hee vouchsafeth to call her his Loue. There is much a doe, many greuances or louers bee vnited. The Church of the Iewes, was 480. yeares vnder persecution of Pharao, and vexed by the Gentiles, or euer it came to enioy peace and prosperitie vnder Salomon. The primatiue Church was 300. yeares militant vnder ten grie∣uous persecutions or euer it came to be dormant vnder Constantine the great. This church of Eng∣land in times past, hath seemed to bee forsaken of her louer, and oftentimes since sundry broiles, many discontentments haue fallen out, or euer shee might hope assuredly, tò enioy any quiet rest indeed. She went about and sought him,Cant 3.2. whom
her soule loued,Ezech. 15 and found him not. But now as a bridegrome reioyceth ouer the Bride, so hath God reioyced ouer this Land, and deckea his Loue with ornaments, in a most excellent manner, shee is bee∣come glorious and of perfect beautie, her name is spred through the world, and other nations doe tast and are satisfied with the breasts of her consolation. If wee aduisedly consider, and call to remem∣brance, the bloudy massakers of France, and dif∣ference of Religion still therein: the wearisome broiles of Flanders, and vnsetled estate of the Church amongst them:The kings Mau∣pted at Rutheuer. 1, 84. If wee set beefore our eyes, the high indignities offered heretofore in Scotland, to our most worthy and religious King Iames; the sodaine and sundry mutines, and vp∣rores euer and anon arising from their presbite∣riall discipline:The kings Mae. e∣sciped at Strine∣ling, en∣forced to take the Castle. & in the end to com∣pound so his saseue. the vnstayed and discontented cariage, the poore and despised estate of such Church-men, as first hoped, but now cannot, with any reuerend gouernment rule therein, then must wee needes confesse, happy are wee in our setled peace, and most blessed in the Godly pro∣speritie which we enioy. This prosperitie, this rest of the Church, vn∣der Salomon then, and such like noble, wise, and religious Kings at this day, is compared vnto Sleepe, and out of this sleep, the Church may not bee wakened. For throughout this whole Song, Christ is neuer said to haue slept with his Spouse,
neither is there at any time mention of sleepe, but presently (as in three seuerall places) follows, this charge; that no man waken. There is one kinde of sleepe,Ouid. Homer. which is Mortis imago. Homer cals it , deaths bro∣ther, or a dead sleepe. Saint Paule in the 6. to the Ephes. 18. hee termes the death of sinne, , the spirit of slumber: the Church of Sardis in the 3. of the Reuel. is said to be in this slumber. Our Church also was supposed to haue beene in this sleepe, and thereupon, those Good men, Vaux, Peircy, and Catesbie, resolued to take punishment of the wickednesse of these times and to waken vs. But howsoeuer the Spouse might sleep,O feareful wakning. Cant. 5.2. her heart was waking, the prayers of the Saints continually crying, kept the mercie of the Lord waking so that though wee sleepe, the keeper of Israell did neither slumber nor sleepe, Hee ope∣ned the eyes, and wakned the heart of his cho∣sen seruant, to doubt of the danger, discry the plot, and to preuent the Deadly Blow. He is deli∣uered, the Lord is magnified, they are fallen, wee stand vpright, and blessed bee the God of our saluation. There is another kinde of Sleepe, which is Ros naturae, the sweat or the dew of nature, of this sleepe the Phisitions say, it is the repast of the bo∣dy, and the greatest comfort in nature that may bee. Such a sleepe, is this of the Spouse, ex rore di∣uino,
the dewe of heauen hath fallen vpon her, he hath giuen his beloued sleepe, et sucro silentia sommo procurat.Bemard. God forbid I should come hither in the name of my God, and stand here before this holy and honorable presence, to wound my conscience, by deliuering an vntruth, or by blanching of sin and corruption, to dishonour my holy calling. No, viuit Iehouath, The Lord knoweth my thoughts, I speake the truth, (as I conceiue) from my soule, to the glorious praise of our euerlast∣ing God, and to the great comfort and encou∣ragement of all that heare me. As it is in the former part of this Chapter. Christ hath now brought his Spouse into the wine seller,Verses. 4.5.6. he hath stay∣ed her with flagons, & comforted her with aples, his left hand is vnder her head, and his right hand doth imbrace her, that is, satisfied in great measure both with temporall and spirituall blessings, shee doth rest in great prosperitie. Shee hath laid her downe in peace,Psal. 4.9. and taketh her rest, for now the Lord hath made her to dwell in safetie. O let vs praise the Lord for his goodnesse, and neuer be ashamed, to declare the wonders, and to publish the blessings, which hee hath brought vpon vs this day. Our eyes doe see them, our thoughts must needes acknowledge them, and our ene∣mies (wee finde by late experience) with secret
and great mallice doe enuie them. Giue me leaue therefore (I humbly beseech you) euen for the glory of Gods blessed name (whose exceeding mercie we are bound to acknowledge) & also for a testimonie of our owne priuate duties, to make some relation of those benefites, which wee en∣ioy by the blessed gouernment of our gratious Soueraigne, whose happy and ioyfull entrance into this Kingdome, wee doe celebrate this day. It is a plaine, but an excellent principle.Euripides. , Let him ne∣uer take vpon him, nor desire to rule, who hath not first learned to obey, and to forbeare. It is well knowne vnto vs all, sundry times hath the quiet state of this Realme beene disturbed, much hurly burly raised, many treasons brued, practi∣sing and procuring the death of our former Queene, pretending most what, some title and interest vnto the crowne, but beehold, notwith∣standing, the apparant truth of his Maiesties ti∣tle was openly knowen to all the States in Chri∣stendome, and that long before, he might haue procured stronge meanes, to haue inuested him∣selfe;Forbea∣rancce. with the honour and possession of the same: yet still, did he patiently abide the Lords leasure, as one who truely feared God, hee neuer com∣bined with France, nor complotted with Spaine; he neuer stirred vp, either subiect within, or for∣raine power without, but that which is yet very
ioyfull to remember, and seldome performed of naturall brothers in one familie, two mightie Princes, good Queene Elizabeth, and our blessed King, most amiably they did liue, and loue, (and as it were in one land) peaceably raigne to∣gether. When God had ended her daies in peace, af∣ter many distracted feares, wherewith the hearts of all beegan sodainely to bee perplexed; how blessed were we in the present succession of the crowne,Successiō. the happie gouernement whereof, did calmely come in, and peaceably arise, as after a short night, the cheerefull and faire morning Sun-shine. How secure is now the state, in the vndoubt∣ed apparance of blessed Issue,Issue. a stay to the Land, and comfort to euery good subiects heart. Blessed art thou,Pron. 28.15 O Land (saith the Scripture) whose Prince is the Sonne of Nobles.Royall dis∣cent. In the royall discent of this imperiall crowne, the Rose is not onely sprounge from the Red and White, des∣cended from the noble off-spring of both houses, Lancaster and Yorke (thereby most happely ta∣king away all occasion of ciuill dissention) but moreouer happy are wee in our selues, and fear∣full to other nations, in the quiet and lawfull vni∣on of these Kingdomes. Phantasticall humors did please themselues a while, and selfe conceit∣ed heades, haue vainely discoursed with idle
similies, against the ordinance of God in this be∣halfe: but (leauing the future successe, and far∣ther coniunction to prayer, forbearance, and time) in this one blessing,Vnion. we may plainely bee∣hold the extraordinarie mercies of the Lord. For I am vndoubtly perswaded (next after the know∣ledge of Christ, and the true profession of the Gospell) this day, this day I say, is now, and here∣after shall bee, the most memorable and happy Day, that in this Land was euer commended vn∣to posteritie these 1000. yeares. Indeed, the con∣quest of France, hath title of renowne, but wee know well the possession thereof was gotten by bloud, kept with charge and lost with dishonour. But by his Maiesties lawfull succession vnto the crowne, that which the great and deepe States∣men of England, forecast many hundred yeares to compasse; that which by dint of sword, and much effusion of bloud hath often beene attemp∣ted; that which all the victorious Kings of Eng∣land often desired, but neuer fully effected; that which the example of other Christian Kings, and the wisest nations teach vs; that which the very idencity of place, language, condition, nature, soyle, affinitie, and all in themselues doe offer; the Lord God, who is wonderfull in counsell, and excellent in workes, that hath he sweetly brought about: without present alliance in mariage, with∣out tumult in warre, without wronge to any
state whatsoeuer, Israell and Iuda, Scotland and England, are both one, the secret and wise ordi∣nance of God hath so setled it, O let the consent and mutuall loue of both nations peaceably con∣firme it, and God in his mercie and goodnesse seale it fast for euer. Irish expe∣ditions. ceased.Since his happy entrance into this kingdome, how well is the whole Common wealth eased and disburdened of the continuall and troublesome charge of our Irish expeditions: Spanish broilcs ap∣pears.How Christianlie are appeased, the vnchristi∣an and bloudy spoyles, robberies, and murders daily committed betweene Spaine and vs. Most Godly and amiable, is the confederate league concluded with our bordering neighbors round about vs.Confe∣derate derate League. most chri∣stian. To subdue Nations, and enlarge Kingdomes, by conquest and bloudshed to wic∣ked and tirannous Princes, it seemes great glory and felicitie, but by good and Christian Kings warre is neuer sought, but enforced by necessitie. Faelicitas maior est,Malis fae∣licitas bo∣nis neces∣sitas. Aug. lib. 4. Aug. de ciuit. Dei li. 4.15. vicinum bonum habere concor∣dem, quam vicinum malum subiugare bellantem. It is greater honour and felicitie, to retaine the loue of a good neighbour concording in peace, then to continue the secret hatred of an ill neigh∣bour seduced by war. Isocrates. ad NicoleThe wise Orator saith. . Faithfull and wise counsellers are the most
profitable and worthy treasure,Faithful Counsel∣lers. which any prince enioyeth. And is not the Common Wealth fur∣nished, with as noble, faithfull and wise Counsel∣lers of state, as learned, stoute,Learned & vncorrup∣ted Law∣ers. vncorrupted Iudges and worthy Lawyers, as reuerend Bishops, shining in their liues and learning, as euer age af∣forded:Reuerend Bishops. all these (through the milde and wise go∣uernement of a gratious King) retaining their former dignities,Gospell e∣stablished. and faithfully performing their duties both to God and to their King. Is not the truth of the Gospell, most peaceably, established and carefully professed, with such re∣uerend and constant ioy in hearing the word, and frequenting of prayer, as giueth example to all the protestant Princes of Christendome? To see the populous Court of a mightie King, as peaceable, well giuen and religious, as the well ordered familie of a priuate mans house, what christian heart will not ioy to heare it, and who can but magnifie the God of heauen to know it. Mariage honored.The sacred bands of holy mariage, are they not tenderly kept; highly esteemed, and haue they not beene solemnly graced in Court, to the imi∣tation of all the Land? Euery great Cittie and incorporation, and euery part of the Land, is it not replenished with Godly and learned Preachers,Learned and Godly teachers. trained vp in the vniuersities, able in some good measure to teach,
rebuke and exhort with good discreation and iudgement? What so is wanting and defectiue herein,Conferēce as Hamptō such hath beene his Maiesties Princely zeale that hee hath referred the care thereof to speciall Committies, that with all couenient speede, Wales, Ireland and the Northren borders, might be supplyed and planted with learned and religious Teachers? Henry Iacob in his seditious Epistle dedicated to the King,H. Iocob. is not ashamed to affirme that the present Ecclesiasticall orders are more friendly to Papists,Ceremo∣monies. Godly and approued. T. C. Libertines and Atheists, then to the since∣ritie of the Gospell: an other also of the same rancke, sets it downe, that wee may better con∣forme our selues in orders and ceremonies to the Turke, then to the Papists. What a strange and dangerous position is this? O where is discreti∣on and pietie, where is Christian loue, and holy moderation? Seeing the doctrine is sound and good in the chiefe and maine points of saluati∣on, why should any man speake so vnaduisedly, in matters of lesse importance? Alas wee also are bound to pray for you, to shew you the right way, and woe be vnto vs, if (as men pleasers) we shall speake against our owne knowledge, or that o∣thers should bee constraind, to subscribe to that which is not consonant with the truth. Heare therefore and as a wise and vnderstanding peo∣ple at length bee satisfied. For vndoubtedly the
ceremonies of the Church, and especially the vse of the Corsse,The vse of the Crosse approued by Origen. in Psal. 38. Basi. de spir. Sanct. cap. 37. Chris. tom. 2. hom. 55. in Mat. cap. 16. Hiero. li. 3. in Ezech. Aug. tract. 55. in Ioh. & de vea∣bis Dei. serm. 18. & 53. Greg. Mag in li 3. in Iob. cap 33 Ambro. li. 2. cap. 7. & other many. so much excepted against this day, as the Standard of Christs honor, hath euer beene aduanced, and borne aloft in the eye of the Church, to the comfort of all good Christi∣ans, by the whole troupe of the blessed Fathers, the Charrets, and horse-men of Israell. And ge∣nerally those ceremonies vsed at this day in our Church, they are in themselues indifferent, in number few, in vse decent. They are peaceable in regard of conformitie, reuerend to breede de∣notion in the people, and for continuance these 1500. yeares vncontrowlable: They are conso∣nant with the Scriptures, the exposition where∣of, is confirmed by the iudgement of the aun∣ciant Fathers of the primatiue Church; appro∣ued directly by later interpreters, defended souldly by new writers, discussed by Kingly con∣ference, agreed vpon by nationall consent, esta∣blished by highest authoritie, attested and made good by the approbation and iudgement of o∣ther neighbour Churches, as appeareth plaine∣ly in the confessions and seuerall articles of Hel∣uetia, Boheme, Ausburge, France, Flanders,Heluetia. 1. art Boh. 25.15.18. Aus. art 4. Fra. art▪ 32 Sand. 32. Sax. ar 20 Sweuel. cap. 4. Saxo∣nie and Sweueland. It is a grounded principle, approued by the learned diuines in all ages. In iis rebus in quibus nihil statuit certum scriptura diuina, nobis populi Det & Christiani principis iura tenenia sunt. In
those things wherein the Scripture hath set downe no certaintie, the Lawes of the Christian Prince, and of Gods people are with all obedi∣ence to bee embraced. To proceede in this peace and prosperitie of the Church, concerning the Saboth: How gene∣rally is it obserued, how religiously sanctified, euen in this great and busie Citie, wherein the streetes may often be seene in a manner deso∣late, and few stirring vpon the Saboth,Saboth. in the time of diuine prayer and preaching: The pain∣full preaching frequented with infinite congre∣gations, and mightie assemblies in this famous Citie; the diligent and daylie prayers, the deuo∣tion and thankesgiuing, the readinesse and at∣tention, in heating the word of God both preach∣ed and reade euen in this place where I stand, doth witnesse what I say. O how faire and bles∣sed a thing it is, for a Christian King to heare and know, all the inhabitants of his Domini∣ons, to bee assembled vpon the Saboth, to bee knit together as one man, praising, singing and reioysing in God all their prayers well neere at an instant, as the flame of a thousand moun∣taines, ascending aloft and peircing the very heauens. And is it not as louely to behold, all the peo∣ple of these Kingdomes,Industry of the peo∣ple. with obedience to Law, and loue to their Soueraigne, to go peaceably on
as birds in the spring, busied euery one in their seuerall callings, and all the weeke long cheere∣fully following their vocation? Hath not the Lord crowned yeare after yeare with his blessing, the Land giuing such encrease that notwithstanding there bee at this present, in this Citie and Suburbs sixe hundred thousand liuing Soules,Plentie. yet they all are well and plentifully fed, and all the people throughout the land wax∣ing warme and wealthie, sit peaceably vnder their vines, taking their pleasure and recreation? . It is a waies an assured and good signe of excellent gouernement, when the people of any kingdome doe grow more wealthie, and become more ciuill and religious. What excellent and Godly acts, stand in force, for the wise ordering and comfortable reliefe of the poore? What straight and holy Canons or,Good Lawes, for the religious proceeding in all mat∣ter Ecclesiasticall? What seueritie is openly pro∣nounced, and what punishment daily executed vpon corrupt Officers & powlers of the people Hath not Mercie triumphed ouer iustice,Mercie. and compassion to forgiue (the perfect note of true Christianitie) shewed it selfe abundantly in par∣doning sundry offences, and sparing the liues of dangerous and hatefull Traitors?
Feare admitteth no securitie:Democrit. , whom all men are a∣fraid of, such a man, stands in feare of all men. And therefore, like a wise and right Christian Prince he doth not build his safety vpon strength and power, but vpon the mercie of God, vpon Princely affabilitie,Affability with his Nobles, and vpon the loue and faithfulnesse of his subiects. Doctor Hill and other Papists, Iacob and other sectaries, they slanderously auouch, that their persecutions are many, and their afflictons very grieuous: and ye behold all dissention in religion,Milde go∣uernment. hath beene a∣waies labored and is still sought, by all forber∣rance and gentle meanes to be appeased: yea to∣wards, all men in generall, the gouernement is sweet and milde, and himselfe in his priuate na∣ture, so louing and compassionate,Ambro. de obitn. Theod. that as Theido. hee seeketh to binde men vnto him, not by force, but by bountie & religion. Troublesome and se∣dicious spirits will neuer cease to murmure and complaine,Aug. de ciuit Dei lib. 1. cap 8. but the point is: Non qualia, sed qualis quis{que} patiatur. Since his blessed Raigne doe not our hearts secretly tell vs, that wee feele and daily tast of ioyfull Peace,Peace. sought by mightie Kings and embraced by forraine Nations, as in the daies of Solomon? Is not true Nobilitie, honorably respected? Vir∣tue and well doing cheerefully rewarded? Holy
men and discreet daily aduanced?Vertue rewarded. the reuenewes of the Church lately confirmed: and diuers foun∣dations, of Religion already laid, as in the glorious raigne of great Constantine? The Lord is God, the Lord is God, and who is such a God as our God. O wretches, and vnthankefull men that we are, wee know not our owne good, we weigh not the sweet mercies of a kinde and gratious God. For in these and many other respects, which are most apparant to the view of all men, I assure my selfe that his royall Maiestie (whom the Lord protect with his mightie hand long to reigne o∣uer vs) is now, and shall bee for euer renowned amongst the most famous Kings, that euer liued in the world: and that the Church, and com∣mon Wealth of England, so happely gouerned by his Highnesse, is now at this day the most Apostolike and florishing Church, the most re∣ligious Court, the most peaceable and vpright state, that is in all Christendome: How bee it when Prince and People, when Nobilitie and Clergy, when all estates and degrees, doe thus Godly and peaceably go on, enioying such bles∣sed happines, such quiet, and reposed peace, would not the Sunne bee abashed, and the pow∣ers of nature daunted, that Christian men, and especially such as are deuoted vnto God in sa∣cred and holy orders, some professing great ho∣linesse and austeritie, others much purenesse and
great singularitie, both these should neuer cease to disturbe and waken the churches peace? Sure∣ly it is the Lord that giueth his beloued sleepe, and this sleepe, this prosperitie of the Church, and Common Wealth, it is a blessing inestima∣ble vnto his people, therefore when hee vouch∣safeth to giue rest, no man ought to waken or stirre vntill shee please, and that is neuer  vntill it is plainely neuer.Vntill. Genes. 8. The Rauen return∣ed not vntill the waters were dryed vp, that is Neuer. Mat. 1.25. Ioseph knew not the blessed Vir∣gin vntill shee had brought forth her first begot∣ten, that is Neuer, neuer, neuer let any man wa∣ken the blessed Spouse. The Conclusion. BVt for as much, as the person, from whom this Commission is directed, is the Metropolitane and great shepherd of our soules, Christ Iesus; the penner of the holy Ghost the heauenly Secretary: seing hee vouchsafeth to call the Church his Loue, the deepest of all the affections: her peace compa∣red to Sleepe, the sweetest comfort in nature: seeing Christ Iesus himselfe, most wise, louing, and fearefull, is not content to perswade, but ve∣hemently to charge, and yet the attributes ap∣plyed
most sweet and kind, Daughters for Loue, Ierusalem for peace: seeing the Charge it selfe is so straitly giuen not one to stir, and in no case to Waken, the Date so plainely set downe, that is, must bee Neuer, according to the tenure of my text, in the person of Christ Iesus, I adiure and solemnly charge: I charge by the holy Patri∣arkes, Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, who in their ge∣nerations, were men of Peace, I charge by the holy Apostles, who haue commaunded vs to keepe the vnitie of the Spirit in the bond of Peace: I charge by the holy Angels, who at the birth of Christ did sing Peace: I charge, by our Faith, Hope and Charitie, which are the fruites of Peace: I charge by that Obedience, due both to the ci∣uil Magistrate and spirituall gouernour, who are by all good meanes to preserue and maintaine Peace: I charge, by the Dum Beastes of the field, who shall take reuenge vpon the disturbers of Peace: Lastly, I adiure and charge, by the Soules of the ignorant and simple people; the least whereof a thousand worlds are not able to redeeme, that no man despise the voyce of this great shepherd this double and three-fold Charge, which con∣cerneth the flowrishing and happy peace of our country, the prosperitie and peaceable rest of the Church; the beeing, liuing, and well being of vs all. Whosoeuer hath any true tast of a religious
heart: whosoeuer hath any care of his Soules Saluation: whosoeuer hath any respect to the honour of his name, and regard of his posteri∣tie: whosoeuer hath any dutifull affection to his Prince and country, let him pray rather that his tongue may cleaue to the roofe of his mouth, and his right arme wither from his body, then once to bee accounted amongst the number of those, who will bee seene to stirre in so well go∣uerned a state, to waken so blessed rest of the Spouse, to discontent the religious heart of so gratious a King, and to blemish the glory of so renowned a Common Wealth. Ah Lord, what estate of Church or Common Wealth did euer in this world at thine vnto per∣fection? , whose de∣sert and wisedome could euer content all hu∣mours? wherein haue not the most Noble and Christian Worthies of the world beene sought, one way or other secretly to bee wronged? and who knoweth (touching these late and grieuous treasons,) why the Lord hath suffered euill coun∣sell to bee vndertaken and with such malice and bloud to bee pursued? Vndoubtedly, First, it may bee thought to this ende, that all the people of this Land, and euery one heere present, might take heede how wee forget our louing God, in the dayes of our pro∣speritie,
that wee might learne, to stand fast, vpon the Lord, as vpon mount Sion, to relie on his loue, as the centre of our life, in all dangers to stye vnto him, as a Bird doth vnto the shadie hill for safetie, that so both heart and tongue might acknowledge his gooodnesse, and as a floud into the Sea, send thanksgiuing to so deare a God againe. Secondly,Aug. permittit Deus quod nemo impunè committit, God suffereth euill and wicked men for a time, expecting their repentance and look∣ing for their conuersion, but, if they persist, and become as Pharao was, hardened in their bloud∣thirsty crueltie, then the Lord, euen for his owne glory, doth suffer them to play vpon the hooke, and daunce in the snare, till at length it might bee knowen, to all Nations and King∣domes, round about, that when it comes to the very poynt, the Lord will rouse himselfe like a Gyant, turne all such practises vpside-downe; but will deliuer his chosen, execute iudgement vpon the wicked,Psal. 16. and the vngodly shall bee trap∣ped in the works of their owne hands. Therefore let neither Prince nor people, bee dismayed, and cast downe with traiterous and fearefull rumors, but let his sacred Maiestie, comfort his heart, raise vp his Spirit, and walke cheerefully vpon the inuincible hope, and assured experience of
the Lords fore passed loue, let him hold still fast by God, and assuredly, height and depth, edge and point, shall fall and flye before him, all his crosses shall afford him ioy, his enemies aduan∣tage, and his account shall cheerefully bee cast vp for another world. Lastly, the Lord hath suffered, euill counsailae thus farre to preuaile, that euery priuate man who liues in peace and safetie, might consider and weigh, what a grieuous burden it is, to sway the Scepter of a Kingdome, how the Kings life is hunted after for our sakes, for the happines which wee enioy, how Hee and his Nobles are in continuall danger, how (not for himselfe) but for vs, for vs it is, that Hee and his Posteritie is pursued with such deadly hatred: yet notwith∣standing, the Lord stands close vnto him, hee hath fastned the crowne vpon his head, and set∣led the Scepter in his hand, mauger the cruel∣tie of all his enemies, and the rage of the Di∣uell himselfe, hee will haue all the world to see, that hee hath set him vp, to bee the onely meanes both of establishing our happinesse en∣ioyed, and also of discouering our danger esca∣ped: that so, when all the people of this Land, shall plainely see, how the Lord hath set his de∣light vpon him: how from the very cradle hee hath lapped him in the bosome of his loue, how
hee hath puld him out of the iawes of death, from Poisen ready to bee taken, from Murde∣ring at an instant, from the Lake of Fire, rea∣dy to bee kindled: wee and all his Subiects, might bee moued, to loue him with a dutifull and entire affection, to pray for him, as for our owne Soules, to ioy in his prosperitie, as the life of our well doeing, to esteeme him in our thoughts, and honour him in our hearts as a tender Father, beeloued of God, the maintain∣er of Religion, the giuer of peace, the ioy of his Subiects, the honour of all Christian Princes, and that with ioy and thanksgiuing wee might sing and showt this day. God saue our King for euer. Now therefore O Lord our GOD, who dwellest in the highest Heauens, infinite in goodnesse, abundant in mercie, and glorious in prayses, wee magnifie thy name, and tri∣umph in thy mercie, for that, still wee doe en∣ioye this happy day. Alas, of our selues, what is our King, and what are wee his Subiectes, that from time to time, thou shouldest so ten∣derly loue him, and so continually follow vs, with thy gratious and sweete mercies? Wee know O Lord, Riches and Honour, Peace and prosperitie, Life and Deliuerance come onely from thee: Greatnesse and Power, Glory, Vic∣torie and Prayses they are thine: and what shall wee render vnto thee, our dearest God? One∣ly
this. Beefore Heauen and Earth, beefore thy holy Angels, beefore all thy Saints, and Ser∣uaunts, heere present in this publike congrega∣tion, wee doe bow our hearts and the thoughts of our hearts vnto thee, wee acknowledge our owne vnworthinesse, ascribing all our happinesse, and this our late deliuerance to thy fatherly protecti∣on onely. We are heartely sory, and doe secretly mourne in our soules, that for all thy kinde and vnspeak∣able blessings, we cannot serue thee as we ought, nor loue thee as we would, but we entreat thy glo∣rious Maiestie, stir vp in vs good desires, encrease them more and more, crowne them with thine owne mercie, and wee will neuer cease to sing e∣uerlasting priases vnto thy name. Deare God and eternall Father, be pleased, be pleased to confirme this goonesse, and to establish this thy couenant both with our King and vs thy people for euer. For thy mercy sake, for thine own glory sake, for thy Son Christ Iesus sake, forsake vs not, neither leaue vs, continue for euer our lo∣uing God, let vs and the remnant of our seed after vs bee sealed vp, in thy mercifull promise, in thy gratious and euerlasting loue, and that through Iesus Christ, to whom, with the Father and holy Ghost, bee all honour, praise and thankesgiuing both now and for euer. Amen. FINIS.
