17679 99848397 13487
A True Relation of the famous & renowmed Victorie latelie atchieued by the Counte Maurice of Nassau, neere to Newport in Flaunders a∣gainst the Arch-Duke ALBERTVS: with the names of such noblemen & others of account, as haue bin ey∣ther slaine or taken Prisoners in this seruice late-done and y performed▪ Truly translated out of the Duch copie. LONDON, Printed by Ralph Blower, for C. B.
❧ A TRVE RELATION of the late proceadings of the States Armie in Flaunders, and of the late ser∣uice done and performed by them against the Spanniardes, the two and twentith of Iune last past. 1600. THe Tweluth of Iune last past, (after the com∣putation of Englande) the States of the lowe Cuntries landed in Flaunders, néere to a place called Burfleete, and in Nine dayes march, they came from thence to Ostende: where after the taking of certaine Sconces, the Count Maurice laide siege, to the Towne of Newport, purposing to fortifie him selfe in such sort, as not to be easily remoued: howbeit▪ such was the great care and dilligence of the Enemie to preuent them, as the Arch-Duke came himselfe in person to giue them Bat∣taile. But the suddaine and speadie comming of the Enemie caused the States Armie (not being well setled in the siege) to remoue thence, and to encounter the Enemie, who then marched towardes them with great furie, they being the ra∣ther incouraged thereto, by reason of an euerthrow giuen to two Thowsande Scots (being the States men of warre) the same morning, which Scottes were vnder the Conducte or leading of the Count ERNESTVS, who was sent before to
preuent the passage of the Enemie by the way. After this, both the Armies being ordred & placed in Bat∣taile array, and each of them within sight of other: they pau∣sed a while who should beginne the fight, or giue the first on∣set: at length the Enemie impatient of delayes, and incou∣raged with the former victorie obtained against the Scots, advaunced themselues forwardes, displaide their Ensignes, and gaue the Charge: which was entertained with such re∣sollution on the Sates side, as they were forced to a retreat, and were pursued till they had gayned some places of aduan∣tage. Their Horses chardging the States men in flancke, whose secondes fayling them, they were inforced to retire: But making presently a stande, they forced the Enemy to a second Retreat, which was then so hottely followed by the States men, and with such great courage and resollution, that they had the aduauntage in slaughtering and killing of the Enemie, from the Hauen of Newport, to the walles of Ostende. In this Battaile, the Englishmen had the Van-guarde, commaunded by Sir Fraunces Vere and his Brother. The Honor of the Victorie that day, was whollie ascry∣bed to the English-men. In this fight were slaine, fiue English Captaines, besides other Captaines and Officers that were hurt, Sir Fraunces Vere himselfe was hurt in the Legge and Thighes, and my Lorde Gray was hurt in the face with a Sworde. Of the States men (of all sortes) there were slaine, more then two Thousande, and as many more sore hurt and grie∣uously wounded. Of the Enemies parte, it is crediblie reported, that there was aboue foure thousande slaine, and aboue a thousande ta∣ken prisoners, besides many that were hurt and wounded. The Enemies Armie consisted as it was reported in sea∣uen
or Eight Thousande footemen, and Seauentéene Cornets of Horsemen, and were devided into thrée squadrons, where∣of the first being Spaniardes, and were conducted by Dan∣lois de Villeers, Don Iasper de Sapena, and Ieronimo denau∣roy. The first two were taken Prisoners, & the thirde of them is not as yet hearde of. The seconde squadron were Wallons, and were conduct∣ed by one La Berlotte Don Alfonso and Bostock, Nephew to sir William Stanley, whereof La Berlot and Bostock were both slaine. The Thirde Squadron were Flemminges, and were vnder the commaunde of one Backwrie, who was also slaine at that time. The Admirall of Aragon is taken Prisoner, and it is ve∣rely thought that Sir William Stanley is slaine. The Spanniardes lost their Ordinances, (being some Eight great pieces in the whole) and the Arch-Duke him∣selfe lost all his own Plate and Baggage. The fighte continued from one of the Clocke in the mor∣ning, till fiue in the after Noone of the same day. The Spaniardes lost in this seruice, aboue an hundred Ensignes, as is most certainly knowne. The Arch-Duke himselfe fled into Bridges, and so esca∣ped away very bardely, he being somewhat hurt as it is sup∣posed. The States Armie is now before Newport, and the place as it is thought, rendred vp to the States before this time.
¶ The Names of the fiue Eng∣lish Captaines that then were slaine, were these. Captaine Yaxley. Captaine Hunnywoode. Captaine Parden. Captaine Terret. Captaine Paxroy.
The names of such Noblemen and Commaunders of the Enemie, as then were either taken or slaine by the Counte Maurice and his forces. Prisoners of account taken. Don Francisco de Mendosa, Marques of Quadelles, and great Admirall of ARRAGON. The Counte of Salins. The Counte de la Fiere. Don Lewis de Valasco. Don Charles de Sapina. The Names of such as were slaine in the Conflict. The Count of Bauquoy. The Count Frederick Vanden Bergh. Don Ambrosio de Adrians. Don Iohn de Rymans, Commaunder of ye Flemmish Regi∣ment. a Parlotte commaunder of the Wallons. Mounsieur Fresyne.
The Gouernour of Dunkerke. The Traitour William Stanley. Of the Arch-Duke ALBERTVS. and of the Duke of Aunae, there is no certaintie as yet, whether they be dead or aliue. Moreouer, all the Ensignes and Banners that were ta∣ken from the Enemie in this seruice were brought into the Tent of his Excellencie, and his Souldiers were mightely enriched by the Spoyle. The Arch-Duchesse her selfe trauailed with the Campe, vntill she came to the Cittie of Bridges in Flaunders, where she then left them. It is since reported by some, that the Arch-Duke is yet li∣uing, and that there are come vnto him to the number of six Thousande fresh Souldiers, (taken vp in Artois, and He∣nault) and are vnder the conduct of the Duke of Arschot. Also it is reported for certainetie, that there are 3000 fresh men taken out of the lande of Luick, and that they are with all speade marching to the Campe of his Excellencie, the Prince Maurice. FINIS.
