18301 99837263 1578
A Daily EXERCISE for LADIES and GENTLEWOMEN. Whereby they may learne and practise the whole Art of making Pastes, Preserues, Marma∣lades, Conserues, Tartstuffes, Gel∣lies, Breads, Sucket Candies, Cordiall vvaters, Conceits in Sugar-vvorkes of seuerall kindes. As also to dry Lemonds, Orenges, or other Fruits. Newly set forth, according to the new approued Receipts, vsed both by Ho∣nourable and Worshipfull personages. BY IOHN MVRREL Professor thereof. LONDON: Printed for the vvidovv Helme, and are to be sould at her shop in S. Dunstans Church-yard in Fleetstreet. 1617.
TO MY MVCH HONOVRED THE TRVLY VERTVOVS, Mris. ELIZABETH BINGHAM, wife of Nicholas Bingham Esquire. AS there is no∣thing new vn∣der heauen; so, nothing old (be∣side the Olde of dayes) can please Soule, or Sense: Yet
on olde Grounds are new Descants daily, as full of rarietie, as varietie: that doth please; the pleasure of Man consisting in nothing more, than in euery thing; that is, in change: varietie standing more aloofe from sacietie, than vniformitie, in whatsoeuer sensible. Wee alter our Fashions and outward Habits daily; the whitest Ruffe being not long since thought the pu∣rest wearing; then the blew; and now the yealow: So, our Cookery, Pastry, Di∣stillations,
Conserues, and Preserues, are farre other∣wise now, than not long since they were; Daily Practise and Obseruation finding out eyther what to adde or detract from olde Formes in eyther of these kindes; or to make new much more pleasing and profitable. These are all, (or, at least, the most) of the newest Straine; ap∣proued and beloued of those that try them. What else they are I referre to your iudgement, and my
selfe to your good fauour; euer remaining, The humble louer of your manifold vertues, IO: MVRREL.
The generall Table of this Booke: Whereof the first containeth Pastes, Preserues, Marmalades, Conserues, Tartstuffes, Gellies, &c. Pastes. TO make Paste of Re∣gia, against Con∣sumption. 1 To make Paste of Genua. 2 To make Paste of Pomcittron. 3
Marmalades. TO make Marmalade of Quinces. 26 To make Marmalade red of Quinces, commonly called Lump-Marmalade, that shall looke as red as a Rubie. 27 To make Marmalade of War∣dens. 28 To make greene Marmalade of Pippins. 29 To make red Marmalade that shall looke very orient. 30 To make Dia Setonia of Quin∣ces. 31
Conserues. TO make Conserue of Violets. 32 To make Conserue of Barberries. 33 To make Conserue of Roses. 34 To make Conserue of Gelliflo∣wers. 35 To make conserue of Cowslips. 36 To make Conserue of Mari∣golds. 37 To make Conserue of Damsons. 38 Tartstuffes. TO make Tart-stuffe of dam∣sons to keep all the yeer. 39
To make tartstuffe of Prunes. 40 To make white tartstuffe. 41 To make yealow tartstuffe. 42 Gellies. TO make Quiddeniock. 43 To make Chrystall Gellie. 44 To preserue Pippins to lie in qua∣king Gellie. 45 To make Gellie of Pippins, of Amber colour. 46 To make Gellie of Pippins as ori∣ent red as any Rubie. 47 To make Leach of Almonds of diuers pleasing colours. 48
Breads. TO make red Ginger-bread otherwise called. Leach Lumbar. 49 To make white Ginger-bread. 50 To make Italian Bisket. 51 To make Ginetoes. 52 To make Prince Bisket. 53 To make French Macaroones. 54 To make Naples Bisket. 55 To make Shelbread. 56 To make Countesse Cakes. 57 To make a fine Sugar Cake. 58
Rough Rock Candies. TO make rocke de Cittron. 59 To rough rock Candie Orenges dried with Sugar. 60 To rough Candie sprigs, or bran∣ches of Rosemarie. 61 To rough Candie all flowers. 62 Sucket Candies. TO sucket Candie greene Le∣monds: 63 To sucket Candie greene Ginger. 64 To sucket Candie Walnuts. 65 To sucket Candie Peaches, or any greene Plumme before it be stoned. 66
Cordiall Waters. TO make Aqua Coelestis. 67 To make Cinamon Water. 68 To make Dr. Steuens water. 69 To make Balme water. 70 To make Angelica water. 71 To make Wormwood water. 72 Conceits in Sugar-works. TO make March-pane Paste. 73 To make a March-pane. 74 To make any conceit in March∣pane stuffe. 75 To make any other small conceits in Sugar worke or Almond
paste, or Sugar plate paeste. 76 To make Snailes, Snakes, &c. 77 To make Shoes, Slippers, &c. 78 To make letters or knots, &c. 79 To make Walnuts both shell and kernell. 80 Sugar-Workes of ano∣ther sort. TO make Sugar plate paste. 81 To make Paste of sundry flowers. 82 To make Pennet. 83 To make Cinamon sticks by Art. 74 To make Callishones. 85 To make Muscachones. 86 To make Muscadinaes. 87
The Table. To make Troses for the cold. 88 To make Cinamon Letters. 89 To make Canalones in spices. 90 To make Ruskilians. 91 To make Gentillissoes. 92 To make Nouellissoes. 93 To make Lozenges of Violets. 94 To drie Fruits. TO drie Orenges or Le∣monds. 95 To dry white Peare-Plums. 96 To dry black Peare-Plums. 97 To dry Pippins as cleere as Am∣ber. 98 To dry Apricockes orient and ve∣rie cleere. 99 To dry Peares without any Su∣gar. 100
Physicall Receipts. TO make sirupe of Ʋiolets. 101 To make sirupe of Liquorice. 102 To make sirupe of Roses solutiue. 103 To make sirupe of drie Roses. 104 Against the trembling of the heart. 105 Against the rising of the mother 106 An almond milke. 107 Against loosenesse of the Bodie. 108 A Receipt for a vomit. 109 Against extreame coughing. 110
Order of Colours. 111 Colours edible, 112 To colour Leach. 113 FINIS.
GEntle Reader, if any shall bee desirous to buy any of the moulds wherein any of the formes specified in the Booke fol∣lowing are made, they may haue them also where these Bookes are to be sould. Farewell.
Of Pastes. To make Paste of Regia against a Consumption. 1 TAke two Quailes, two Roales, two Partridges, a do∣zen of cock Spar∣rowes, the brawne of a Ca∣pon, roast these readie to be eaten; take the flesh from the bone, and beate it fine in an Alabaster mortar, with two ounces of the pith of Veale growing in the backe, a quarter of a pound of Pi∣staceas,
halfe a drachme of Amber-greece, a graine of Musk, halfe a pound of white Sugar-candie beaten fine: put all these into an Alabaster morter, beat it to a perfect Paste, now and then putting in a spoonefull of Goates milke, put in two or three graines of Bezar, when you haue beaten all to a perfect Paste, make it vp in little round cakes, and so bake it vp on a sheete of paper. To make Paste of Genua, as they doe beyond the Seas. 2 BOile faire yellow Peare-Quinces tender in their
skinnes, and so let them stand vntill the next day, till they be colde, then pare them, and scrape all the pulp from the coare, then take as much pulp of yellow Peaches as the pulp of Quinces doth weigh, and dry it vpon a little chafingdish of coales, alwaies stirring it, then boile the weight of both these pulps in double refined Sugar, and so let it boile, alway stirring it vntill it come to a candie height, with as much Rose-water as will melt that Su∣gar, and put in your pulps, alway stirring it in the boi∣ling, vntill it come from the the bottome of the Posnet,
then fashion it vpon a pie plate, or a sheete of glasse, some like leaues, some like halfe fruits, and some you may print with moulds, set them into a warme Ouen af∣ter the breadis drawne, or in∣to a Stoue, the next day you may turne them, and when the stuffe is through dry, you may box it, and keepe it for all the yeere, but be sure it be through dried before you lay it vp in store.
To make Marble Paste of Pome∣cittron, an excellent Cordiall paste. 3 TAke the yellowest Pome∣cittrons that you can get, pare them, and cut them in quarters, and take out the meate, and as soone as you haue cut and pared a piece, throw it into a bason of colde water, then set on a Pipkin of faire water, and so soone as it boyleth, take out your pie∣ces, and drie them in a faire cloath, and put them into the seething liquor, and let them boile vntill they be tender, but shift them three or foure times
in the boyling to take away the bitternesse, powre them into a Colender, and drie them againe in a faire cloath, and stampe them in a stone morter, then boile the weight of the pulp in double refined Sugar vnto a Candie height, and put the pulp into the boi∣ling Sugar, and so let it boile leasurely, alway stirring it, and when it growes stiffe, powre it on a plate or sheete of glasse reasonable thinne in a broad cake, and stoue it, the next day cut it in lozenges, and turne them vpon a sheete of white paper, then wash your glasse or plate, and lay them on againe vntill they be
through dry, box them and keepe them all the yeere. If you please wrap a graine of Muske in a paper, and let it lie in the bottome of the box, it will adde to the pleasure. To make Marble Paste, called the Italian Chippe. 4 TAke Violets, Cowslips, and Cloue-gilliflowers, dry them and beate them to fine powder, mingle them with double refined Sugar, cearsed through a tiffanie or a lawne Sieue, make it vp in∣to Sugar plate, with a little gum dragon steept in Rose water and milke, when you
haue made your plate, then rowle euery piece thinne and lay each vpon other, and so rowle them vp in round rowles, as you would rowle vp a leafe of paper, then cut it end waies, and rowle it as thinne as a paper, and so it will looke finely sheckled like a piece of Marble. In like manner you may make Pur∣slane dishes or trenchers of that stuffe. To make Paste of Apricockes or Peare plums. 5 TAke the fairest of these fruits that you can get, and take out the stones, then
boile them softly betwixt two dishes without any liquor, and when they be soft, drie them somewhat drie, then take them off the fire, and put them vpon a sheete of white paper, then boile the weight of the pulp in double refined Sugar vnto a Candie height, with as much Rose-water as will melt it, and put your pulp into the hot Sugar, and if you please: put a graine of Muske into the boiling, and so let it boile vntill it be some∣what stiffe, then fashion it vp∣on a sheete of glasse in what forme you thinke fit, and so let it drie in a Stoue or warme Ouen, the next day turne it
and put it into the Ouen or Stoue againe, and when it is through dry, it will looke as cleare as Amber: so you may vse all kinde of Plums. To make Paste of Pippins, after the Genua fashion, some like leaues, some like Plums, with stalkes and stones. 6 TAke and pare faire yel∣low Pippins, cut them in small pieces, stew them be∣twixt two dishes with two or three spoonefuls of Rose-water, and when they be boi∣led very tender, straine them, then boile the weight of the
pulp in double refined Sugar vnto a Candie height, and if you please put in a graine of Muske, and a quarter of an ounce of fine white Ginger searced, and so let it boile vn∣till you see it come from the bottome of the Posnet, then fashion it on a sheete of glasse in some prettie forme as you thinke best, and stoue it ei∣ther in a Stoue, or in a warme Ouen. If you desire to haue any of it red, colour it with a spoonefull of Conserue of Damsons, before you fashion it vpon your glasse or plate, and that will make it shew as though it were made of red Plums. If you put a stone be∣twixt
two halfes, will shew like a Plum, you may keepe Cher∣rie stalkes drie for the same purpose. To make Paste of Eringus rontes. 7 TAke halfe a pound of Eringus roots newly can∣died, the youngest that you can get, cut them in short pie∣ces like dice, then stampe them in a mortar fine, blanch and beate into fine Paste a quarter of a pound of Iordane Almonds, take three spoone∣fuls of Damaske Rose-water, one spoonefull of Aqua Coe∣lestis, a graine of Muske, two
graines of Amber-greece, a graine of Bezar stone, then take halfe a pound of Pistaceus (which being crackt and pild, will not be aboue an ounce & a halfe) when you haue taken off the husks, beat them fine, and put them to your Paste, beat all together in a faire A∣labaster morter then beat the weight of your pulp in fine Sugar-candy, & put it to the pulp, & so beat it againe, then take it out and set it on a cha∣fingdish of coales, and dry it, alwaies stirring it vntill you see it turn somwhat white and dry, then lay it in little lumps vpon white paper, & so dry in a Stoue, & keep it all the yeere.
To make an excellent greene Paste without any colouring. 8 QVoddle greene Apples reasonably tender, pill off the outward skinne, and throw all the barke of the Apples into a Posnet of seeth∣ing water, and so let it boile as fast as it can vntill it turne greene, then take them vp and straine the pulp, then boile the weight of it in Su∣gar to a Candie height, and put your pulp into the seeth∣ing Sugar, and let it boile vn∣till it grow stiffe, then fashion it on a pie-plate, or a sheete of
glasse, and pint it on mowlds, and drie it in a Stoue or a warme Ouen some tenne or twelue dayes, that it be per∣fectly drie, and then you may keepe it all the yeere. To make Almond Paste. 9 BLanch and beate Iordane Almonds in a stone mor∣ter, put in now and then a spoonefull of Rose-water to keepe it from oyling, and when they be very fine, put about a pound and a halfe of fine Sugar to two pound of Almonds, halfe a drachme of Muske, and as much Rose-water as will serue to beat it
to a perfect Paste, which you may easily guesse by your owne discretion beginning with one spoonefull, and so adding as you shall see fit. To make Paste of Enula-cam∣pana rootes an excellent cordiall Paste, and good against the cough of the lungs. 10 LAy the youngest of these rootes in water, and then boile them tender, shift them three or foure times to take away their bitternesse, pill them, pith them, and beat them in a morter, with the weight of eighteene pence of
these seuerall sirups, videlicet, Maydenhaire, Isope, and Horehound: when you haue beaten all this fine, draw them through a strainer, with the pap of two rosted Pippins, and a graine of Muske, then dry it a little on a chafingdish of coales, vntill you see it be∣gin to be somewhat stiffe, then boile the weight thereof in double refined Sugar vnto a Candie height, and put the pulp into the Sugar, let it boile with continuall stirring, vntill it be somewhat stiffe, then drop it on a plate or sheete of glasse, dry it and keepe it in a Stoue.
Preserues. To preserue Peare-plums greene. 11 BOile a pound and a halfe of Sugar, with as much wa∣ter as will melt it, with a pound of the best Peare-plummes that you can get, your Plums must first be washt and dried in a faire cloath; let them boile softly the space of an houre, and then take them vp, and put them into a siluer or an ear∣then dish, when they be al∣most
colde, put them into the Sugar againe, and let them boile vntill they be tender, and the corner of the stone sweet, then take them vp, and coole them againe as before, vntill they be almost colde, and whilst they be a cooling boile your sirupe something thick, and betweene hot and colde, put them vp and keepe them, they will be greene. To preserue other Plums greene. 12 TAke your Plums while they be hard vpon the trees, scald them in faire wa∣ter, and take them vp, and
couer them in a preseruing pan with Sugar, and boile them tender, and then take them vp, and boile the sirup by it selfe vntill it be somwhat thick, then betweene hot and colde pot them vp. To preserue Cherries. 13 TAke the weight of your Cherries in Sugar, and with a siluer spoone bruise as many other-Cherries in a posnet, boile them vntill the sirup be somewhat red, then straine that liquor through a cushion canuas into another faire posnet, then diuide your Sugar into three parts, and
put one part into the red si∣rup, & so soone as the Sugar is melted take it off the fire, & scum it cleane, then cut the stalkes off the Cherries some∣thing short, and crosse them one by one with a sharp knife on the end, then put the Che∣ries into the red liquor, and make them boile as fast as they can, vntill they rise vp frothie, then take them off the fire and scum them, and then put in the second part of the Sugar into them, & set them on the fire againe & let them boile as fast as they can, and when they boile vp, take it off and scum it, then put in the third part of Sugar, & yet
againe set it ouer the fire, and when it riseth vp frothie, take it off and scum it very cleane, then set them on the fire vn∣till it be something thick, you may know when they are enough by dropping a little on a sawcer on the bottome of it, if it be thicke like gellie; then take them off the fire, and powre them into an ear∣then platter, and being be∣tweene hot and colde, put them vp in a gally pot, or put them in gallie-pots to keepe all the yeere, but put a piece of white paper on them, and couer them with a piece of parchment or soft leather.
To preserue Quinces red. 14 PAre and core yellow Peare-quinces, parboile them in faire water, then cla∣rifie your Sugar, and take to euery pound of Sugar an Ale-pint of water, and when your Sugar is clarified, straine it into a preseruing pan, and put your Quinces into that hot Sugar, and so let them boile close couered, now and then stirring them, and tur∣ning them to keepe them from breaking, and when you see your Quinces tender, and looke very red, take them vp, and boile the sirupe by it
selfe, vntill you see it some what thicke, then betweene hot and colde, pot them or put them in glasses as was said in Cherries. To preserue Wardens. 15 PArboile your Wardens reasonable tender in faire water, let them stand vntill they be colde, then pare them and pricke them with a knife two or three pricks in euery Warden, and so couer them in clarified Sugar, with a piece of whole Cinamon, a slice or two of pared Ginger, and three Cloues, boile them leasurely close couered, vntill
they be red and tender, then boile the sirupe by it selfe. To preserue Pippins greene. 16 GAther greene Pippins especially from the wa∣ter-boughes, and in the sha∣dow; quoddle them in two seuerall waters, and to euery one of these Pippins take a pound of Sugar, clarifie it well and very cleare, and put in your Pippins, and let them boile leasurely, and they will turne greene as any Leeke. Take them now and then off the fire, and turne them with a spoone, and set them ouer the fire againe three or foure
times, alwaies turning them, and warming them, and when your Pippins bevery tender: take them vp, and boile the sirupe a little by it selfe, then betwixt hot and colde pot them. If you please you may put in a graine of Muske, and a few Cloues, it will much en∣crease the pleasure. To preserue Pippins of the co∣lour of Amber. 17 PAre and bore a hole through a pound of Pip∣pins as small as a wheat straw, couer them with Sugar in a preseruing pan (the Sugar being first clarified) with a
graine of Muske, and a piece of Cinamon, so let them boile leasurely, vncouered, when they be tender, take them out and boile the sirupe a little by it selfe, then pot the Pippins blood warme, & keepe them. To preserue Barberries red. 18 TAke out the stones from the fairest Barberries, that you can get, and take foure times their weight in Sugar, then take as much iuice of other Barberries, as wil dissolue the one part, then put it into a skillet, and dis∣solue this part of Sugar vpon the fire, then put in your Bar∣berries,
and let them boile up, then beat the second part of your Sugar, and put it in, and make it boile up againe, and put in the rest, and couer it close, and let it boile untill they be enough, then take them up and scum them, and so let them stand, and between hot and colde not them up. To preserue Barberries white. 19 STone the fairest Barberries that you can get, take foure times their weight in sugar, then take as much faire water as will dissolue one part, and put it in a skillet on the fire, and when it is
dissolued put in your Barber∣ries, and let them boile vp, then put in the other of your parts, beat it first and put it in, then let them stand, and boile vp againe alwaies vn∣couered, and put in the rest, boile it, and scum it againe, coole it and pot it. To preserue Pippins red. 20 BOre a hole of the bignesse of a wheat straw quite through a pound of Pippins, couer them with Sugar in a preseruing pan, put in a piece of Muske, a piece of Cina∣mon, and so let them boile close couered very leasurely
vntill they be tender, then boile the sirupe by it selfe, coole it and pot it, and the Pippins blood-warme. To preserue white Peare-plums. 21 TAke a pound of the best Peare-plums that you get, and with their weight in Sugar, set them on the fire with halfe a pint of faire wa∣ter vntill it be dissolued, then take it off, let it coole vntill it be but blood-warme, put in your Plums, and let them stand about a quarter of an houre vpon a soft fire, and let them stand vntill their
skinnes be broken, then take them off and scum them, and let them stand vntill they be colde, then set them on the fire againe, and boile them a pace vntill they be soft, then take them off againe, and scum them, coole them, and pot them: if your sirupe be too thinne, boile it a little by it selfe. To preserue Orenges or Lemonds rindes. 22 DRiue off the vttermost skinne of your Orenges with a rasp, cut them in two, and take out the core quite and cleane, and let the pils
lie in water three or foure daies, then boile them tender in sixe or seauen waters, least their bitternesse be distastfull, then take them vp, and drie them in a very faire cloath, and put them to as much Su∣gar clarified as will couer them: let them boile softly ouer the fire halfe an houre at least, and rest in that sirupe three or foure daies, after that time heat them throughly, and take them out of the si∣rupe, and strengthen it with fresh Sugar boiled therein halfe an houre, coole it, and being blood-warme, pot vp your fruit in it.
To preserue greene Peaches be∣fore they be stoned. 23 SCald your Peaches, being so young that you may thrust a pinne through them, rub off the furre with a piece of course linnen cloath, then pricke them with a sharpe knife, and boile them tender in as much clarified Sugar as will couer them, then take them vp and boile the sirupe by it selfe, vntill it be some∣what thick, and being blood-warme with cooling, put in your fruit and pot it.
To preserue greene Walnuts be∣fore they be shelled. 24 TAke your Walnuts also when they may easily be pierced with a pin, pare them thinne, and lay them a weeke together in brine, then par∣boile them very tender in seauen or eight waters, then take them vp, and dry them with a faire cloath, and sticke in euery one two or three Cloues, and couer them in clarified Sugar, and boile them a good houre close co∣uered, then powre them into an earthen pot, and let them stand a weeke, & then warme
them againe, and powre them into a Colender, to let the si∣rupe drop from them; then boile the sirupe by itselfe vn∣till it be somewhat thicke with fresh Sugar, and being but warme pot them. To preserue Damsons. 25 TAke two pounds of the fairest Damsons, and one pound of hard Sugar, halfe a pinte of faire water, set it on the fire vntill it be dissolued in a preseruing pan, lay your Damsons in milke-warme water, and put them into the dissolued Sugar, make a soft fire, and when it beginneth
to boyle: scum it continually an houre long, but let it boile softly vncouered, for breaking the Damsons, then take them out, and lay them in an earthen or siluer dish, and let your sirupe boile a∣lone, and when they be al∣most colde, put them in a∣gaine, and let them boile soft∣ly, vntill the kernell be both sweet and tender, cracke the stone, and trie, then take your Damsons vp, and be∣twixt hot and colde pot them, and put them in glasses.
Marmulades. To make Marmulade of Quinces. 26 PArboyle yellowe Peare∣quinces tender in their skins, and let them stand in a Tray all night, vntill they be colde, then pare them as thin as you can, for the best of the Quince groweth next the skin, then scrape all the pulp from the core, for it is grauelly, and therefore goe not too neere: then beat the weight of the pulp in double refined Sugar, with one grain
of Muske, and three graines of Amber-greece, & as much Damaske Rose-water as will dissolue the Sugar, boile it to a Candie height, then put in your pulp, alwaies stirring it still till it come from the bot∣tome of the Posnet, box it, and keepe it till occasion call for it. To make rough red Marmalade of Quinces, commonly called lump-Marmalade, that shall laoke as red as any Rubie. 27 PAre ripe and well colou∣red Peare-quinces, and cut them in pieces like dice,
parboile them very tender, or rather reasonably tender in faire water, then powre them into a Colender, and let the water runne from them into a cleane Bason, then straine that water through a strainer into a Posnet, for if there be any grauell in the Quinces, it will be in that water: Then take the weight of the Quin∣ces in double refined Sugar very fine, put halfe thereof into the Posnet, into the wa∣ter with it a graine of Muske, a slice or two of Ginger tied in a thrid, and let it boile co∣uered close, vntill you see your Sugar come to the co∣lour of Claret wine, then vn∣couer
it, and take out your Ginger, and so let it boile vntill your sirupe begin to consume away, then take it off the fire, and pomice it with a ladle, and so stirre it and coole it, and it will looke thick like tart-stuffe, then put in your other halfe of your Sugar, and so let it boile, al∣way stirring it vntill it come from the bottome of the Pos∣net, then box it, and it will looke red like a Rubie, the putting of the last Sugar brings it to an orient colour.
To make Marmulade of War∣dens a most cordiall Marmulade. 28 BAke the best Wardens that you can get in an Ouen with wheaten bread, or longer time then that, let them stand in an Ouen in an earthen Panne, but beware they be not burnt, then cut them in small pieces like Dice from the core, and beate them in a stone mor∣ter, then take the weight of the pulp in fine Sugar, and boile it to a Candie height, and put the pulp into the Su∣gar boiling hot, with a little
beaten and cearsed Ginger, and a graine of Muske, and so let it boile, alway stirring it vntill it come from the bot∣tome of the Posnet, box it, dry it and vse it. To make Marmulade of Pippins. 29 PAre greene Pippins, cut them in pieces, and boile them tender betwixt two di∣shes, when they be tender straine them, then melt the weight of the pulp in Sugar with Rose-water, and boile it to a Candie height; put in two or three spoonefuls of Cina∣mon water, a thimble full of
beaten Cinamon, two thim∣bles full of Fennell seede bea∣ten together, throw all toge∣ther in the boiling Sugar, &c. as in the last. To make red Marmulade of Pippins, orient and cleare. 30 TAke the quantitie of a pound of the afore-said pulp, and put to it two spoon∣fuls of Conserue of Bullice, and so stirre it together, and your pulp will looke as red as a Cherrie, boile the weight thereof in Sugar vnto a Can∣die height, with two or three spoonfuls of Cinamon water,
then put in the red pulp into the hot Sugar, and doe as in other Marmulades. To make Dia Setonia of Quin∣ces, a cordiall for the stomack. 31 TAke the iuice of good, large, and ripe Quinces, being well washt, and cleane wipt with a faire cloath, take out the core, and cut the rest in small pieces, and stamp them like crabs, & strain them euen as vergis, to euery pinte of that liquour take halfe a pound of white Sugar-candie, and a graine of Muske, boile it as thicke as Quiddeniock, pot it, and vse it.
Conserues. To make Conserue of Violets. 32 PIcke cleane the blewe single gard in Violets, stamp halfe a pound of them fine in an Alabaster morter, very fine, put two or three ounces of Sugar-candie to the beating of them, and so soone as your Sugar comes vnto it, it will haue a very pleasant colour, then lay it on a white paper, and boyle the weight of it in Su∣gar vnto a Candie height,
and put in the pulp, and let it boile a walme or two, and coole it with a siluer spoone, and being almost colde, pot it and vse it. To make Conserue of Bar∣beries. 33 IN the heat of the day ga∣ther the fairest red Barbe∣ries, pick them cleane, and put them into a deepe pot, and set in boiling water vntill they be tender, then straine them through a cushion canuas. and boile thrice their weight in double refined Sugar to a Candie height, and coole it a little, and put in your pulp,
and boile it halfe an houre, coole it againe vntill it be blood-warme, and then pot it vp. To make Conserue of Roses in the best manner. 34 CVt off the white of red Rose-buds, stamp them very fine in a stone morter, beat their weight in fine Su∣gar, & put it to your flowers, and beat them together in a stone morter a whole houre together at the least, vntill they be very fine, then boile it in like quantity of Sugar vnto a Candie height, and put your pulp into the boiling
Sugar, when it hath boiled a while, coole it againe with your spatter, and wring in the iuyce of a Lemond. To make Conserue of Gilliflowers. 35 GAther red Cloue-Gilli∣flowers in the heat of the day, clip them very short, one leafe into eight or nine pieces at the least, for the shorter you clip them, the sooner they will be beaten fine: then beat them with the quantity of halfe their weight in double refined Sugar, vn∣till the pulp be inough, which you may easily know both
by taste and feeling, then boile the same quantitie of the same Sugar to a Candie height, with as much Rose∣water as will melt it, and put your pulp into the boiling Sugar, stirring it continually vntill it be thicke, then pot it and keepe it for vse. To make Conserue of Cow∣slips, good against Melancholy. 36 GAther them in the heat of the day, & clip only the yellow flower, then take twise their weight in fine Su∣gar, and beate the flowers with one halfe of it, vn∣till
till the pulp be very fine, and boile the other part to a Ma∣nus Christi height, and put the beaten flowers into the boiling Sugar, and let it boile with continuall stir∣ring, vntill it grow something thick, coole it vntill it be but warme, and pot it. 37 TO make Conserue of Marigoldes being the same vertue, with the last Conserue, is to worke with Marigolds altogether, as with the Cowslip, without any dif∣ference.
To make Conserue of Damsons. 38 TAke a pottle of Damsons, prick them, & put them into a pint of Rose-water, and as much Claret-wine, couer them, and let them boile in an other vessell of hot water two houres or more, then incorpo∣rate them well together with a great spoone, and when they be tender, coole them and straine them, and set the pulp ouer the fire, and put thereto a sufficient quantity of Sugar, guessing it by your taste, & let the pulp boile vntill it looke of a Damson colour.
Tart-stuffes. To make an excellent Tart-stuffe of Damsons, to last all the yeere. 39 TAke a pottle of Damsons and good ripe Apples pared and cut into quarters, put them into an earthen pot, couer your pot with a piece of course Paste, and bake it in an Ouen with Manchet, and straine it through a strai∣ner, season it with Cinamon, Ginger, Sugar, and Rose-wa∣ter, and boile it thick.
To make an excellent Tart-stuffe of Prunes. 40 PVt sixe faire Pippins pa∣red and cored vnto two or three pound of Prunes, & a pinte of Claret-wine, stew them tender, and strain them, season them with Cinamon, Ginger, and Sugar, and a little Rose-water. To make white Tart-stuffe. 41 TAke a quart of sweete Creame, the white of ten Egs, straine them, & boile the stuffe with quartered Nut∣megs, a piece of whole Mace, a graine of Muske, then boile
it with continuall stirring, when it growes thicke like Curds, hang it on a naile in a cloath, to dreine out the Whay, then take out the wholespice, and straine it, sea∣son it with Sugar. To make yellow Tart-stuffe. 42 DRiue the yolks of tenne Egges through a strai∣ner, with a quart of sweet Creame, season it with Cina∣mon, Ginger, and Sugar, and a little Rose-water, and let it boile, with continuall stir∣ring, vntil it be thick enough.
Gellies. To make Quiddoniock. 43 TAke out the kernels from eight Peare quinces, the fairest and yellowest that you can get, boile them in a quart of spring water vnto a pinte, put in a quarter of a pinte of Damaske Rose-water, and one pound of fine Sugar, and so let it boile vntill it come to a deepe colour, then drop a drop on the bottome of a sawcer, and if it stand; take it off the fire, and let it runne through a gelly-bagge into a
Bason, ouer a chafingdish of coales to keepe it warme, and fill your boxes with a spoon, but couer them not till they be colde. If you would haue it printed, then you must haue moulds of the very same big∣nesse with your boxes, wet your mould with Rose-water, and let it runne into them, and when it is colde turne it into your boxes, or else if they should be dry, your Gellie would not come out. To make Chrystall Gellie. 44 TAke a knuckle of Veale, and two paire of Calues∣feet, flay the feet, and take out
the fat betweene the clawes, wash them in two or three warme waters, & lay them all night in faire water in an ear∣then pan or pot, the next day boile them tender in cleare spring-water from a gallon to three pintes, & let that liquor stand in an earthen Bason, then pare off the top and bot∣tome, & put to it some Rose∣water, season it with double refined Sugar, and put to it halfe a dozen spoonefuls of oyle of Ciuamon, and as ma∣ny of Ginger, and likewise of Nutmeg and Mace, one grain of Musk in a piece of lawne ti∣ed in a thrid, put all this being boiled into a siluer or earthen
dish, and when it is colde slice it and serue it in on glasse Plates. To preserue Lemonds to lie in quaking Gellie. 45 First, purge away their bit∣ternesse, by boiling, and shifting them seauen or eight times in the boiling, then boile a pinte of Apple-water, and a pound of Sugar, and scum it, & take it off when you scum it, then put in your Lemond rindes into the hot liquor, and boile them leasurely in that hot sirupe, vntill they be ten∣der, and being almost colde, pot it.
To make Gellie of Pippins of Amber colour. 46 PAre and core eight Pip∣pins, boile them in a quart of spring water, from a quart to a pinte, put in a quarter of a pint of Rose-wa∣ter, one pound of Sugar, and boile it vncouered vntill it come to a deeper colour, drop a drop on a piece of glasse, & if it stand, then it is enough, then let it run through a gel∣lie bag into a vessell on a cha∣fingdish of coales, and while it is warme fill your moulds or boxes with a spoone, and let it stand till it be colde.
To make Gellie of Pippins as orient as a Rubie. 47 PAre and core eight Pip∣pins, boile them in a quart of spring water to a pinte, put to it a quarter of a pinte of Rose-water, a pound of fine Sugar, boile it still co∣uered, vntill it be both red and readie: in all other things doe as in the Amber-colou∣red Gellie, remembring al∣waies that your moulds be laid in water two or three houres before you vse them, and drop or knock out the water, but wipe them not, if the Gellie will not easily
come, but warme the bot∣tome neuer so little, and it will come out as you wish. To make Leach of diuers colours. 48 LAy halfe a pound of Ior∣dane Almonds in colde water, the next day blanch and beate them in a stone morter, put in some good Damaske Rose-water into the beating of them, when they be very fine draw them through a strainer with a quart of sweete milke from the Cowe, and set it on a cha∣fing dish of coales, with a piece
of Isinglasse, a piece of whole Mace and Nutmeg quartered, a graine of Muske tyed in a piece of lawne, when it gro∣weth thick, take it off the fire, and take out your whole spi∣ces, and let it runne through a strainer into a broad and deepe dish, and when it is colde, you may so slice it and serue it in. If you will colour any of it, Saffron is for yel∣low, greene Wheat for green, Turnsoll is for red, and blew bottles in corne giue their owne colour.
Breads. To make red Ginger-bread, commonly called Leach∣lumbar. 49 GRate and dry two stale Manchets, either by the fire, or in an Ouen, sift them through a Sieue, and put to it Cinamon, Ginger, Sugar, Li∣quorice, Anis-seed: when you haue mingled all this toge∣ther, boile a pint of red wine, & put in your mingled bread, and stirre it, that it be as thick as a Hastie-pudding; then take it out, and coole it, and
mould it with Cinamon, Gin∣ger, Liquorice, and Anise∣seede, and rowle it thinne, and print it with your mould, and dry it in a warme Ouen. To make white Ginger∣bread. 50 TAke halfe a pound of March-pane-Past made with Almonds, Rose-water and Sugar, and a spoonefull of Aqua-vitae, season it very hot with Ginger mould it vp stiffe, rowle it thin, and print it with your moulds.
To make Italian Bisket. 51 BEat and cearse a pound of double refined Sugar with 2. grains of Musk, foure of Amber-greece, then steepe gum-dragon in Rose-water, and the white of a new laid Egge, beat it in a stone mor∣ter to a perfect Paste, then rub, drie, and dust an ounce of Anise-seede, and worke it into the Paste on a sheete of paper like to little Manchets, or print it with moulds, and lay it vpon Marchpane Wa∣fers, and bake it in a warme Ouen, it will be light and white.
To make an excellent Bread called Ginetoes. 52 TAke halfe a pound of fine Wheat flower, an ounce of powder of Pomecit∣trons, an ounce of powder of Lemonds, a quarter of an ounce of fine cersed Ginger, the weight of sixe pence of the finest Basill, Marioram beaten into powder, make all this into a perfect Paste as stiffe as for Manchet, with a little Ipocras made warme, the yolks of three or foure new laid Egges, a sawcer full of sweet Creame, a piece of sweet Butter as much as an
Egge, and then rowle it in long rowles, and tie them in some pretie fashion like Sum∣bals, then throw them into seething water, and they will presently fall downe to the bottome, watch them, and so soone as you see them rise to the top of the water, take them vp presently with a scummer, and bake them vpon sheetes of white paper, and when they be three or foure dayes old, throw them into boiling Sugar of a Candie height; then take them vp, and drie them vpon leaues made of Basket-makers twigges in a warme Ouen.
To make Prince Bisket. 53 DRie a pound of very fine wheat flower in an Ouen two houres, after the bread hath beene drawne, or the Ouen being warmed, but not heated for the nonce, the flower were best in an ear∣then Pipkin couered, least it loose the colour, put to it a pound of double refined Su∣gar beaten and cearsed fine, then take ten new laid Egges, take away fiue of their whites, straine these Egs into a Bason, with a spoonfull of Rose-wa∣ter, and sixe spoonfuls of scal∣ded Creame, when you haue
all in the Bason, first put in your cearsed Sugar, and let it dissolue by beating it into your Egs, then put in your flower by little and little, vntill both the flower and the other things be incorporated, beat it well together an houre at least, and you shall at last see it turne white, then you must haue coffins of white plate indude with butter as thinne as you can, so as it be touch∣ed in euery place, then take an ounce and a halfe of sweet Anise-seed, and one of Corian∣der, dried rubd and dusted, put the Anise-seed in the batter, & the batter into the coffins, and bake it an houre at least if you
will, you may make Crack∣nels of the same batter, driue it thinne vpon the Plates, and when you take it off, rowle it thinne like a Wafer, and dry them againe in the Ouen. To make French Maca∣roones. 54 VVAsh a pound of the newest and the best Iordane Almonds in three or foure waters, to take away the rednesse from their out-side, lay them in a Bason of warme water all night, the next day blanch them, and dry them with a faire cloath, beat them in a stone morter, vntillthey
be reasonably fine, put to them halfe a pound of fine beaten Sugar, and so beat it to a perfect Paste, then put in halfe a dozen spoonefuls of good Damaske Rose-water, three graines of Amber∣greece, when you haue beaten all this together, dry it on a chafingdish of coales vntill it grow white and stiffe, then take it off the fire, and put the whites of two new laid Egs first beaten into froath, and so stirre it well together, then lay them on wafers in fashion of little long rowles, and so bake them in an Ouen as hot as for Manchet, but you must first let the heat of the Ouen
passe ouer before you put them in, when they rise white and light, take them out of the Ouen, and put them in a warme platter, and set them againe into the warme Ouen, & so let them remain foure or fiue houres, and then they wil be throughly dry, but if you like them better being moist, then dry them not after the first baking. To make Naples Bisket. 55 BEat and cearse a pound of double refined Sugar, a quarter of a pound of Al∣monds, beat them as fine as you would doe for Almond
milke, straine your Almonds with a sawcer full of sweete creame, and two or three spoonefulls of the best Rose∣water, then take your afore∣said powder of Sugar, two or three graines of Muske, foure of Amber-greece, put in three or foure spoonefulls of baked flower, and so beate it in a siluer bason into batter with a siluer spoone, and put it into little long coffines, and set them againe a drying in a dish, vntill they be readie, box them and keepe them.
To make shell bread. 56 BEate a quarter of a pound of double refined Sugar, cearse it with two or three spoonefulls of the finest, the youlkes of three new laid egs, and the white of one, beate all this together in with two or three spoonefulls of sweete creame, a graine of muske, a thimble full of the powder of a dried Lemond, and a little Annise-seede beaten and cear∣sed, and a little Rose-water, then baste Muskle-shells with sweete butter, as thinne as you can lay it on with a feather, fill your shells with the batter
and lay them on a gridiron or a lattise of wickers into the ouen, and bake them, and take them out of the shells, and ise them with Rose-water & Su∣gar. It is a delicate bread, some call it the Italian Mushle, if you keepe them any long time, then alwaies in wet wea∣ther put them in your ouen. To make Countesse cakes. 57 TAke halfe a pound of March-pane paste vn∣bakte, and put it into a stone morter with the youlkes of foure new laid egges, two or three spoonefuils of Rose∣water, as much sweet creame,
season it with Cloues, Mace, and Nutmegs, beate your egs, spices, and nutmegs well to∣gether, then straine it with a thimble-full of Coriander; the spices being so mingled doe season, and yet are not seene, then grate a Manchet & beat all together in an Alabaster morter, and powre it on two little round plates, drie them for all the yeare. To make a fine Sugar cake. 58 BAke a pound of finewheat flower in a pipkin close couered, put thereto halfe a pound of fine Sugar, foure yolkes and one white of egs.
Pepper and Nutmegs, straine them with clouted creame, and with a little new Ale yeast, make it in past, as it were for Manchet, bake it in a quicke ouen with a breath fire in the o∣uens mouth, but beware of bur∣ning them.
Rough Rock Candies. To make Rock de Cittron. 59 ROwle into little bals halfe a pound of rawe March∣pane Paste, flat them like Figges, then take prefered Pomecittrons, blunch Al∣monds, greene Ginger, cut each of these fruits an inch long, and prick them into the Marchpane stuffe, and set them in an Ouen, dry them, and ise them like a March∣pane, cast on Carrawaies, &c.
To rough-Candie Orenges with Sugar. 60 TAke a deepe earthen Ba∣son, and fiue round wires, according to the bignesse of the Pan, lay your Orenge rindes on the lowest wire, and lay another wire on it, and then lade that wire also with your fruit, and lay on the third wire, and lade it also, and so with the rest, then co∣uer all with Sugar boiled to a Candie height, and set the Pan vpon a soft mat or cu∣shion seauen or eight houres, then poure out all the Sugar that will run from the wires.
and let them drop an houre after, vntill it haue quite done, then take them out, &c. To rough-Candie sprigs of Rosemarie. 61 LAy your Rosemarie bran∣ches one by one vpon a faire sheete of paper, then take Sugar-candie beaten smal like sparks of diamonds, and wet it in a little Rose-wa∣ter in a siluer spoone, and lay it as euen as you can vpon euery branch, and set them a drying a good way off from the fire, and in one houre they will be dry, then turne them, and candie the other side, and
when both sides be throughly dry, box them & keepe them all the yeere they wil appeare to the eye in their natural co∣lour, and seeme to be couered with sparks of diamonds. To rough-Candie all manner of flowers in their owne colours, tastes, and smels. 62 GAther what flowers you will in the heat of the day, when the Sun hath drawn away all the moisture from them, & vse them altogether as the Rosemarie. The like practise may be with whole Mace, Nutmegs, sticks of Ci∣namon, or any other dry fruit.
Sucket-Candies. To Sucket-Candie greene Lemonds. 63 VVAsh this fruit with seething water, dry it, & put it in a warme Ouen, the next day throw them in hot double refined Sugar, boiled to a Candie height, boile them a walme or two, take them vp and dry them in an Ouen, the next day boxe them.
To sucket-Candie greene Ginger. 64 VVAsh it, as was she¦wed in the Le∣monds, dry it in the Ouen, the next day couer it in clari∣fied Sugar, boiled to a Can∣die height, &c. but remember that both must be first pre∣serued. To sucket-Candie greene Wal∣nuts, before they be sheld. 65 FIrst, preserue them as hath beene shewed before in the twentie foure Receipt, and
then, as the Lemonds and the Ginger, they must be washt from their sirupe, and hand∣led as they. Peaches, or any other. 66 GReene Plums may be sucket-Candied after the very same manner, remem∣bring that they be first pre∣serued.
Cordiall VVaters. To make Aqua-Coelestis. 67 TAke sixe ounces of Cina∣mon, of Cloues one drachme, of Nutmegs one drachme & a halfe, of Cubebs two drachmes, of Calamus rootes one drachme, bruise them all, and keepe them in a faire paper: then take Betonie and Sage flowers, of each a handfull, Marioram and Pen∣niroyall of each a handfull, bruise them also: then take of these powders, Aromaticum Rosarum three drachmes, Di∣ambre Diamargariton frigidum,
Diamoscum dulce, of each a drachme and ½, put all these into a gallon of spirit of wine, and steepe them three dayes and three nights very close coucred, and shake them well together euery morning and euening, then distill them in your Limbecke, and hang an ounce of Saunders in the water. To make Cinamon Water. 68 TAke one pound of Cina∣mon, the best you can get, bruise it well, and put to it a gallon of the best Sack, and steepe it three daies and three nights, and distill it as before.
To make Doctor Steuens Water. 69 TAke one drachme of Rose-leaues, Borage, Bu∣glosse, Violets, & Rosemarie flowers, of each a drachme and a halfe, of Spicknard a drachme, of Cinamon two ounces, of Ginger an ounce, Cloues and Nutmegs of each halfe an ounce, of Card a∣mous a drachme and a halfe, Galingall two drachmes, Cu∣bebs a drachme, Pepper three drachmes, Annise-seede, Car∣raway-seedes and Fennell, of each an ounce, Lignum halfe a drachme, Corall and Pearle
in fine powder, of each a drachme, bruise these and put them in a pottle of Aqua-vitae and a quart of excellent good Sack, vsing the same as be∣fore is shewed in Aqua-Coe∣lestis. To make Balme-water. 70 TAke fiue ounces of dri∣ed Balme, Time, Pennie-Royall, of each three ounces, of Cinamon foure ounces, of Cardamon one drachme, graines halfe an ounce, sweet Fennell seedes an ounce, Nut∣megs and Ginger of each a drachme, Galingall, Calamus, and Cypresse, Cubebs, and
Pepper of each two drachmes, of Calamus rootes halfe a drachme, of Diptimus one drachme, bruise these things, and put them into a pottle of Sack, and steepe them twenty foure houres, and vse them like the rest. To make Angelica-water. 71 TAke a handfull of dried Carduus, of Angelica rootes three ounces, of Myrrh one drachme, Nutmegs halfe an ounce, of Cinamon and Ginger, foure ounces of each, Saffron one drachme and a halfe, Cardamons, Cubebs, Galingall and Pepper, of each
a quarter of an ounce, Mace two drachmes, Graines one drachme, Lignum Aloes. Spick∣nard, Iunius adoratus, of each a drachme, Sage, Borage, Boglosse, Violets and Rose∣marie flowers, of each a hand∣full, brus them and steepe them in a pottle of Sack twelue houres, and then &c. To make Wormewood water. 73 TAke foure ounces of Wormewood, Sage, Ber∣tonie, and Rew, of each a handfull, Rosemarie tops a handfull, Cinamon three ounces, Nutmegs halfe an ounce, Cloues and Mace, of
each halfe a drachme, Ginger an ounce Galingall, Cubebs, and Spicknard, of each a drachme and ½, of Scordium halfe a handfull, bruise these and put them in a pottle of Sack, and a pint of Aquavitae, steepe them 24. houres. &c.
Conceits in Sugar-Workes. To make March-pane Paste. 73 CEarse the finest and the whitest refined Sugar, to euery third spoonfull thereof take a blauncht Iordane Al∣mond, stampe them in a smooth morter, and now and then put in two or three drops of Rose-water. It must be extreamely much beaten before it wil be a perfect past, at the least an houre.
To make a March-pane, to ise, and garnish it, accor∣ding to Art. 74 BLaunch and beate two pound of Iordane Al∣monds in a stone morter, put∣ting in now & then a spoon∣full of Rose-water, to keepe them from oyling: when they are beaten fine, put to them a pound and a halfe of the fi∣nest cearsed Sugar, and now and then a spoonfull more of Rose-water, as your selfe shall see requisite, incorporate them, which with much la∣bour must be effected: when
you haue brought them to a perfect paste, then rowle it to what breadth you will, but it must be thin, make a bot∣tome to it with Wafers, set an edge to it round about, and pinch it then bake it, and ice it with Rose-water and Sugar beaten like batter, and spread it on with a fea her, and so put it againe into the Ouen, or baking-pan, when you see it rise white, and shining like ice, take it out againe, and sticke in your standing con∣ceits, as namely golden Ma∣rigolds, and long Comfits, or such like, cast on Biskets and Carrawaies, and lay Bay leaues vnder it, appearing
with the leaues end without the Marchpane round about. To make any Conceit in March-pane-stuffe. 75 MOuld some of your a∣foresaid stuffe with cearsed Sugar, & make some vp like little square pies, fill them with drie suckets, cut in small peeces, or drye Mar∣mulade; cast on them colour∣ed Biskets and Carrawaies, gild them & serue them to the board, you may make some of it like collops & bacon, to doe which you must haue both red and white past, and rowle them both and cut it ouer∣thwart
and lay one on ano∣ther like bacon, the red must be colonied with Rosa Paris and Saunders. To make any other conceit as Buttons, Beades, Chaines, &c. 76 HAuing fashioned your buttons made of this stuffe all of a bignesse, either with your hand and knife, or in a mould, if with a knife, then you may turne vp the ridges and the nib, like the threds of silke buttons, and the ground-worke is white of it selfe, if you will haue them greene and white, then temper
sap-green with gum-Arabick water on the top of your pen∣sill, and strike it downe the ridges of the button, not tou∣ching the button on the crea∣ses. If you will haue them sil∣uer, then strike them downe with shell-siluer, the like may be done with shell-gold. If blew, then Azur being first steept in vinegar; for else it is verie dangerous, the vinegar killeth the strength of the blew: If you would haue them red, then vse Rosa-paris on the top of your pensil: when these buttons be readie and drie, you may set them vpon a card of Sugar plate, and fa∣sten them with Gum-dragon
steept in damaske Rose-water and the owne paste tempred verie soft; serue it in on plates of glasse, or keepe it as long as you will. To make Snakes, Snailes, Frogs, Roses, Cheries, &c. 77 TAke single mouldes car∣ued inward, according to the forme of the things na∣med, or any other, what you will, then take double refined Sugar, and as much water, or rather Rose-water as will dis∣solue it, and boyle it to a Can∣die height: then take your mouldes, hauing steept them two or three houres before in
colde water, and fill them with the hot Sugar, and when it is colde turne it out of your moulde, and drie it with a faire cloath, and it will haue the true forme graued or car∣ued in the mould. But for your Cherries, strawberries, and such like, take double mouldes, wet them in water, and fill them with hot Sugar, then take a small birchen twig, dried before in a feather-makers or diers fat, and prick them in the nose of the mould into the hot Sugar, and when they be colde, take them out and drie them, and they will be as though they grew vpon staulkes; then colour them as
is shewed in the order of co∣lours in the end of this booke, but if you will make Roses you must make them of Sugar plate past (mentioned in the fourescore and one receipt) rowled verie thin, & then you must cut the leaues single with an instrument of tynne made for the same purpose, & then fasten one leafe vpon another, as in the last receipt was shewed, and stick them on the top of a birchen-twig, pilde and dipt in the fat, and they will be white Roses, but you may colour them as is else-where shewed. In like ma∣ner, you may make Burrage, Cowslips, Primroses, stock-Gilliflowers,
Marigoldes, &c. keepe them drie. To make Shooes, Slippers, Keyes, Kniues, Gloues, &c. 78 ALL these and such like things, you may make of Sugar plate paste, cut them with your knife, but fashion & finish them only with your hand and pincers, but if you want handines, or haue no leisure, then you must haue mouldes of tynne, and hauing fitted your paste, cut it with the mouldes, drie them ley∣surely, &c.
To make Letters, Knots, or any other Iumball for a ban∣quet quicklie. 79 YOu must take single mouldes carued inward, either in wood or stone, with the true forme of what you would haue, lay them in cold water: then take double refi∣ned Sugar, and as much Rose-water as will dissolue it, boile it to a Candie height, then take the mouldes out of the water, shake out the water, but wipe them not, and fill your Letters or Knots with the hot Sugar, and when they be colde and hard, turne them
out, and wipe them with a faire cloath. There is also another way to make these or such things, thus: Take drie single moulds, dust them through a Lawne or Tiffanie Sieue, then take Sugar-plate paste, or Almond paste, wrought vnto a good temper, and fill your mould, then cut it off smooth and euen, with the top of your mouldes, and turne it out, the rest of your stuffe you may make in long Iumballs about the bignesse of a Goose quill, and then you may knit it in double knots, or turne it in forme of capital letters, or like claspes & eyes, or wax-lights
To make a Walnut, both shell, and Kernill. 80 MAke a paste of fine cear∣sed Cinamon and Gin∣ger, mingled with twise so much Sugar, cearsed also ve∣ry fine, & a little Muske, print it in a double moulde, made in like vnto a Wallnut with shells, then close them toge∣ther with gumme dragon steept in Rose-water, and if you will haue a Kernill in it, then you must haue another double mould for the Kernill, but you must make the Ker∣nill of white Sugar plate, and
when it is throughly drie, you must ouer-lay it with a little saffron that it may be like the skinne of the Kernill. Sugar workes of another sort. To make Sugar plate paste. 81 TAke a pound of double refined Sugar, put there∣to three ounces of the best starch, if you drie the Sugar after it is in pouder, it will the sooner passe through the Lawne sieue: then cearse it
on a faire sheete of paper, and sweepe it on a heape with a feather or a wing, and in the middest of the heape, you must put a lumpe of gumme-draggon, about the bignesse of a wallnut, first steeped in Rose-water (a little porrin∣ger full of Rose-water, is e∣nough to dissolue an ounce of gumme, which gumme must be very cleane pict from all drosse & strained through a canuis strainer,) temper this gumme with the white of an egge, and with the Sugar, a little at once, vntill you haue wrought vp all the gumme & the Sugar into a stiffe paste: you must alwaies in the work∣ing
haue some of the gumme, and some of the Sugar, and before you moulde it in the moulde, you must first dust your moulde with cearsed Sugar. To make paste of diuers sorts of flowers as Violets, Cow∣slips, Marigolds, Roses, Gilliflowers, &c. 82 MAke a pouder of these flowers, being drie, ta∣king onely their sweete leafe, and put thereto fine pouder of Cinamon and a little Muske, if you haue it, mingled well together then boile the waight of the pouder in fine
Sugar, with as much Rose-water as will dissolue it. If your worke be with Mari∣golds, put to it a little Saf∣fron, boile it, and to your worke adde the pap of a Pip∣pin dried on a chafingdish with coales in a siluer or ear∣then dish, and sprinkled with Rose-water, and wrought in∣to Paste, then bray some Su∣gar-candie, but not to pow∣der, wet Gum-dragon, and with the same make it sticke in your paste, and so it will seeme to be rock candied, cut the paste with a knife steept in Rose-water.
To make an excellent Pennet, good against colde. 83 BEat foure ounces of Su∣gar-candy vnto fine pow∣der, put to it a thimble-full of English Liquorice, beaten and cearsed, three drops of Chimicall oyle of Anise-seed, a graine of Muske, beat all this to paste, with Gum-dragon steept in Damask Rose-water, and when you haue beaten it to perfect paste, rowle it vp∣on a sheet of white paper into rowles, about the bignesse of a wheat straw, and cut it in pieces about an inch long.
To make Cinamon stickes by Art. 84 TAke a quarter of a pound of fine cearsed Cinamon, and halfe an ounce of fine cearsed Ginger, mingle it with halfe a pound of fine cearsed Sugar two graines of Muske; beat all together into a perfect paste, with Gum-dragon steept in Rose water, in an Alabaster or stone mor∣ter, rowle it thin on a sheete of paper, dusted through a cearse with beaten Cina∣mon, and then wrap it a∣bout Reedes, and when it is almost dry, draw it easily
off the Reedes, and dry them throughly. To make Callishones. 85 TAke halfe a pound of Marchpane paste, a thim∣ble-full of Coriander seedes beaten to powder, with a graine of Muske, beat all to a perfect paste, print it, and drie it. To make Muscachones. 86 TAke batter made as for Prince Bisket, in the 53. Receipt, put to it two spoon∣fuls of Cheese-curds, Cina∣mon, Ginger, Sugar, and a
graine of Muske, beat all into the batter, and take a batter spout, and spout it in long rowles on a sheete of paper, dusted through a Sieue with fine Sugar, and before they be dry, tye them in some pre∣tie knots, and so dry them, and then guild them. To make Muscadinaes, com∣monly called kissing-Comfits. 87 TAke halfe a pound of double refined Sugar, beaten and cearsed, with two graines of Musk, three grains of Amber-greece, and a drachme of Orice powder,
beat all to a perfect paste in an Alabaster morter, then sleeke a sheete of white paper with a Sleek-stone, and rowle your Sugar paste, then cut it in lit∣tle Lozenges with a rowle, and dry them in a Stoue, they will serue to garnish a March∣pane or other dishes. If you will haue any red, you must mingle it with Rosa Paris, if blew, then with blew bottles. To make Troces, against the colde. 88 BEat two ounces of Sugar-candie to fine powder, put to it a little iuyce of Li∣quorice, iuice of Horehound,
of Mayden-haire, beate all into a perfect paste, and rowle it as small as Wheat strawes, cut them an inch and ½. long, dry them, &c. To make Cinamon Letters. 89 TAke paste made as for Gemillissoes, colour it with Cinamon, and rowle it in long rowles, as neere as you can all of a bignesse, and thereof make faire capitall Romane letters, according to some exact patterne, cut in thinne board or white plate, gild them and make a crosse in the beginning of them.
To make Canalones in Spices. 90 TAke halfe a pound of sif∣ted Sugar, put thereto a graine of Muske, Cinamon and Ginger, a little powder of a dried Lemond, beat all this to a perfect paste with Gum-dragon steept in Rose-water, rowle it thin, and print it with a shallow mould, then rowle it vpon Reedes very thin, dry them leasurely, and keepe them dry.
To make Rushilians. 91 TAke a pinte of bakt flo∣wer, an ounce of Cina∣mon, a quarter of an ounce of beaten Ginger, a graine of Muske, mingle these with a pound of beaten Sugar, then take sixe yolks and sweet but∣ter, two or three spoonefuls of sweet Creame, make all this into a perfect paste, and it will looke of Cinamon co∣lour, then coole it in small rowles, and make it in letters or knots, dry them in a ba∣king Pan.
To make Gentillissoes. 92 BAke and cearse a pound of double refined Sugar, beat it to a perfect paste, w th the whites of two Egges, and Gum-dragon steept in Rose-water, one graine of Muske, and as much Amber-greece, rowle it in fine rowles and bake it. To make Nouellissoes. 93 TAke the paste of your Gentillissoes, rowle it thin & fine with red Almond past, pinch it with your nippers, & bake it as in the Gentillissoes,
alwaies prouided that you put Muske and Amber-greece in. To make Lozenges of Ʋiolets. 94 TAke Violets, Cowslips, Rosemarie flowers, or any other in the heat of the day, shred onely the beauti∣fullest of the blossomes vpon a trencher, with a sharp knife, in as many pieces, and as fine as possibly you can, and then beat them as fine as may be in an Alabaster mor∣ter, with the pap of a Pippin, and a graine of Muske, then boile double refined Sugar to a Candy height, and put your
beaten flowers into the boi∣ling Sugar, and boile it a little longer, for the flowers will bring the Sugar back againe, and when you see it some∣thing thicke, powre it on a sheet of glasse, and cut it into little Lozenges like Wigs, some you may drop.
To dry Fruits. To dry Orenges and Le∣monds. 95 RAspe the skinnes of these fruits, cut them in halfes, and take out the cores, lay the rindes presently in faire water two or three dayes, to take away their bitternesse, then boile them fiue or sixe times, in seueral waters for the same purpose, and when they be tender take them vp, and dry them in a faire cloath; then couer them in clarified Sugar, and boile it leasurely
two houres, then take them off, and put them in an ear∣then Pipkin, and let them so remaine foure or fiue dayes, or longer the better, when you will dry them, set them on the fire againe vntill they be through hot, drain them, and the whilest boile fresh Sugar to a Candie height, then put them in, take them out, and lay them on a basket-makers lattice, and dry them in a warme Ouen in one night, and they are ready. To dry white Peare-Plums. 96 GAther the fairest of this fruit before they bee
throughly ripe, pricke them with a Pen-knife, and couer them in clarified Sugar, heat them on the fire vntill they crack, then take them vp, and put fresh Sugar to that sirupe, and boile it a good deale higher, now and then taking it off and scumming it cleane: then put in the Plums againe, and warme them againe in the hot Sugar about halfe an houre, then poure them into a pot or glasse, and let them remaine 3. or 4. dayes in that hot Sugar, then warme againe these Plums, and set them a cooling; then boile as much fresh Sugar as will couer them vnto a candie height, and put
the plums into that hot Su∣gar, and so let it boile leysure∣ly a quarter of an houre, now and then turning them, for that will make them take Su∣gar, then take them vp be∣tweene hot and colde, and lay them on a sheete of glasse, and so drie them in a stoue, or in a warme Ouen. To drie blacke Pear-eplums. 97 GAther this fruit also in a faire sun-shine day a∣bout two or three of the clocke, when the sunne hath taken off all the outward moisture from them, which otherwise would hinder the worke.
In all other practise doe as in the white peare-plum hath beene shewed. To drie Pippins cleere at Amber. 98 PAre this fruit, and cut out the coare, and so soone as you haue prepared a piece, cast it into a bason of faire running water, then boile the weight thereof in clarified Sugar vnto a Candie height, then drie your Pippins with a faire cloath, and boile them apace in the hot Sugar, and euer when you see any froth, take them off the fire and scum them verie cleane, then
turne them and set them on againe and boile them apace; then (as before) take them off and scum them, and set them on the fire againe, and doe so halfe a dozen times at at the least and when your Sugar is at a Candie height, take out your pippins and put them in a warme Ouen, and let them stay two or three houres, and they will be drie. To drie Apricockes orient and verie cleere. 99 TAke faire large Apri∣cocks well coloured, but not too ripe, pare and stone
them, and couer them in cla∣rified Sugar, boile them ley∣surely turning them, & scum∣ming them verie often: then take them off the fire, and let them stand all night in that sirupe, the next day warme them againe, and when they be hot, take them out, and set them a dreining againe, then boile other Sugar a little higher with the Apricockes leysurely, now and then turn∣ing them, & scumming them, and let them stand in the si∣rupe vntill the next day; the next day warme them againe, and then lay them a dreining, then boile other Sugar to a Candie height, and put the
Apricockes into the boiling Sugar, turne them vntill you see the Candie grow about them, & lay them on a sheete of glasse, and set them into a warme Ouen after the bread hath beene drawne, and let them stand about three houres, the next day take them out and turne them, & doe so a weeke at least; for they will be verie long a dry∣ing To drie Peares without any Sugar. 100 PAre your Norwich Pare, or any other of the best that you can get, but leaue
the staulke and the peepe on, prick it with a penknife, and put them into a earthen pot, and bake them a little in an Ouen, then put them vpon straw or bents, into a white plate or latten-pan into an Ouen presently after the drawing of the bread, doe so a weeke together, or longer, and the fruit will last the longer.
Physicall Receipts ap∣proued by very wor∣thy Physitians of this Realme. To make sirupe of Violets. 101 PIck and weigh the flow∣ers of violets put them in a quart of water, and stew them vpon hot embers vntill the flowers haue made the water as blew as themselues, then boile that infusion vnto a sirupe with foure pound of clarified Sugar vpon a gentle
fire with scumming now and then, if the fire be too hot all is mard. To make sirupe of Liquorce. 102 SCrape eight ounces of Li∣quorice verie cleane and bruise it, take an ounce of Maidenhaire, one ounce of Annise-seede, and as much Fennill-seede, steepe these in foure pintes of raine water and boile it to a quart, then boile the liquour, with one pound and a halfe of Sugar.
To make sirupe of Roses solutiue. 103 PLucke the leaues of da∣maske Roses, and put them to a gallon of hot water, and set it on embers in a great vessell of boiling liquor, the more leysurely it boiles, the better it is, and when the leaues looke white, take them vp, and put in fresh, and doe so three or foure times, and when the water is red, to eue∣ry pinte put the white of an egge, and a pound of clarified Sugar, boile it to a sirupe: the thicker it is the better.
To make sirupe of drie Roses. 104 TAke foure ounces of red Roses dried, and infuse them in a quart of faire wa∣ter vpon hot embers, vntill the Roses haue lost their co∣lour, then take a pound and a halfe of clarified Sugar, clari∣fie your liquour & Sugar with two Egs, and boile it to the height of a sirupe vpon a ve∣rie soft fire, for if it be ouer hot, the sirupe will bee of no vse.
Against the trembling of the heart. 105 LEt the Patient drink three or foure spoonefuls of Claret wine, halfe so much Damaske Rose-water. An excellent medicine against the rising of the mother, taught and tried by diuers. 106 TAke the bignesse of a Pease of Methridate, and mingle the same with Con∣serue of Roses, as much in quantitie as a Walnut, and let the partie eate so much
euery morning fasting, and euery euening as much for the space of three dayes to∣gether, or as long as neede re∣quireth. An Almond milke made for the cooling of the liuer and bloud, it was taught by a Doctor of very good note, for a great personage. 107 TAke Suckorie rootes, A∣sparagus, and Marsh-Mal∣lowes, of each the weight of eighteene pence in siluer, Fen∣nell rootes as much, the tops of the flowsing of Borage, Buglosse, and Scabious, of each a handfull, boile this in
a pinte and a quarter of  water vnto a pinte,  make the milke. A remedie against loose∣nesse of the Bodie. 108 TAke a pinte of red wine, and halfe an ounce of beaten Cinamon, boile it on the fire, & thicken it with the yolks of foure raw Egs; brew them well, and drinke euery morning halfe a pinte, and euery euening as much. It is best in the full or change of the Moone, but good al¦waies.
Receipt to make a vomit. 109 STampe three or foure leaues of Assara, Tobacco that growes in the Gardens, and straine it with sixe spoon∣fuls of Ale, and drinke it fa∣sting, fasting halfe an houre after or longer: then take warme Posset-drinke, and keepe your selfe walking vn∣till the vomit haue done wor∣king; if it worke not as you wish, then take more Posset-drinke, and still walke till it hath done working, and keepe a good diet at least that day after.
To stay 110 TAke sirupe of Liq∣rice, of May denhaire, of Horehound, of Isope, of each a like quantity, Conserue of a Foxe lungs, of Ale-cam∣pane (if the partie be enfla∣med the Ale-cam∣pane must be left out.)
ordering of Colours. 111 SAp-greene, Rosa-Paris, blew Bise, yellow Smalt, all these colours must bee ground with thinne gum-Arabicke water, and are fit to garnish, but perillous to eate. Of Colours that may be eaten. 112 A White Rose dried, and ground with Alome wa∣ter, maketh a faire straw co∣lour.
in the heat of the  dried, and power  his owne colour  and a little gum Arabicke water. The second barke of an Elder, ground with gum-wa∣ter and a little Alome, maketh a faire greene. Other Colours to colour Leach. 113 YOur Saffron water ma∣keth a yellow: iuyce of greene Wheat in the blade, maketh a greene: Turnsoll gi∣ueth a red, and the white is of it selfe.
