19168 S112665 99847911 12978
PANACEA: OR, Select Aphorismes, Diuine and Morall. SENECA. Optimus Orator, qui plurima paucis dicit. PROV. 31. 8. Open thy mouth for the dumbe, in the cause of of all the children of destruction. LONDON, Printed by Augustine Mathewes. 16
In Approbation of these APHORISMES. Schediasma. GOod Bookes are Gardens full of choicest Flowers, Which Bees and Spiders equally frequent; The Bee suckes Honey (for her golden Bowers) The Spider's wholly vnto Poyson bent: Yea, so malignant are some Bumble-Bees, That Spider-like they'l turn to venom, These. What Magicke-spell, or strong Inuocatiue, Could euer (yet) charme deleterious Tongues? Yet, here behold, a faire Defensatiue, And Panacea 'gainst pure Ʋillaines wrongs; Euen sacred Truth; whose Beams (in eu'ry line) May dazzle the most bristling Porcupine. S. N. Oxon.
AD PONTICVM, Cleonem insignisimum. POntice, quid nostrum laceras uesane libellum? An quia te rodit, tetra{que} facta notat? Ah (miser) in anis: tuate Mens Nil ego peccaui: tua te mala cognita produnt. Ovid. saùcia prodit: Quin, caue ne perdat sontica Barbaries. S N. Cantabrigiensis.
APHORISMES Diuine and Morall. 1 VN kindnesse for Loue, is worse then Blowes for Hate: for better is a Blister with a Nettle, then a Pricke with a Rose. 2. Affliction is to be measured rather by Faith then Fancy. 3. We must not rashly condemne them whom we haue oftimes con∣sideratly approued; lest the change being in our Iudgment, and not in them; we display our owne Weak∣nesse, by building on the Sandy
foundation of Heare-say; or the Bogs and Quag mires of blust∣ring Malice. 4. He that beleeueth Easily, con∣demneth Rashly. 5. Sympathy of maners, maketh Symphony of mindes. 6. Loue grounded vpon Lust, dissolueth vpon light occasion. 7. He that would haue his name Registred with the pen of Eterni∣ty; let him write it himselfe with the pen of Chastitie: for Vbi deus,S. Hierome. ibi pudicitia. 8. Plenty shall bee vpon that Table, where Charity is attendant. 9. The mercy of God is not promised to men loaden with sin, but with sorrow for their sinne. 10. An insensible Heart is the Deuills Anuill. 11. It isin the Power of mens sins, to make God curse his Blessings. 12. The Chaire of the scorner
s the Throne of Sathan. 13. Worldly Happines and Hum∣blenes are seldome linkt together: or very seldome is a good minde nd a great Estate giuen to one man. 14. The ranknesse of Prosperity mpoysons the carnall minde; and he Daughter of Riches is Pride. 15. There is nothing that can etter agree, then Patience with isery. 16. The eyes that Sinne hath ut with impenitency; Damnati∣ shall open with a Vengeance. 17. A wicked man is soone Rai∣, and with like speede Depres∣: He flourisheth for a time, and isheth for euer. 18. A godly man is long kept wne, but when he riseth his E∣ation is permanent. 19. Quake and feare, to suffer  sinne of thy soule, and the end thy life to come together.
20. To haue the Euidence  Faith, is to haue the Witnesse  Workes. 21. Deuout prayer and readi makes Men like to Angels: For  the one they speake to God,  the other God speakes to them. 22. Hearty repentance mou God to repent him of his intend  Plagues. 23. Through Iesus Christ do God looke at vs, and we at hi that we may be Hopefull, and h Mercifull. 24. Loue neuer Dineth in t Conscience, where Faith h not first broke her Fast. 25. There may bee a shew  Charity, without Faith: But th can be no shew of Faith, with Charity. 26. Man iudgeth by the Ha God by the Heart. 27. Hypocrisie is a Pandar
ll other sinne: and Vice is made Vertues Ape, in an Hypocrites ractise. 28. The Detractor and he that elights to heare him, are whelpes f a Litter: the one hath the De∣ill in his Tongue, the other in his Eare. 29. The Dispositions of wicked en are peruerse: Coaction must orce them to Goodnesse, and Cor∣ection restraine thē from Badnes. 30. Hee that doth any thing which God hath forbidden, doth uill: and he that doth it willful∣y, is a Deuill. 31. Not to restraine euill, is to maintaine euill; And want of pu∣ishment, is the Incouragement hereof. 32. It is allowable to haue plen∣y of wealthinesse, where mindes re empty of Wickednesse. 33. Next to Prayer, there is no
better Sacrifice then the Punish∣ment of Malefactors. 34 We are in this world for Action, not for Fruition: in viâ, not in termino. 35. It is neither Harsh nor Newes to Gods children, to heare of Death, or thinke of it. 36. Christian fortitude may be ouer-borne, not daunted: (pre∣mitur non perimitur.) 37. It is weaknesse of Faith, to feare to dye (for feare of death euerlasting) since wee haue per∣mission to praeclude Diuine iudg∣ments by our prayers, with pro∣mise of Ayde and Vctory. 38. It is madnesse to run from Punishment, and not from Sinne. 39. It is vaine to pray against Punishment, while Sinne continues. 40. There cannot bee a more forcible motiue to Patience, then to acknowledge a Diuine hand to strike.
41. It is a fruit of false Faith in aduersity, to seeke second meanes, with neglect of the first, (to wit, God.) 42. He that escapes Affliction, may suspect his Adoption. 43. God is most present, when he most chastens. 44. He that hopes for good to himselfe, will returne good for euillto others. 45. It is good so to diet the bo∣dy, that the soule may be fatted. 46. Not our Afflictions, but Sins, are Crosses in our way to Heauen. 47. The lesse man prizes him∣selfe, the more God esteemes him. 48. The longer God staies, not finding amendment; the sorer he strikes when he comes to iudg∣ment. 49. As water doth the fire, so doth delight in sinne extinguish repentance.
50. Temporall things are to be giuen to them that want; and spi∣rituall things to them that haue. 51. As prosperity doth not re∣ueale a friend: So aduersity doth not conceale a Foe. 52. A wicked man hath (most∣what) Feare for his bedfellow, De∣spaire for his companion, and the sting of Conscience for his Tor∣mentor. 53. Hee that flatters an Vsurer, doth claw the Deuill. 54. Strong affections giue credit to weake Reasons. 55. When the vniust sinner re∣pents and confesseth; Then the iust Lord relents and forgiues. 56. He that restores not, repents not: and his sinnes are retained, till his vniust gaines be repaid. 57. It is reason that he that sets anothers house on fire, should la∣bour to quench it: and hee that
hath done wrong, should carry himselfe so, as he may deserue to be forgiuen. 58. The way to possesse all things, is to possesse God the Possessour of all things. 59. One Sin opens the doore for many Vertues to goe out. 60. As the Deuill will not dwel in a house which is not swept frō Goodnes: So the grace of God will not dwell in a heart which is not cleansed from Wickednes. 61. Hidden may be the causes of Predestination, but vniust they neuer bee. 62. Betweene the Prowdest and Poorest there may be difference in Fleece, but not in Flesh. 63. Omission, and Commssion, are a wicked mans Confusion. 64. Ther's litle difference be∣tweene Permission and Commissi∣on of euill.
65. Kindly to reprehend, is friendly to bid amend. 66. If Charity command care o∣uer thy Neighbours Body; let Christianity double that care ouer his Soule. 67. It is a Vertue to bewaile sin, though we cannot preuaile against sinne. 68. The deuill stil by Ignorance or Insolence perswades Men to sin. 69. They that make Peacocks of their wiues, make Woodcocks of themselues. 70. Actum est de homine, cum ac∣tum est de nomine: When a mans good name is viz. By his ovvne mideds not by o∣thers mis∣deemings. done, himselfe is vndone. 71. Heauen gates are too straight for Grosse sinners to enter: yet not in deficiencie of their Glory, but our Grace. 72. * Oppressors feast on othersAn Oppres. for is the Duills banqueting dish. Euills, and are feastes for Deuills:
for while they deuoure the poore, the deuill deuoures them. 73. Earth is not our House but our Bridge; which wee passe ouer to heauen or hell. 74. He Of this some Sip, others Sup, but most Scope, (as an Am∣boexter one Pin∣dizd ex Aboe.) that drinkes of follies Cup, hath small cause to licke his Lips after it. 75. The time is Short, that plea∣seth a sinner: euerlasting, that Plagueth him. 76. Pleasure is a Channell, and death the Sea where vnto it run∣neth. 77. It were some blessing to an infamous Oppressour if his stinking Memoriall might not surviue his Funerall. 78. The perdition that Vice brings, is not so Visible as miserable. 79. The euill disposition of the soule marres the good compositi∣on the Body. 80. The faithfull are dead to
Ille est pec ato mor∣tus, in quo pecatum est mortu, aut saltem non reg∣ans. Hug Victorin. Sin, the faithlesse dead in Sin. 81. So far is the spirit quickned, as the flesh is mortified: It is there∣fore a true Paradox: A Christian so far liues, as he is dead. 82. Christ at one Viz: by his death. Blow slew our Sinnes, and saued our Soules. 83. He that wil not heare Christs Words, shall feele his Wounds: and he that is now deafe to his sweet voyce of Mercy, shall heare one Day his thundering voice of Iudgement, Goe ye cursed &c. 84. He is senslesse, who is not sensible that he begins and ends his life in Sorrow: his first voyce being a Cry, and his last a Groné. 85. Euery soule shall mourne ei∣ther in Repentance here, or in Vengeance hereafter; and he shall be opprest with desperation, that hath not exprest contrition. 86. A weake body may haue a strong faith.
87. Riot drinkes so many healths to others, that it leaues none to it selfe. 88. The Antidote to diuine iudg∣ments, is humble penitence. 89. With God, weake meanes can neuer be too weake: Without God, the strongest, not strong inough. 90. The viz. Ac∣companied with Con∣trition; and Satisfaction (in the case of Oppres∣sion.) Confession of our sinnes doth no lesse honour God, than his Glory is blemisht by their Commission. 91. Christ dyed our Death, that we might liue his Life: And suf∣fered viz. Not in the dia∣bolicall sense of Phrenetical Catharists, but Analo∣gically &c. our Hell to bring vs to his Heauen. 92. Charity will allow Suspiti∣on; where no cause can be found to trust. 93. Satans wayes haue pleasant Intrats but bitter Exits. 94. He is vnworthy of Gods Blessings, that hath not learned to bee content with his Corrections,
(which tend to our blessednesse, if we make right vse of them.) 95. Beware of sinne; for if thou make it thy Companion in youth, it will be thy Master in age. 96. It is Infidelity, in visible be∣nefits, not to see the invisible Giuer. 97. Misery deserues mercy: for in doing good to others, we doe more good to our selues. 98. Afflictions are necessary, for they whip men to prayer and con∣fession. 99. He that will not resist Temp∣tation when it is offerd, shall not resist Tribulation when it is suf∣fered. 100. Security is the Suburbs of Hell. 101. Sin is as crafty as the Deuill, giue it place in the Eye, it vvill soone possesse the Heart. 102. It is the part of Cain, to de∣ny
to be thy Brothers keeper. 103. Mortifie thy sinnes before they mortifie thy soule: For eter∣nall Life or death depends vpon it. 104. Sin, and an accusing con∣science, will cleaue to an impeni∣tent Soule, in death; after death, in iudgment, and for euer. 105. Two things are to be no∣ted out of euery good Booke and Sermon: 1. That which thou didest not know before: 2. That which speaketh to thy sinnes: for by the one, thou shalt encrease thy Knowledge; by the other les∣sen thy Vices. 106. He that hath an vnfained desire to pay, and cannot, makes his debt a Sore, not a Sin: For God will accept his Restitution mentall; though Man bee content with no lesse then Totall. 107. As Prouided it be not such as some pre∣tend, which conceit themselues to be the onely elect and can tell how many in a Towne shall be sa∣ued or dam∣ned. Dea Cotyt∣to, quanti hi tibi Mys∣tagogs! Humility is a signe of Election: so pride is a signe of re∣iection.
108. As the Seruants of God are knowne by humility and cha∣rity: So the Deuills slaues are knowne by pride and cruelty. 109. As a Wolfe followes his Prey, and Hunters follow him: So while an oppressour pursues the poore, the Deuill dogs him at the heeles. 110. There are three degrees of sinne; Suggestion, Delectation, Consent: Suggestion is the Seed, Delectation the Nourishment, Consent the Accomplishment. 111. To pretend Sincerity and want Sanctity, is meere hypocrisy 112. Death to Sin, is the Fune∣rall of Vice, and the Resurrection of Vertue. 113. The Scripture is a faithfull Counsellour in prosperity, and a sure Comforter in aduersity, 114. He that is rightly wise will
vse humane Wisdome, as a Hand∣maid to Diuine prouidence. 115. K. lame Though Almesdeeds merit notat Gods hands: yet they make him our Debtor according to his owne Gracious promise. 116. Riches are taken frō good men, to try them: and from bad men, to curbe them. 117. God is Verity; his Lavv Charity; his honour Equity: his peace Felicity; his life Eternity. 118. All the Words of Christ are Consolation: all his Deeds, Com∣passion: all his Passions, Propitiation. 119. The Kingdome of Hea∣uen to the godly is Granted, in Predestination. Promised, Vacation. Shewed, Iustification. Exhibited, Glorification. 120. He that heares in Gods word Read or Preached, his Promi∣ses pronounced, & his Iudgments
denounced, without respect to the one, or regard to the other, is in a dangerous, if not incurable case. 121. There be 3. principall mo∣tiues to excitevs to prayer, 1. Gods Precepts, 2. His promises, 3. Our owne necessities. 122. To the true Beleeuer no∣thing can succeed, but either to his Approed good, or Tolerable cuill: In the first, he will be thankefull, In the second, patient. 123. When we pray to the Lord for corporall benefits, we must not fix our Confidence on Naturall meanes. 124. Hee that giues God his Lips insteed of his Heart, teaches him to giue him Stones instead of Bread. 125. Christ was Figured in the Law, Foretold in the Prophets, and Fulfilled in the Gospel. 126. Christ was made not one∣ly
Redemption to saue man, but Wisedome and Example to guide him: therefore learne and imitate. 127. The best Reuenge of a Christian, is to correct his Lusts, and to take Vengeance of his own Sinnes. 128. He that hates a good Man, hates God. He that hates an Ell man, hates one like himselfe: there∣fore haue peace with all men. 129. As Men would haue men doe as they teach; So God would haue men to doe as they heare; Else Hearers shall bee no more saued by hearing, then Preachers by preaching. 130. Patience for sowing the Seed of sorrow on earth, Shall reape a golden Crop of Ioy in hea∣uen. 131. Aduersity is Gods Vniuersi∣ty, wherein wee learne the Iustice, Mercy, Power, and Providence of
God. 132. Aduersity seekes out the Promise of God: the Promise, Faith: Faith, Prayer: At last God heareth, and in Mercy answereth. 133. The best Antidote for Affl∣ictions, is to prepare for them be∣fore they come; And to beare them patiently when they come. 134. Rich mens Heires that weare Blackes at their Funeralls, oft mourne in their Gownes, and laugh in their Slecues. 135. Gods visitations, to the Godly are Rods; to the vngodly Whips: the one, are punisht for their Instruction; the other to De∣struction. 136. Seeming Denotion may bee in a Reprobate: but holy Zeale in none but the Predestinate. 137. As God will bee sought with sober Fasting & Mourning: so will hee bee found with holy
feasting and spirituall reioycing. 138. To humble our soules be∣fore God, is to Embase our selues, and Embrace him. 139. When death besigeth the Body, Satan beleagureth the Soule. 140. Hell-torments are endlesse, caselesse, and remedilesse. 141. A Drunkards Tongue is the closet of his Heart: for what a so∣bermā thinks a drūkē man speakes. 142. A Vertuous man is Famous on Earth. Illustrious in the Graue. Glorious in the Heauens. 143. Prayer is the Winge, and Meditation the Eye of the soule. 144. Repentance is the Superse∣deas, wherewith all the Bonds of sinne are discharged. 145. Though sin be as heauy as a mountaine of Lead, yet his weight is light in a corrupt heart. 146. Where the cinders of na∣turall
affection are extinct, there can be no flame nor feruor of Re∣ligion. 147. He that wants Mercy, shall finde none. 148. The Vsurer and Broker, are the two milstones that grinde the poore. 149. Where grace within, doth beautifie the attire without, there good cloathes are commendable. 150. Good Lawes without Ex∣ecution, are like the Picture of St. George, with his hand alwaies vp, but neuer striking. 151. It is as necessary a part of a Christian, to Exuere & Induere, is the To∣tall of Re∣ligion. put on the new man, as to put off the old. 152. It is not inough to cease to do euill: for it is damnable, not to doe good. 153. He that will come to God, by Faith; God will come vnto him, by Grace.
154. A friend is to Forbe are in Anger, Reproue in Errour, Comfort in Aduersity, and Counsell in Pro∣sperity. 155. Where Fasting is, corporall Passions are cured: Where Pray∣er is, Spirituall Pestilence is healed. 156. If the Master will drinke to Fulnesse; the man will drinke to Madnesse. 157. Greatnesse is a Copy, which euery man striues to write after. 158. Hee that hinders good workes in others, makes their euill workes his owne. 159. Ministers of mercy can doe little good, except ministers of Iustice put to their helping hands. 160. Ministers may forbid cor∣ruptions of the Heart: but Magi∣strats must prohibite the Wicked∣nesse of the hands. 161. Greatnesse is the fairest Ob∣iect to the eye of the world. Good∣nesse,
to the eye of God. 162. The glorious splendor of earthly Honour, little auailes in Gods sight, if Vertue giue it not a heauenly Lustre. 163. Hee that is Greatnesse and Goodnesse, is pleased to prefer Deus Opt Ma. Good before Great. 164. The Booke of Grace, is the Counterpane to the Booke of glory. 165. Gods hand is heauiest on the Conscience, if he suffer it to sur∣fet on Pleasure till death. 166. The Burthen of Sin, must make vs weary, before we haue a∣ny promise of Ease. 167. The next way to abate the burthen of Iudgment, is to abate the burthen of Sin. 168. He cannot be true to him∣selfe, that is false to God. 169. The Lease of vanity, is but a Moment, and the Tenure of this world, is vncertain.
170. To buy the merriment of a day, with the Eternity of insuf∣ferable Torments, is a deare Pur∣chase. 171. What thou darest not doe, Man looking on thee; how darest doe, God looking on thee? 172. Christ giues no title of In∣heritance in Heauen, to such as haue no Holines on Earth. 173. The Euidence of Faith is weake, if it want the Witnesse of Workes. 174. Let not Malice (in Enmi∣ty) make thee reueale that; which loue (in Amity) bound thee to con∣ceale. 175. Hate no man: no not thine enemy; lest God loue him: For to hate where he loues, is fearefull opposition. 176. In matters of Life & Death, vse a iust mercy, and a mercifull Iustice.
177. Whatsoeuer is pleasing to the Body, but preiudiciall to the Soule, forbeare it. 178. Affect in all things, rather substance without shew, thē shew without substance. 179. Not to feare God, is to feare euery thing. 180. True valour, is neither to be faint hearted, nor foole-hardy. 181. Be not confident in pros∣perity, not diffident in aduersity: For Grande solatium est, um Vniuerso rap, Sn. the world is in perpetuall reuolution. 182. Pride regardes neither O∣bedience to God, nor Loue to Man. 183. Wicked men are plunged either in a false hope of mercy, or a desperate feare of misery. 184. Reprehension whether iust or vniust, neuer does a Wise man harme: for if it be iust, he hath a Warning to amend: If vniust, hee
hath a Caneat ro avoyde. 185. Though men iudge of the heart, by outward actions; yet God iudgeth outward actions by he heart. 186. Iustice will euer haue an pen eare to the iust complaints of niust dealings. 187. Let thy Bed represent to ee thy Graue: thy bed-cloaths, he Mould: the sheets, thy Wind∣gsheet: Sleepe, Death: and Awak∣ng, thy Resurrection. 188. Be more glad to see any ans Amendment, then his Punish∣ent. 119. As death leaues thee, Iustice indes thee, and Iudgment doomes hee. 190. The beginning of Grace, is o search, try & examine thy selfe. 191. If thou finde thy Heart ounded with sin, & canst beg for ercy, with sighes, Grones, & St. Bas writes that Angels bath them∣selues in Sinners Teares. Teares
vpon thy Knees (as for Life and Death) then art thou in the right way to Repentance. Diuine M. DRAT∣TOM. Heauen rings for ioy, When once a sinner Prayes. 192. If thou accuse thy selfe by Confessing thy sinnes, thou preuen∣test the Deuill of his purpose: For then, he cannot accuse thee at the Day of Iudgement.Panitentia  recess :  access ad bonum. 193. Repentance, is a hearly sor∣row for sin, accompanied with Amendment of life, and a godly Resolution to sin no more. 194. Prayer & hearing of Gods word brings vs to Christ, (being not vsed perfunctorily, and in hypo∣crisie.) 195. By Repentance burne thy Sin, lest Hell fire burne thy Soule. 196. Repentance is a turning from all Sin, and not from one kind
of sin to another. 197. It is not enough to repent, but thou must proceed from graceNon  greds, e regre to grace, if thou wouldst atchieue the Crowne of Glory: (Nam qui cessat esse melior, cessat esse bonus.) 198. God is more Mercifull thē man can be sinfull: If he be truely contrite and sorrowfull. 199. Let Repentance beget in thee as much Sorrow; as Sin bred Delight. Let no mans Contrition be lesse then his Crime St. Cyprian. 200. It hath beene Arist. Eth: N∣co. anciently ob∣serued, that there are 3. Sorts of People in the world. 1. Those that can well aduise and counsell themselues. 2. Those that will take good Counsell of others.
3. Those (which are the worst that can neither counsell themselues nor will follovv the aduise of o¦thers. Ex minimis seminibus nascuntur ingentia. FINIS.
A CHARACTERISME OF THE FOVRE CARDINALL VERTVES. NEWLY PVBLISHT Fato, non Merito. CICERO pro P. SEXTIO. ƲIRTVS in tempestate savâ quieta est, & lu∣cet in tenebris, et pulta loco, manet tamen, at{que} haeret in patriâ; splendet{que} per se semper, neque alienis vnquam sordibus obsoleseit. LONDON, Printed by Augustine Mathewes 160.
The Printer to the Reader. THE Affinity of the Ar∣gument, and Rarity of he Subject, haue moued me o adioyne to the precedent Aphorismes, this insuing Cha∣acter; imparted by the No∣ly-descended & Vertuously ccomplisht, Sir R. G. Knight. And albeit (to sparkling Wits)  sute not point blanke with Theophrastus his superlatiue I∣ea; yet, I doubt not, but it will bee gratefully accepted
of all well-disposed & ingenuou Iudgements, that (according to the Rabbinical Adage,) re¦gard not so much the gay outsid o the cup, as the good Liquor within Considering therefore wha a choyce Peece thou hast heer communicated: I trust tho wilt (by way of Gratificati¦on) requite the Heroick Founder with as many goo Wishes. Ouid. GARGARA quot segetes, quot habet Methymna racemos. Thine in summo gradu A. M.
A CHARACTERISME OF THE FOVRE CARDINALL VERTVES. Of Prudence. PRudence is Triple: First, of the Heart; and this consisteth in disposing things present, n remembring things past; in oreseeing things o come: which is xcellently exprest, Deut. 32. O hat men would be wise, (that is by hings past) and would vnderstand  viz. things present, and would fore∣see
the last, viz. things to come.) All which is included in this versicle. Corrige praeteritum, rege praesens, cernefuturum▪ Secondly of the Tongue: which consists in gouerning our speech, Pro. 10. He is most wise who can rule his Lips. Whereto accords this ingenious Epigram. Sonne Benjamin, sith thou art young, And know'st not yet the benefit of Tongue. Make it thy slaue, since thou art free; Imprison it, lest it imprison thee. Thirdly, of Worke: and this con∣sists in eschuing euill & pursuing good. Psal. 33. Decline from euill, & doe good: Both must goe together, for the one, without the other, is not auailable.
Of Fortitude. FOrtitude, in as much as it is a Po∣litike Vertue, teaches to beare a valiant minde; to feare nothing but dishonesty, manfully to endure Aduersity, and not to beare the crest too high in Prosperity. Fortitude of a purged minde, is to be void of effeminate Passions: not to feare basely, not to be an∣gry rashly, & to desire no reproch∣full thing. Fortitude exemplar, is to be vn∣changeable: because it is euer the same & is not at any time changed. The parts of Fortitude are 4. viz. Magnificence, Confidence, Patience, Perseuerance. Magnificence, is seene in the Me∣ditation and pursuit of great and
high Acts, with an honorable de∣sire of glory. Confidence is a Vertue, whereby the minde, in high and honorable Dissignes, reposeth it selfe in cer∣taine hope and Assurance. Patience is voluntary and con∣tinued sufferance of hard and dif∣ficult things for Honour and Vti∣lity. Perseuerance, is a Vertue which consists in a permanent and well aduised Purpose. The effects of Fortitude are foure. First, it triumpheth ouer ones enemies, Iudges. 4. and 5. Chapter. Debora, and Barak. Secondly, it keepeth a mans Goods, Luke. 11. When a stronge man armed, &c. Thirdly, it enricheth, Pro. 10. The hand of the strong getteth Riches.
Fourthly it adorneth: as in the Psalmes, Fortitude and Majesty his Garment. It consisteth in fiue things. First, in aduenturing vpon hard things. Secondly, in despising earthly things. Thirdly, in suffering Tribulation. Fourthly, in resisting Tempta∣tion. Fiftly, in fighting against Vices. Fiue things conduce to Fortitude. First, the exhortation of wise men. Secondly, the Example of the Valorous. Thirdly, Exercise in Martiall Affaires. Fourthly, Hope of Reward. Fiftly, the Diuine Assistance
gotten by feruent Prayer. To conclude: As Harts haue great hornes in vaine, seeing they want Courage: So is it not sufficient to be power∣full in Wit, Policy or other things vnlesse Fortitude be adioyned. Plutarke. Of Temperance. Politike Temperance (according to Macrobius) is to desire no∣thing to be repented: not to ex∣ceed the golden Meane. To bring Concupisence vnder the Yoke of Reason: This also teacheth vs not be ouer-wise or too precise in our owne conceit, but wise ac∣cording to Sobricty, as the Apostle admonisheth. Temperance of a purged minde
doth not onely represse, but quite suppresse irregular Desires. Temperance as it is an Exem∣plar Vertue, is a certain Reflex on it selfe, constant and immutable. There are three Parts of Tem∣perance, viz. Continence, Cle∣mency, Modestly. First, Continence, (according to Tully) is a Vertue, by which the appetite is ruled and reined by the golden Bit of Wisdome. Secondly, Clemency is a Ver∣tue, which steereth the Minde in the greatest Stormes and pertur∣bations of Hatred, with a gene∣rous and gratious Disposition to forgiue the Delinquent. Thirdly, Modesty is a Vertue, by which an honest Shamefastnes procureth an Honourable and durable Estimation.
The Excellencie of Tempe∣rance is seene in two things First it preserueth Nature: be∣cause Nature (not corrupted) de∣lights in the Meane, and with Extreames is corrupted and de∣praued. Secondly it adorneth the Minde. For as in Nature; Forme is more Noble then Matter: So in Mo∣rality, the Manner is more com∣mended, then the Action it selfe. Whence it is ancienly and truly said: We merit not by Verbes but by Aduerbes: that is, not in speake∣ing or doing any thing: but in speaking or doing well. Accor∣ding to that of the Philosopher, Cujusvis est pulsare citharam: boui autem, praeclaè.
Of Justice. Ivstice giues to euery one his owne: wherein also is re∣gard to bee had to a Religious obseruation; that nothing bee e∣steemed Profitable, that may seeme dishonest. Iustice (being taken in a large Latitude and Extent) hath sixe Branches or Parts: First, Religion. Secondly, Piety. Thirdly, Grati∣tude. Fourthly, Reuenge. Fiftly, Obedience. Sixtly, Truth. First, Religion is a sacred Vertue, of a superiour and diuine Nature, attended with awefull Respect and ceremonious Obseruance,
without Superstition. Secondly, Piety is when Duty, Respect and Reuerence is giuen to them that are linked to vs, in Bloud or Good will: and are therefore neere and deare vnto vs. (So the Prince of Romane Elo∣quence, Tully, oft vseth the Word in his Golden Epistles.) Thirdly, Gratitude is a Vertue, comprizing the Remembrance and Desire of requiting the Ami∣ty and Friendly Offices of ano∣ther. Fourthly, Reuenge is, whereby wee doe in a lawfull manner re∣pell and represse Violence and In∣iury and euery base Affront, by a prudent Defence of our selues, and a just Vindication of the proferd Wrong. Fiftly, Obedience (or Obeisance) is
a Vertue, whereby men excelling in Worthy qualities are obserued with all due Reuerence & Honour. Sixtly, Truth (or Verity) is an Intellectuall Vertue, whereby those things are immutably the same, which they haue beene, are, or heereafter shall bee. Iustice may be chiefly peruer∣ted, three wayes; First, through partiall Affection to the Person, or loue of Money. Isai. 5. Woe to them that iustifie the vngodly for Reward. Secondly, through Feare, Mat. 10. Feare not them that can kill the Body, &c. Thirdly, through Enuy, Mark. 15. Knowing that for Enuy they had betrayed him. To summe vp all: Iustice is the Pillar of the State; the Queene of Vertues, and the Empresse of
Humane Society. And as the Sunne in his Glory is most pleasant to the Beholders: So is a just Prince most deare to all good Patriots and Friends of Iustice. Vivant Rex, Regina & Princeps, aeternumque Floreant. FINIS.
