19698 99849752 14919
A DISCOVRSE OF THE DAM∣NED ART OF WITCH∣CRAFT; SO FARRE FORTH as it is reuealed in the Scriptures, and manifest by true expe∣rience. FRAMED AND DELIVERED by M. WILLIAM PERKINS, in his ordi∣narie course of Preaching, and now published by THO. PICKERING Batchelour of Diuinitie, and Minister of Fin∣chingfield in Essex. WHEREVNTO IS ADIOYNED a twofold Table; one of the order and Heades of the Treatise; another of the texts of Scripture explaned, or vindicated from the cor∣rupt interpretation of the Aduersarie. PRINTED BY CANTREL LEGGE, Printer to the Vniuersitie of Cambridge. 1610.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, SIR EDWARD COOKE Knight, Lord chiefe Iustice of his Maiesties Court of Common Pleas; Grace and peace. RIght Honourable: The word of God that one∣ly Oracle of truth, hath pointed out the Ene∣mie of mankind, by his proper Characters, in sundrie places. Our Sa∣uiour tearmes him, the Prince of this World;Ioh. 12. 11. & aIoh. 8. 44 murtherer from the beginning▪ Peter com∣pares him to1. Pet 5. 8. a roaring Lyon, that rangeth a∣broad in the earth, seeking whō he may deuoure. His attempts in regard of their quality, are cal∣led 2. Cor. 2. 11. ▪ subtill & deepe deuises; yeaEph. 6. 11. plots exquisitely contriued, and orderly framed, as it were in Methode. The meaning of the holy Ghost in these and such like attri∣butes, is, to expresse that measure of policie and power, which Satan hath reserued vnto him∣selfe euen in the state of his Apostasie, improo∣ued by long experience, and instantly practised
vpon the sonne, of men, that he might set vp in the world, a spirituall regiment of time, as a meane to encounter the kingdome of grace, and  it were possible, to bring the same to ru∣ine. To forbeare instances of open force made against God and his Church by other courses, for the compassing of his dec, how skilfully he worke, his owne aduantage, by se∣cret opposition in the exercise of that cursed Art, which is the Subiect of the present Dis∣course, is a point not vnworthie your Honou∣rable consideration. The Power of this Prince of darknesse, bee∣ing aboue the might of all sensible Creatures, and euery way seconded by the greatnesse of his knowledge and experience, manifeseth it selfe herein, for the most part, by workes of wonder, transcendent in regard of ordinarie ca∣pacitie, and diuersly dispsed by his chosen in∣struments of both text▪ sometime in matter of Diuination, sometime by Inchantment, some∣time by rare  and delusions; otherwhiles by hurting, by cuing, by raising of Tempests, by speedie conuayance and transportation from place to place, &c. and all to purchase vnto himselfe admiration, feare, and faith, of the creduous world, which is vsually carried away, with affectation and applause of signes and wonders. His policie, appeareth in a wise and exquiite manner of framing and concei∣uing both his practises and grounds; the one to procure credit and intertainment, the other,
that he may not faile of his purpose, but pro∣ceede vpon certenties. Touching the manner of his practise. He stands resolued, that the world hath taken no∣tice of him to beIoh. 8. 4. a lyar, and the father thereof: and therefore if he should offer to speake in his one language, or informe an Art by Rules of his owne deuising; he might haply incurre su∣spicion of falshood. Hereupon he composeth his courses , by way of counterfait and imitation, not of the actions and dealings of men, but of the order of Gods owne procee∣ding with his Church; holding it a sure princi∣ple in policie, That actions will be much more effectuall, when they be framed vnto the best presidents, then when they are suted to the di∣rection of meaner examples. To this purpose, as God hath made a Couenant with his Church, binding himselfe by promise to be their God, and requiring of them the conditi∣on of faith and obedience; so doth Satan in∣dent with his Subiects by mutuall confedera∣cie, either solemnly or secretly; whereby they bind themselues on the one part to obserue his Rules, and he on the other to accomplish their desires. Againe, God giues his Word, the In∣terpreter of his will, and his Sacraments, the eales of his promises, to which beeing rightly administred and receiued, he hath tied his own presence, and the worke of his grace in them that beleeue. Answerably to this, the Deuill giues a word of direction to his Instruments,
and addeth vnto it, Charmes, Figures, Chara∣cters, and other outward Ceremonies, at the vse whereof he hath bound himselfe to be pre∣sent, and to manifest his power in effecting the thing desired. Furthermore, God hath re∣uealed his will to the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, by familiarGen. 18. 17. conference, byNum. 16. dreams, byA∣mos 3. 7. inspiration, byAct. 10. 10. Trances: In the same ma∣ner, Satan hath his Diuinors, and Soothsayers, his Pythonisses, his Cassandras, his Sibylles, to whome he maketh knowne things to come, by familiar presence, by dreames, &c. To con∣clude, God had in the Old Testament his Temple at Ierusalem, yea hisExod 25. 22. Nmb. 7. 89. Oracle, from whence he spake, and gaue the answer vnto Moses: So of auncient times, the deuill ere∣cted his Temple atHerodot. Euterpe. Dodona, and Delphos, whence he gaue his answers, for the satisfacti∣on of the superstitios Heathen. Yea, and at this day, as the Ministers of God doe giue re∣solution to the conscience in matters doubtfull and difficult: so the ministers of Satan, vnder the name of Wise-men, and Wise-women, are at hand, by his appointment, to resolue, direct, and helpe ignorant and vnsetled persons, in ca∣ses of distraction, losse, or other outward cala∣mities. Now the Grounds whereupon he buildeth his proceedings for certentie, are cunningly ga∣thered from the disposition of mans heart, by naturall all corruption, and that in three speciall instances. First, he knowes that Man naturally
out of the light of grace, hath but1. Cor. 2. 14. . a meere Saule, indued onely with some generall and confused notions; and as for matters of deeper apprehension touching God and heauenly things, there is a vaile of ignorance and blind∣nesse drawne ouer the eyes of his mind. Wher∣upon, though he be apt to know and worship a God, and learne his will, yet for want of in∣formation by the word, he is prone to erre in the practise of his notion. Here Satan applies himselfe to mans measure, and at his owne will, drawes the minde into error, by his delusions, and impostures. This made the2. king. 17. 29. Ih 4. 21. Samaritants in the Old Testament, and the superstitiousAct. 17. 3. A∣thenians in the New, to worship an vnknowne God, that is the1. Cor. 10. 20. Deuill. Hence it was, that the greatest Clarkes of Greece,Diog. La∣ert. lib. 1 in Thaltis e∣pist. ad Phe∣recid. & l. 3. Strabo Geo∣gr. l. 17. Thales, Plato, and the rest, for want of a better light, sought vnto the Wizzards of Egypt, whome they cal∣led Prophets, men instructed by Satan in the grounds of Diuination. And of this sort were Iannes and lambres mentioned in the 2. Tim. 3. 8. Scriptures. Hence it was also that the aun∣cient Heathen, hauingba 8. 19, 20. no Law and Testimo∣nie from God, inquired at Soothsayers, and mur∣muring Inchanters; others betooke them∣selues, in matters of doubt and difficultie, to the old Oracles ofDiod. Sic. l. 17. Plin. l. 5. c. 5. Iupiter Ammon in Libya, ofHerodot. Euterpe. Strabo Geo∣gr. l. 16. ex Hom. Odyss. . Iupiter Dodonaeus at Dodona in Epirus; ofPasan. in Phocicis. Herodot. Euterpe Str Geogr. lib. 9. & l. 16. Apollo at Delphos, ofPasan. in Hoeoticis. Strabo Geo∣gr. lib. 9. Iupiter Tropho∣nius in Boeotia, and the rest; where the Deuill gaue the answer, sometimes one way, and
sometimes another. Secondly, Satan by ob∣seruation perceiueth, that man vpon aOmn su∣perstiti i∣becilli ani∣mi atque a nilis est. Cic. de Divin. weake and ignorant minde, is prone superstitiously to dote vpon the creatures, attributing some di∣uine operation or vertue to them, without any ground of Gods word, or common vnderstan∣ding; and consequently disposed to worship God in some worke of man, or to ioyne to the sme worship the inuentions of man, which he hath not commanded. Vpon which ground he made the Heathen to dote vpon their wise∣men, to regardLevit. 19. 31. Soothsayers, and them that wrought with Spirits; The ChaldeanCle Al. . lib. 6. Strabo Geo∣gr. l. 15. Philoso∣phers renowmed for their superstitions and Magicall courses, to make the Heauens, fatali∣um Legum Tabulam, ascribing that to the ver∣tue of the Starres, which was knowne and done by Satanicall operation; The Magicians of Per∣sia, to admit of corruptions in their auncient good learning, and to giue themselues, vpon reading the fabulous writings of the Chaldean Sorcerers,Dan  2. Matth. 2. 1. to the sludie of vnlawfull Arts in∣uented by himselfe, both before and after the times of Daniel the Prophet: Lastly, the n∣cient Romanes vpon a superstitious doage, ne∣uer to vndertake any businesse of weight, isi auspicatò, vnlesse they had luckie consent and warrant from the Colledges of their Augurors erected by Romulu. Thirdly, there is a na∣turall Distemper in the minde of man, shewing it selfe in these particulars, That he cannot en∣dure to stand in feare of imminent daunger;
That he swells in an high conceit of his owne deserts, specially when he is in lower estate, then he would be; That he will not beare a wrong done, without reuenge; That he rests not satisfied, with the measure of knowledge receiued, but affecteth the searching of things secret, and not reuealed. When the minde is possessed with these troubled passions, with care to helpe it selfe; then comes the Deuill, and ministreth occasion to vse vnlawfll means in the generall, and forceth the minde by con∣tinuall suggestion, to determine it selfe in par∣ticular vpon his owne crafts. It was the case of1. Sam 28. Saul, and ofDan. 2. 1, 2. Nebuchadnetsar. It caused many of the Heathen Philosophers, to go from Athens to Memphis, from Grecia to Syria, from men on earth to wicked Spirits in hell, to get more illumination at the hands of the Prince of darkenesse. It mooued sundrie al-contented Priests of Rome,Platina in Sylv. 2. &c. Fascie. tem∣porum. to aspire vnto the chaire of Supremacie, by Diabolicall assistance; yeaBenno Cardinal. de Sylvest  & Gregor. 6. Act. 8 9. to exercise Magicall arts, when they were Popes: and thereby to manifest indeed, that they were not the true Successors of Simon Peter, but heyres of the vertues of Simon that Magus, who bewitched the people of Samaria, and professed to doe that by the great power of God, which he wrought by the ayde and assi∣stance of the Deuill. If any doe thinke it strange, that Satan should in this sort oppose himselfe to the king∣dome of God, and maintaine his owne princi∣palitie,
by such vngodly arts and exercises;August. En∣chirid. cap. 95. & 96. They must knowe, that this and all other euills come to passe euen by the will of God, who hath iustly permitted the same; To punish the wicked for their horrible sines;1. Sam. 28. as Saul for his wickednesse: To auenge himselfe vpon Man for his ingratitude;2 Thess. 2. 10, 11, 12. who hauing the truth reuealed vnto him, will not beleeue or obey it; To wa∣ken and rowze vp the godly, who are sleeping in any great sinnes or infirmities; Lastly, to trie and prooue his people, whether they will cleaue to him and his word,Deut. 13. 3. or seeke vnto Sa∣tan and wicked Spirits. Now from the consideration of the pre∣misses, we conclude it a necessarie thing for the Church and people of God, to be acquainted with the dealing of Satan in this kinde, that knowing his subtill deuises, they may learne to auoyd them. For which purpose this Treatise was first framed, and now exhibited to your Lordship. The iust commendation whereof, aboue others formerly divulged touching this Argument, appeareth herein, that it serueth to the full opening and declaration of Satans Me∣thode in the ground and practises of Witch∣craft. Wherein among many other remarkable points, it may please you to take speciall notice of these particulars. I. That they doe grossely erre, who either in expresse tearmes denie that there be Witches, or in effect, and by conse∣quent; auouching that there is no league be∣tweene them and the Deuill; or affirming they
can doe no such miraculous workes, as are ascribed to them. The former issueth plainly our of the bodie of the Discourse. And for the latter; That there is a Couenant betweene them, either explicite in manner and forme, or implicite by degrees of superstitious procee∣ding in the vse of meanes insufficient in them∣selues; is plainely taught and confirmed in the same. That Witches may and doe worke won∣ders, is euidently prooued; howbeit not by an omnipotent power, Reignald Scot, epist. . (as the  hath vnlearnedly and improperly tea ) but by the assistance of Satan their Princ ho is a powerfull Spirit, but yet a Creatu well as they. And the Wonders wrough  them are not properly and simply miracles,Miravel mi∣rand, non Miracula. but workes of wonder, because they exceede the ordinarie power and capacitie of men, especially such as are ignorant of Satans habilitie, and the hidden causes in nature, whereby things are brought to passe. II. That the Witch truely conuicted, is to be punished with death, the highest de∣gree of punishment; and that by the Lawe of Moses, the equitie whereof is perpetuall. Yea euen the better Witch of the two in common reputation, because both are equally enemies to God, and all true religion; and it is well knowne by true experience, that all professed Sorcrers, are guiltie of many most monstrous impieties. III. That the Miracles of the Popish Church at this day, are indeed either no Miracles, or false and deceitfull workes. Touch∣ing
corporall presence in the Sacrament, which they affirme to be by miracle; If it were true, then miracles were not yet ceased, but should still be as ordinarie in the Church, as are the Sa∣craments. A point not onely confuted in the latter part of this Treatise,Lib. de civ. Dei. 22. c. 8. but also by the testimonie of purer Antiquitie. Augustine saith, That miracles were once necessarie to make the world beleeue the Gospel; but he that now seekes a signe that he may beleeue, is a won∣der, yea  monster in nature. Chrysostome conclude  on the same grounds,Homil. 19. ope. im∣perfect. that there is now in the Church, no necessitie of working Miracles; and calles him a false Prophet that now takes in hand to worke them. Againe, if there be a miracle in the Sacrament, it is con∣trarie to the nature of all those that were wrought, either by Moses and the Prophets, or by Christ, and his Apostles. For they were apparent to the eye, but this is insensible; and therfore neither of orce to mooue admiration, nor to conuince the minde of man, and make him to beleeue. As for those, which are pre∣tended to be wrought by Saints in that church; if we make recourse to the Primitiue times, wherein God gaue the gift, to breede faith in the Gentiles; we shall finde that the power of producing such workes, was neuer actually in∣herent in the Apostles,Act. 3. 12. 16. but dispensed by their▪ in the Name of Christ: Neither was it in their libertie, to worke miracles, when they would, but when it pleased God, vpon speciall cause▪
to cal them thereunto. And i neither the power nor the will was in them, much lesse is it likely to be sound in any of the Saints. And for their Reliques, of what name so∣euer, so greatly magnified and resorted vnto; we denie there is any such vertue in them. For they may not be thought to be more effectuall then the hem of Christs garment, from which the power of healing the woman did not pro∣ceede, but from himself:Luk. 8. 46. Or, then the Napkin of Paul, which did not cure the sicke, but the power of God onely, dispensed by the hands of Paul.Act. 19. 1. 11. Miracles therefore, auouched by them, to be wrought at the Tombs & Statues of Saints, and by their reliques and monuments, are but meere Satanicall wonders, seruing to maintaine Idolatrie and superstition; and are in truth, no better then the wonders of the Donatists in S. Augustines time,Aug. lib de vnital. eccl. cap. 16. aut figmenta mondcium ho∣minum, aut portnta fallacium spirituum.2. Cor. 4. 4. IV. That the light of the Gospel purely preached, is a soueraigne meane, to discoue & conound the power and policie of San in Witch-craft and Sorcerie. The wod of God preached, is the weapn of the Christians warfare, and is migh∣tie through God to cast downe strong bolds.2. Cor. 10. 4. At the dispensation of i by the disciples of Christ, Satan fall from heauen a lightning.Luk. 10. 18. After the ascension of Christ into Heauen, in the times of Claudius CesarIust. Mart. Apol. ad An∣ton., the Deuill stirred vp sundrie persons, who in regard of the admirable works which they did, by the helpe of Magicke and
Sorcerie, were accounted as Gods, and their Statues erected and worshipped with great re∣uerence. Amongst the rest, one Simon, called by a kinde of eminencie; Magus, practising his trade with successe, to the admiration of the multitude,Act. . 10. was holden to be the great power of God. Whose dealing was first discouered by the light of the word, shining in the Ministery of the Apostles, and himselfe conuicted with such euidence of truth, to be an Instrument of Satan, that he was forced at length to flie ou of Samai into the Westerne parts,Euseb. Eccl. hist. lib. 2. cap. 12. as Eusebi∣us recordeth in his Ecclesiasticall Historie. By this, Christ the true angel of the Couenant, lo∣ked and bound vp Satan for a 1000.Rev. 20. 2. yeares af∣ter his ascension, that he might not be so gene∣rally powerfull in seducing the Gentiles, as he had beene before his incarnation. But toward the expiration of those yeares, when corrupti∣on began to creepe into the Papacie; when the Bishops affected that Sea, and aspired vnto it by Diabolicall arts; when the Canons, Decrees, Sentences, Synodlls, Derialls, Clemenines, Extrauagants, with other Laws and Constituti∣ons, preuailed aboue the Scriptures; then began Satan againe to erect his kingdome, and these workes of iniquitie to be set abroach. Thse points together with the whole work ensueing▪ I humby commend to your Hono∣rable patronage, that vnder your protection they may freely passeth the common view of the world. Wherin if I seem ouer-bold, thus to
presse vpon your Lordship vnknowne; my an∣swer in at hand; That all by-respects  part, I haue beene hereunto induced many waies. First, vpon a reuerent opinion of those rare gifts of knowledge and pietie; wherewith God hath beautified your person, nd thereby aduanced you to high place, and estimation in this Com∣mon-wealth; Whereof those your graue and indicious speeches, euen in the weightiest mat∣ters touching God and Cesar, as also those ma∣ny learned writings, haue giuen large testimo∣nie. Frō which hath issued the greatnes of your Name, both in the present iudgement of the world, and in future expectation. Next out of a resolued perswasion of your Honourable disposition, as in generall to the whole house of Leui, so particularly to those, whose labours haue fruitfully flowed out of the Schooles of the Prophets, amongst whome the Author of this booke, in his time, was none of the mea∣nest. Lastly, by the consideration of the Ar∣gument arising out of a Law Iudiciall, agreea∣ble to the calling and qualitie of a Iudge. A Law penall in regard of the offence, and there∣fore sutable to his proceedings, whose office is to heare with fauour, to determine with equi∣tie, to execute iustice with moderation. A law of the highest, and greatest weight, immedi∣ately concerning God and his Honour, and therefore appertaining to him,Det. 1. 16. 2. Chron. 19. 6. that sits in the place of God, to maintane his right, that he may be with him, in the cause and iudgement.
By such Motiues, I haue incouraged my , vnder assurance of your Lordships pardon, to present you with that, wherein you are most deseruedly interessed; further intreating your fauourable interpretation and acceptance, both of the qualitie of the Worke, and of the paines of the Publisher. And thus heartily wishing to your Lordship increase of grace and honour, with a daily influence of blessing and direction from heauen, vpon your graue consultations and employments, I humbly take my leaue, and commend you to the grace of God, by whome doe rule all the Iudges of the earth.Prov. 8. 16. Finching∣field. Octob. 26. 1608. Your L. in all Christian dutie to be commanded, THOMAS PICKERING.
A Table of the Contents. The entrance into the Discourse. Pag. 1. CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Witchcraft in generall. That VVitchcraft is an Art. 4 That VVitchcraft is a wicked Art. 7 The ende of VVitchraft: To worke wonders. 8 The grounds of working wonders, discon∣tentment and Curiositie. 9 That wonders are wrought by Satans assi∣stance. 12 The sorts of wonders. True wonders wrought onely by God. 13, 14 Lyg wonders wrought by Satan and his in∣struments. 18 That Satan is able to doe extraordinarie works by the helpe of Nature. 19 The sorts of Lying wonders. 22 1. Illusions, of the Senses. 22 Minde. 22 2. Reall workes. 27 That Satan cannot change one creature into another. 33
Gods Permission of the practises of Witchcraft. Why he permitteth them? 38 Satan cannot go beyond his permission. 39 CHAP. II. Of the Ground of all the practises of Witchcraft. That there is a league betweene Satan and the Witch. 42 This League is twofold. Expresse or open. 47 Secret; and the degree, thereof. 51 CHAP. III. Of the Parts of Witchcraft, and first of Diuination. How Satan beeing a creature, reuealeth things to come. 56 Diuination by meanes, which are the true crea∣tures of God▪ As, By the flying and noise of Birdes. 66 By the Intralls of Beasts. 67 By the starres called Iudiciarie Astrolo∣gie. 73 That Predictions by the Starres are vnlaw∣full. 75. 86 Of the Obseruation of the Signe. 88 Of the choise and obseruation of daies. 91
By Dreames; Diuine. 93 Naturall. 95 Diabolicall. 97 Notes of Difference to know them each from other. 100 By Lots. Diuination by counterfeit meanes; Ncroman∣cie. 107 Whether that which was raised by the Witch of Endor, was true Samuel, or no? 109 Diuination without meanes; by immediate assi∣stance of a familiar Spirit. 121 Practised two waies. 1. When the spirit is within the Witch. 122 2. When he is out of the Witch. 123 The Difference betweene Traunces diuine and diabolicall. 124 CHAP. IV. Of working Witchcraft. The parts of it. Inchantment; What it is. 127 What a Charme is. 130 Whether the Charme be in it selfe effectual to worke wonders. 133 Particular practises referred to Inchant∣ment. 148 Iugling: consisting in delusion and sleight. 157 That the wonders done by the Sorcerers of E∣gypt
befor Pharaoh, were lrgling sleights, and not true and reall works. 160 CHAP. V. Of Witches. What a Witch is. 167 How many Sorts of Witches. 173 The bad Witch. 173 The good Witch the worser of the two. 174 That the word:  vsed by the 70. signifies a Witch. 178. CHAP. VI. Of the punishment of Witches. Why Witches are and ought to be punished with Death. 182 CHAP. VII. The Application of the Doctrine of Witch∣craft to the present times. Here foure Points are handled. I. Whether the Witches of our times be the same with those, which are condemned by this Law of Mses. 186 Reasons proouing that they are. 186 Allegations to the contrarie answered. 188. 194. &c. II. How we may be able in these daies to dis∣cerne and discouer a Witch. 199
The Meanes of Discouerie two: 200 1. Examination, vpon Presumptions. 00 2. Conuiction vpon proofes lesse sufficient: 205 more sufficient. 211 The causes mouing Satan to further their discouerie. 215 Why all Witches are not speedily detected by Satans meanes. 216, 217 III. What Remedie may be vsed to preuent or cure the hurts of Witchcraft. 219 Remedies of two Sorts. Lawfull, either preseruatiue or restoratiue. 219 Preseruatiue concerning Persons. 219 Whether the child of God may be bewit∣ched or no? 222 Concerning places of abode. 224 Restoratiue. How whole countries may be cured. 227 How particular persons may be cured. 229 False and vnlawfull Remedies prescribed by the Church of Rome. Generall. The gift of casting out of De∣uills. 232 That there is no such gift in the church, since the daies of the Apostles. 232 Particr, siue. The name Iesus. 239 The vse of Saints Reliques. 241 The Signe of the Grosse. 243 Hallowing of Creatures. 244 Exorcismes. 245
IV. Whether the witches of our times are to be punished with death, and that by vertue of this Law of Moses? 246 Reasons proouing that they ought. 247 Obiections answered. 251 The Table of the Texts of Scripture. Chap. vers. Pag. Genesis. 3 20. 226 12 8 226 30 37 141 37 7 94   9 94 41 25 94 44 5 69 Exodus. 7 21 166   11 163   12 165 8 14 166   19 40. 164   8 165 14 21 13 22 18 1   20 182 32 28 254 9 11 164 Leuiticus. 16 8 106 19 31 121 20 27 121 29 19 182 Numbers. 12 6 93 22 6 129 23 23 130 25 8 254 35 31 180. 183 Deuteronom. 1 17 93 13 1 38   2 103   3 93   5 182   6 250 17 3 249 18 9 220   10 67. 73. 92   11 43. 108     121. 127   18 228
20 5 225 Iosha. 7 15 106 10 13 14 14 2 106 I. Samuel. 10 21 106 15 23 8 28 8 126   9 122   19 62.108 I. Kings. 17 21 116 22 22 40 II. Kings. 2 21 245 4 34 116 13 21 242 20 11 14 II. Chron. 30 18 226 Iob. 1 16 28   21 157 33 15 94 Psalmes. 58 5 42. 143 92 10 221 106 30 235 136 4 15 Proverbes. 16 33 106 18 18 106 Ecclesiastes. 1 9 64 9 2 223 10 11 128 Isaiah. 8 19 108   20 ibid. 47 13 74 Ieremie. 23 25 93 Ezekiel. 21 21 67 Daniel. 2 1 102   2 74 3 25 14 4 30 34 6 22 14 8 16 102 11 3 58 Matthew. 1 20 94 2 13 ibid. 4 9 43 7 22 23. 35 12 27 234 14 20 14 20 34 17 Marke.
5 12 41 16 17 234. 237 16 18 232   19 ibid. Luke. 10 17 36   18 227 12 54 71 13 16 222 Iohn. 11 43 17 Acts. 3 6 151   12 16   16 151 5 15 242 7 22 82 8 9 173 10 11 126 13 6 173   8 ibid. 16 16 122. 151 19 12 242   13 25. 240 Romanes. 8 1 199 I. Corinth. 6 5 230 12 vlt. 36 14 22 233 II. Corinth. 4 4 5 11 14 147 12 2 124 Galatians. 3 1 23. 158 5 20 179 Ephesians. 6 12 5 Philippians. 2 10 241 Colossians. 2 15 198 II. Thessal. 2 9 28. 238   10 39   11 ibid. I. Timoth. 1 20 230 4 4 245 II. Timoth. 3 8 160. 163 Hebrewes. 10 28 182 Reuelat. 14 13 110. 115 21 8 179 22 15 ibid. "Ecclesiasticus." 46 20 112 Tobit. 6 7 226 FINIS.
A Discourse of Witch∣craft. Exod. 22. 18. Thou shalt not suffer a Witch to liue. THis text containeth one of the Iudiciall Lawes of Moses touching the punishment of Witch∣craft: which argument I haue chosen to intreat of, for these causes: First, because Witchcraft is arife and common sinne in these our daies, and very many are intangled with it, beeing either practitioners thereof in their owne persons, or at the least, yeilding to seeke for helpe and counsell of such as practise it. Againe, there be sundrie men who
receiue it for a truth, that Witchcraft is nothing else but a meere illusion, and Witches nothing but persons deluded by the Deuill: and this opinion takes place not onely with the ignorant, but is holden and maintained by such as are learned, who doe auouch it by word and writing, that there be no witches, but as I said before. Vpon these and such like considera∣tions, I haue beene mooued to vnder∣take the Interpretation of this Iudiciall law, as a sufficient ground of the do∣ctrine which shall be deliuered. In hand∣ling whereof, two things are distinctly to be considered. The first, what is a Witch. The second, what is her due and deserued punishment. And both these beeing opened and handled, the whole meaning of the law will the better ap∣peare. For the first. To giue the true de∣scriptiō of a Witch, is a matter of great difficultie, because there be many diffe∣rences and diuersities of opinions tou∣ching this point; and therefore that we may properly and truly define a Witch,
we must first pause a while in opening the nature of Witchcraft, so farre forth as it is deliuered in the bookes of the Old and New Testament, and may be gathered out of the true experience of learned and godly men. Touching Witchcraft therefore I will consider three points: I. What witchcraft is. II. What is the ground of the whole practise thereof. III. How many kinds and differen∣ces there be of it. CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Witchcraft. TO begin with the first: According to the true meaning of all the pla∣ces of holy Scripture which treate of this point, it may be thus de∣scribed: Witchcraft is a wicked Arte, seruing for the working of wonders, by the assi∣stance
of the Deuill, so farre forth as God shall in iustice permit. Sect. I. I say it is an Arte, because it is com∣monly so called and esteemed amongst men, and there is reason why it should be thus tearmed. For as in all good and lawfull arts, the whole practise thereof is performed by certaine rules and pre∣cepts, and without them nothing can be done: so Witchcraft hath certaine superstitious grounds and principles whereupon it standeth, and by which a∣lone the seats and practises thereof are commonly performed. If it be demaunded, what these rules be, and whence they had their begin∣ning, considering that euery Arte hath reference to some author, by whom it was originally taught and deliuered? I answer, that they weare deuised first by Satan, and by him reuealed to wicked and vngodly persons of auncient times, as occasion serued: who receiuing them from him, became afterward, in the iust iudgement of God, his instruments to
report and conuey them to others from hand to hand. For manifestation whereof, it is to be considered, that God is not onely in generall a Soueraigne Lord and King ouer all his creatures, whether in hea∣uen or earth, none excepted, no not the deuills themselues; but that he exerci∣seth also a speciall kingdome, partly of grace in the Church militant vpon earth, and partly of glorie ouer the Saints and Angels, members of the Church triumphant in heauen. Now in like manner the Deuill hath a king∣dome, called in Scripture the kingdom of darknes, whereof himselfe is the head and gouernour, for which cause he is tearmed. 12. the Prince of darknes,2. Cor. . the God of this world, ruling and effectually work∣ing in the hearts of the children of dis∣obedience. Againe, as God hath enacted Laws, whereby his kingdome is gouerned, so hath the deuill his ordinances, whereby he keepeth his subiects in awe and obe∣dience, which generally and for sub∣stance, are nothing else but transgressi∣ons
of the very lawe of God. And a∣mongst thē all, the precepts of Witch∣craft are the very chiefe and most noto∣rious. For by them especially he holds vp his kingdome, and therefore more esteemeth the obedience of them, then of other. Neither doth he deliuer them indifferently to euery man, but to his owne subiects, the wicked; and not to them all, but to some speciall and tried ones, whome he most betrusteth with his secrets, as beeing the fittest to serue his turne, both in respect of their wil∣lingnesse to learne and practise, as also for their abilitie to become instruments of the mischiefe, which he intendeth to others. If it be here asked, whence the deuill did fetch and conceiue his rules? I an∣swer, out of the corruption and depra∣uation of that great measure of know∣ledge he once had of God, and of all the duties of his seruice. For that beeing quite depraued by his fall, he turnes the same to the inuenting and deuising of what he is possibly able, against God and his honour. Hereupon, well per∣ceiuing
that God hath expressely com∣manded to renounce, and abhorre all practises of Whitchcraft, he hath set a∣broach this art in the world, as a maine pillar of his kingdome, which notwith∣standing is flatly and directly opposed to one of the maine principall lawes of the kingdome of God, touching the seruice of himselfe in spirit and truth.Ioh. 4. 4. Againe, the reason why he conueies these vngodly principles and practises from man to man is, because he finds in experience, that things are farre more welcome and agreeable to the com∣mon nature of mankinde, which are taught by man like vnto themselues, then if the deuill should personally de∣liuer the same to each man in speciall. Hereupon, he takes the course at first to instruct some fewe onely, who beeing taught by him, are apt to conuey that which they know to others. And hence in probabilitie this deuillish trade, had his first originall and continuance. Sect. II. In the second place, I call it a wicked
art, o distinguish it from allgood and lawfull as, taught in schooles of lear∣nin which  they are warantable by the word of God▪ so are they no lesse profitable and necessary in the Church. Againe, to shewe the nature and quali∣ie of , that it is a most vngracious and wicked art, as appearth by the Scrip∣tures. For when Saul had broken the expresse commandement of God▪ in sparing Agag, and the best things, Sa∣muel tells him, tht rebellion and dis∣obedience is as the sinne of Witchcraft, that is, a most horrible and , like vnto that wicked, capitall, and  sinne, 1. Sam. 15. 23. Sect. III. Thirdly, I dde▪ teing to the working or producing of wonders, wherein is noted the proer ende of this art, whereby I put a further difference betweene it, and others that are godly and lawfull. Now if question be mooued, why man should desire  Witchcraft to worke wonders  the true and proper cause is  first temptati∣on,
whereby the deuill preuailed against our first parents, had inclosed within it many sinnes: for the eating of the for∣bidden fruit, was no small or single of∣fence, but as some haue taught, contai∣ned in it the breach of euery comman∣dement of the Morall lawe. Amongst the rest, Satan laboured to bring them to the sinne of discontentment, whereby they sought to become as Gods; that is, better then God had made them, not resting content with the condition of men.  his sinne was then learned▪ and could neuer since b forgotten, but con∣tinually is deriued from them to al their posterie, and now is become so com∣mon a corruption in the whole nature of flesh and blood, that there is scarce a man to be found; vvho is not originally tainted therevvith as he is a man. This corruption shevves it selfe prin∣cipally in tvvo things, both vvhich are the maine causes of the practises of Witchcraft. First, in mans outwardeste; for▪ lie beeing naturally possessed with a loue of himselfe, and an high conceit of his
owne deseruing, when he liues in base and low estate, whether in regard of po∣uertie, or want of honour and reputati∣on, which he thinkes by right is due vn∣to him: he then growes to some mea∣sure of griefe and sorrow within him∣selfe. Hereupon, he is mooued to yeeld himselfe to the deuill, to be his vassall and scholler in this wicked art, suppo∣sing that by the working of some won∣ders, he may be able in time to releeue his pouerty, and to purchase to himselfe credit and countenance amongst men. It were easie to shew the truth of this, by examples of some persons, who by these meanes haue risen from nothing, to great places and preferments in the world. In stead of all, it appeareth in certain Popes of Rome,Plaa de vit. Pot▪ in vita Sil▪ 2. aleus in Act. Rom. Pont lib. 5. & lib. 6. as Syluester the second, Benedict the eight, Alexander the sixt, Iohn the 0. and twentie one, &c. who for the attayning of the Pope∣dom (as histories record) gaue thēselues to the deuil in the practise of witchcraft, that by the working of wonders, they might rise frō one step of honour to an∣other, vntill they had seated themselues
in the chaire of the Papacie. So great was their desire of eminencie in the Church, that it caused them to dislike meaner conditions of life, and neuer to cease aspiring, though they incurred thereby the hazard of good conscience, and the losse of their soules. The scond degree of discontent∣ment,August. con∣fess. l. 10. c. 35 is in the minde and inward man; and that is curiositie, when a man resteth not satisfied with the measure of inward gifts receiued, as of knowledge, wit, vnderstanding, memorie, and such like, but aspires to search out such things as God would haue kept secret: and hence he is mooued to attempt the cursed art of Magicke and witchcraft, as a way to get further knowledge in matters secret and not reueiled, that by working of wonders, he may purchase fame in the world, and consequently reape more benefit by such vnlawfull courses, then in likelihood he could haue done, by or∣dinarie and lawfull meanes. Sect. IV. Fourthly, it is affirmed in the descrip∣tion,
that Witchcraft is practised by the assistance of the Deuill, yet the more fully to distinguish it from all good, lawfull, and commendable arts. For in them ex∣perience teacheth, that the Arts-master is able by himselfe to practise his art, & to doe things belonging thereunto, without the help of another. But in this it is otherwise; for here the worke is done by the helpe of another, namely, the Deuill, who is confederate with the Witch. The power of effecting such strange works, is not in the art, neither doth it flow from the skill of the sorce∣rer, man-or-woman, but is deriued wholly▪ from Satan, and is brought into execution by vertue of mutuall conse∣deracie▪ betweene him and the Magici∣an. Now that this part of the descripti∣on may be more clearely manifested, procede to a further point, kind of wonders they be which are ordinarily wrought by the ministerie and power of the deuill. § 1. Wonders therefore be of two sorts; either true and plaine, or lying
and deceitfull. A true wonder is a rare worke, done by the power of God simply, either a∣boue, or against the power of nature, and it is properly called a miracle. The Scripture is plentifull in examples of this kind. Of this sort, was the deuiding of the redde sea, and making it drie land by a mighty east wind, that the children of Israel might passe through it, Exod. 14. 21. For though the East wind be na∣turall of great force to mooue the wa∣ters, and to drie the earth; yet to part the sea asunder, and to make the waters to stand as walls on each side, and the bottome of the sea as a pauement, this is a worke simply aboue the naturall pow∣er of any wind, and therefore is a mira∣cle. Again, such were the wonders done by Moses and Aaron before Pharaoh in Egypt, one whereof, in stead of many, was the turning of Aarons rodde into a serpent, a worke truely miraculous. For it is aboue the power of naturall gene∣ration, that the substance of on creature should be really turned into the sub∣stance of another, as the substance of a
roode into the substance of a serpent. Of the like kinde, were the standing of the Sunne in the firmament without moouing in his course, for a whole day, losh. 10. 13. the going backe of the Sunne in the firmament tenne de∣grees, 2. King. 20. 11. the preseruation of the three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego in the midst of the hoat fierie fornace, Dan. 3. 25. and of Daniel in the lyons den, Dan. 6. 22. the feeding of fiue thousand men, beside women and children, with fiue loaues and two fishes, Matth. 14. 20. 21. the curing of the eyes of the bling man, with spittle and clay tempered together, Ioh. 9. 6. 7. &c. Now the effecting of a miracle in this kind, is a work proper to God one∣ly; and no creature, man, or Angel, can doe any thing either aboue or contrarie to nature, but he alone which is the Creator. For as God in the beginning made all things of nothing, so he hath reserued to himselfe, as a peculiar work of his almightie power, to change or abolish the substance, propertie, motion
and vse of any creature. The reason is, because he is the author and creator of nature, and therefore at his pleasure, is perfectly able to command, restraine, enlarge, or extend the power & strēgth thereof, without the helpe or assistance of the creature. Againe, the working of a miracle is a kind of creation, for therein a thing is made to be, which was not before. And this must needs be proper to God alon, by whose power, things that are, were once produced out of things that did not appeare. The conclusion therefore must needs be this, which Dauid con∣fesseth in the Psalme: God onely doth won∣drous things, Psalme 136. 4. that is, works simply wonderfull. But it is alleadged to the contrarie, that the Prophets in the old Testament, and the Apostles in the new, did worke miracles. I answer, they did so, but how? not by their owne power, but by the power of God, beeing onely his instru∣ments, whom he vsed for some speciall purpose in those works: and such as did not themselues cause the miracle, but
God in and by them. The same doth Pe∣ter and Iohn acknowledge, when they had restored the lame man to the per∣fect vse of his limmes, that by their power and godlinesse, they had not made the man to goe, Act. 3. 13. Againe, it is obiected, that our Saui∣our Christ in his manhood wrought many miracles, as those before mentio∣ned, and many more. Ans. Christ as he was man did something in the working of miracles, but not all. For in euery mi∣raculous worke there be two things, the worke it sele, and the acting or dispen∣sing of the work: the work it selfe, being for nature and substance miraculous, considering it was aboue or against the order of natural causes, did not proceed rom Christ as man, but from him as God; but the dispensation of the same, in this or that visible manner to the viewe of men, was done and performed by his manhood. For example; The rai∣sing vp of Lazarus out of the graue, ha∣uing beene dead foure daies, was a mi∣racle to the effecting whereof, both the Godhead & the manhood of Christ ō∣curred,
by their seueral & distinct actiōs. The manhood onely vttered the voice, and bad Lazarus come forth, but it was the godhead of Christ that fetched his soule from heauen, and put it againe in∣to his bodie, yea, which gaue life and power to Lazarus, to heare the voice vt∣tered, to rise and come forth. Ioh. 11. 43. In like manner, when he gaue sight to the blinde, Matth. 20. 34. he touched their eyes with the hands of his man∣hood, but the power of opening them, and making them to see, came from his Godhead, whereby he was able to doe all things. And in all other miraculous workes which he did, the miracle was alwaies wrought by his diuine power onely; the outward actions and circum∣stances that accompanied the same, pro∣ceeded from him as he was man. Now, if Christ as he is man, cannot worke a true miracle, then no meere creature can doe it, no not the Angels themselues, and consequently not Sa∣tan, it beeing a meere supernaturall worke, performed onely by the omni∣potent power of God.
§ 2. The second sort of wonders, are lying and deceitfull, which also are ex∣traordinarie workes in regard of man, because they proceed not from the vsu∣all and ordinarie course of nature: and yet they be no miracles, because they are done by the vertue of nature, and not aboue or against nature simply, but aboue and against the ordinarie course thereof: and these are properly such wonders, as are done by Satan and his instruments; examples whereof wee shall see afterwards. If any man in reason thinke it not likely, that a creature should be able to worke extraordinarily by naturall means, he must remember, that though God hath reserued to himselfe alone the power of abolishing and changing na∣ture, the order whereof he set and esta∣blished in the creation, yet the alterati∣on of the ordinarie course of nature, he hath put in the power of his strongest creatures, Angels and deuills. That the Angels haue receiued this power, and doe execute the same vpon his com∣mand or permission, it is manifest by
Scripture, and the proofe of it is not so necessarie in this place. But that Satan is able to doe extraordinarie workes by the helpe of nature (which is the que∣stion in hand) it shall appeare, if we consider in him these things. First, the Deuil is by nature a spirit, & therfore of great vnderstanding, know∣ledge, & capacitie in all naturall things, of what sort, qualitie, & cōdition soeuer, whether they be causes or effects, whe∣ther of a simple or mixt nature. By rea∣son whereof he can search more deeply & narrowly into the grounds of things, then all corporall creatures that are clo∣thed with flesh and blood. Secondly, he is an auncient spirit, whose skil hath beene confirmed by ex∣perience of the course of nature, for the space almost of sixe thousand yeares. Hence he hath attainted to the know∣ledge of many secrets, and by long ob∣seruation of the effects, is able to discern and iudge of hidden causes in nature, which man in likelyhood cannot come vnto by ordinarie meanes, for want of that opportunitie both of vnderstāding
and experience. Hereupon it is, that whereas in nature there be some pro∣perties, causes, and effects, which man neuer imagined to be; others, that men did once know, but are now forgot; some, which men knewe not, but might know; and thousands which can hardly, or not at all be known: all these are most familiar vnto him, because in themselus they be no wonders, but only misteries and secrets, the vertue and effect where∣of he hath sometime obserued since his creation. Thirdly, he is a spirit of wonderfull power and might, able to shake the earth, and to confound the creatures in∣feriour to him in nature and condition, if he were not restrained by the omni∣potent power of God. And this power, as it was great by his creation, so it is not impayred by his fall, but rather in∣creased and made more forcible by his irreconciliable malice he beareth to mankind, specially the seede of the wo∣man. Fourthly, there is in the deuil an ad∣mirable quicknes and agilitie, procee∣ding
from his spirituall nature, whereby he can very speedily and in a short spoce of time, conuay himselfe and other crea∣tures into places farre distant one from another. By these ower helpes, Satan is inabled to doe strange workes. Strange I say to man, whose knowledge since the fall is mingled with much igno∣rance, euen in naturall things; whose ex∣perience is of short continuance, and much hindered by forgetfulnes; whose agilitie by reason of his grosse nature, is nothing, if he had not the helpe of o∣ther creatures; whose power is but weaknes and infirmity in comparison of Satans. if their be any further doubt, how Satan can by these helpes worke wonders, we may be resolued of the truth thereof by considering three o∣ther things. First, that by reason of his great knowledge and skill in nature he is able to apply creature to creature, and the causes efficient to the matter, and therby bring things to passe, that are in common conceit impossible. Secondly, he hath power to mooue
them, not onely according to the ordi∣nary course, but with much more speed and celeritie. Thirdly, as he can apply and mooue, so by his spirituall nature he is able, if God permit, to conuey himselfe into the substance of the creature, without any penetration of dimensions: and beeing in the creature, although it be neuer so solide, he can worke therein, not onely according to the principles of the nature thereof, but as farre as the strength and abilitie of those principles will possibly reach and extend them∣selues. Thus it appeareth, that the deuill can in generall worke wonders. § 3. Now more particularly, the deuills wonders are of two sorts. Illusi∣ons, or reall actions. An illusion is a worke of Satan, wherby he deludeth or deceiueth man. And it is two-fold; either of the out∣ward senses, or of the minde. An illusion of the outward senses,August de . c. 18. is a worke of the deuil, wherby he makes a man to thinke that he heareth, seeth, feeleth or touch∣eth such things as indeede he doth not.
This the deuill can easily doe diuers waies, euen by the strength of nature. For example, by corrupting the instru∣ments of sense, as the humor of the eye, &c. or by altering and changing the ayre, which is the meanes whereby we see, and such like. Experience teacheth vs, that the de∣uill is a skilfull practitioner in this kind, though the means whereby he worketh such feats, be vnknowne vnto vs. In this manner Paul affirmeth that the Galati∣ans were deluded, whē he saith, O foolish Glatians who hath bewitched you? Gal. 3. 1. Where he vseth a word borrowed from the practise of witches and sorce∣rers, who vse to cast a miste (as it were) before the eyes to dazle them, and make things to appeare vnto them which in∣deede they doe not see: and the ground of Pauls comparison is that which hee takes for a graunted truth, that there be such delusions whereby mens senses are and may be corrupted by Satanicall o∣peration. Thus againe the deuill by the Witch of Endor deceiued Saul in the appea∣rance
of Samuel, . Sam. 28. making him beleeue that it had beene Samuel in∣deed, whereas it was but a mere coun∣erfeit of him, as shal appeare hereafter. Againe, the deuill knowing the consti∣tutions of men, and the particular dis∣eases whereunto they are inclined, taks the vantage of some, and secondeth the nature of the disease by the cōcurrence of his owne delusion, thereby corrup∣ting the imagination, and working in the minde a strong perswasion, that they are become, that which in truth they are not. This is apparant in that disease▪ which is tearmed Lycanthropia, where some, hauing their brains posses∣sed and distempered with melancholy, haue verily thought themselues to bee wolues, and so behaued themselues. And the Histories of men in former a∣ges, haue recorded strange testimonies of some, that haue been thus turned in∣to wolues, lyons, dogges birds, and o∣ther creatures, which could not be re∣ally in substance, but onely in appea∣rance, and phantasie corrupted, and so these records are true. For God in his
iust iudgement, may suffer some men so to be bewitched by the deuill, that to their conceit thy may seeme to be like these bruit beaste, though indeede they remaine true  still. For it i a worke surmounting the deuills power, to change the substance of any one crea∣ture, into the substance of another. By this kind of delusion the Church of Rome, in the times of blindnesse and ignorance, hath taken great aduantage, and much encreased her riches and ho∣nour. For there be three points of the religion of that Church, to wie, Rur∣gatorie, Inuocation of  Saints, and honouring of Reliques, whereby she hath notably inriched her selfe, all which had their first foundation from these and such like Satanicall impostures. For the onely way, whereby they haue brought the common sort to yeeld vnto them, both for beleefe and practise, hath beene by deluding their outward sense, with false apparitions of ghosts and soules of men, walking and ranging abroad af∣ter their departure, and such like wher∣by simple persons, ignorant of their fet∣ches
and delusions, haue beene much affrighted, ad caused thorough extre∣mitie of feare and dread, to purchase their owne peace and securitie, by many and great expenses. And indeede these were the strongest arguments that euer they had, and which most preuailed with the common people, as is manifest in stories of all nations and ages, where such deceits haue taken place, though oftentimes by the iust iudgement of God, they were taken in their craft, and their feat reuealed. The second kind of illusion, is of the minde, whereby the deuill deceiues the minde, and makes a man thinke that of himselfe which is not true. Thus expe∣rience teacheth, that he hath deluded men both in former and latter times, who haue auouched and professed themselues to be kings, or the sonnes of Kings. Yea, some haue holden them∣selues to be Christ, some to be Elias, some to be Iohn the Baptist, and some extraordinarie Prophets. And the like conceis haue entred into the minds of sundrie Witches, by the suggestion and
perswasion of the deuill. To whome, when they haue wholly resigned their soules and bodies, they haue beene mooued to beleeue things impossible touching themselues, as that they haue indeed beene changed into other crea∣tures, as catts, birds, mise, &c. The in∣quisitions of Spaine & other countries, wherein these and such like things are recorded touching Witches really me∣tamorphosed into such creatures, can∣not be true; considering that it is not in the power of the deuill, thus to change substāces into other substāces. And those conuersions recorded by them, were onely Satans illusions, wherewith the mindes of Witches were possessed, and nothing else; which though they were extraordinarie, (as the rest of this kinde are) yet they went not beyond the power of nature. The second sort of the deuills won∣ders, are reall workes, that is, such as are indeede that which they seeme and ap∣peare to be. These, howsoeuer to men that knowe not the natures of things, nor the secret and hidden causes there∣of,
they may seeme very strange and ad∣mirable, yet they are no true miracles, because they are not aboue and beyond the power of nature. If it be here alleadged, that the deuils workes are not reall and true actions, because the holy Ghost calleth them Lying wonders, 2. Thes. 2. 9. I answer, that they are called Lying wonders, not in re∣spect of the workes themselues, for they were workes truely done and effected; but in regard of the deuills end and pur∣pose in working thē, which is to lie vn∣to men, and by them to deceiue. The truth of which point will appeare in the viewe of some particular examples. First▪ we read in the historie of Iob,Iob. 1. 16. that Satan brought downe fire from heauen, which burnt vp Iobs sheep and seruants; and caused a mightie winde to blowe downe the house vpon his chil∣dren,er. 19. as they were feasting, to destroy them. Againe, he smot the bodie of Iob with botches and boyles. All these were true & reall works, very strange & admi∣rable, and yet no miracles, because they exceeded not the compasse of nature.
For first, when he cast downe the fire from heauen, he did not create the fire of nothing, for that is a worke proper to God alone, but applied creature to creature, and therefore produced such a matter as was fit to make fire of. If it be demanded, how he is able to doe this? we must remember, that his know∣ledge in naturall causes is great, and therefore he was not ignorant of the materiall cause of fire, which beeing throughly knowne and founde out, Satan brought fire vnto it, and so put∣ting fire to the matter of fire, he brought it downe by his power and agilitie from heauen, vpon the cattell and seruants of Iob. Againe, the winde which blewe downe the house, where his sonnes and daughters were eating and drinking, was not created by the deuill, but he knowing well the matter wherof winds are generated naturally, added mat∣ter to matter, and thence came the winde; whereunto he ioynes himselfe, beeing a spirit of a swift and speedie nature, and so makes it, for his own pur∣pose, the more violent and forcible.
Thirdly, he smote Iobs bodie with sore boyles, from the crowne of his head to the sole of his foote. Now this may seeme strange, that he should haue such power ouer mans body, as to cause such diseases to breed in it. Therefore we are further to vnderstand, that his know∣ledge extendeth it selfe to the whole frame and disposition of mans bodie, whereby it comes to passe, that the cau∣ses of all diseases are well knowne vnto him, and he is not ignorant hoe the humours in the bodie may be putrified, and what corrupt humours will breede such and such diseases, and by what meanes the aire it selfe may be infected: hereupon preparing his matter, and ap∣plying cause to cause, he practised vpon the bodie of Iob, and filled him with grieuous sores. Another example of Satans reall workes is this. By reason of his great power and skill, he is able to appeare in the forme and shape of a man, and re∣semble any person or creature, and that not by deluding the senses, but by assu∣ming to himselfe a true body. His pow∣er
is not so large, as to create a bodie, or bring againe a oule into a bodie, yet by his dexteritie and skill in naturall causes he can worke wonderfully. For he is a∣ble, hauing gathered together fit mat∣ter, to ioyne member to member, and to make a true bodie, either after the likenes of man, or some other creature; and hauing so done, to enter into it, to mooue and stirre it vp and downe, and therein visibly and sensibly to appeare vnto man; which though it be a strange worke, and besides the ordinarie course of nature, yet it is not simply aboue the power thereof. For a third instance. The deuill is a∣ble to vtter a voice in plaine words and speach, answerable to mans vnderstan∣ding in any language. Not that he can take vnto himselfe beeing a spirit, an immeadiate power to speake or frame a voyce of nothing without meanes, but knowing the naturall and proper causes and meanes by which men doe speake, by them he frames in himselfe the voyce of a man, and plainely vtters the same in a knowne language. In this manner
he abused the tongue and mouth of the serpent, when in plaine words he temp∣ted Eue to eate the forbidden fruit. Now it is to be remembred here, that when the deuill speakes in a creature, it must be such a creature, as hath the in∣struments of speach, or such whereby speach may be framed and vttered, not otherwise: for it was neuer heard that he spake in a stocke or a stone, or any created entity, that had not the meanes and power of vttering a voice, at least in some sort; it beeing a worke peculiar to the Creator, to giue power of vtte∣rance where it is not by creation. A∣gaine, when he frameth a voice in a creature, he doth it not by giuing im∣mediate power to speake, for that he cannot doe, and the creature abused by him, remaineth in that regard, as it was before. But it beeing naturally fitted and disposed to vtter a voice, though not perfectly to speake as a man, he furthe∣reth and helpeth nature in it, and ad∣deth to the facultie thereof a present vse of words, by ordering and ruling the instruments to his intended purposes.
And to conclude this point, looke what strange workes and wonders may be truely effected by the power of nature, (though they be not ordinarily brought to passe in the course of nature) those the deuill can do, & so farre forth as the power of nature will permit, he is able to worke true wonders, though for a false and euill ende. Here a question is mooued by some, whether the deuil can change one crea∣ture into another, as a man or woman into a beast? for some, notwithstanding the doctrine alreadie taught, are of opi∣nion, that he can turne the bodies of Witches into other creatures, as hares, cattes, and such like. Ans. The transmu∣taion of the substance of one creature into another, as of a man into a beast of what kind soeuer, is a worke simply aboue the power of nature, and there∣fore cannot be done by the deuil, or any creature. For it is the proper worke of God alone, as I haue said, to create, to change or abolish nature. It is obiected, that such chāges haue beene made. For Lots wie was turned
into a pillar of salt, Gen. 19. 26. Ans. It is true, but that was done by the mightie power of God, neither can it be proued that any creature, Angel, or other, was euer able to doe the like. But it is further said, that king Nabu∣chadnezzar was turned ino a beast, and did eate grasse with the beasts of the field, Dan. 4. 30. Ans. There is no such matter: his substance was not changed, so as his bodie became the bodie of a beast indeede, but his condicions onely were altered by the iudgement of God vpon his minde, whereby he was so farre forth bereaued of humane sense and vnderstanding. Againe, for his be∣hauiour and kinde of life, he became altogether bruitish for the time, and ex∣cepting onely his outward forme and shape, no part of humanitie could ap∣peare in him: but that he retained his humane bodie still, it is euident by his owne words, vers. 31. when he saith, And mine vnderstanding was restored to me: which argueth plainly, that the hand of God was vpon him in some kind of madnesse and furie, and therefore that
there was not a change of his bodie and substance, but a strange and fearefull al∣teration in his minde and outward be∣hauiour. And though such a transmuta∣tion should be granted, yet it makes no∣thing for the purpose, considering it was the worke of God onely, and not of the deull. And thus we see what kind of wonders the deuil can bring to passe. The meditation of which point may teach vs tvvo things. First that the working of wonders is not a thing that will commend man vn∣to God, for the deuill himselfe, a wicked spirit, can worke them: And many shall alledge this in the day of iudgement, that they haue by the name of God cast out deuils, and done many great woks, to whome notwithstanding the Lord will say, I neuer knewe you; depart from me yee workers of inquitie, Matth. 7. 22. 23. It behooueth vs rather to get vnto our selues the precious gifts of faith, repen∣tance, and the feare of God, yea to go before others in a godly life and vpright conuerstion, then to excell in effecting of strange workes. When the seauentie
Disciples came to our Sauiour Christ with ioy, and tolde him, that euen the deuills were subdued vnto them through his name, Luk. 10. 17. he counsells them, not to reioyce in this, that wicked spirits were sbdued vnto them, but ra∣ther, because their names were written in heauen, vers. 20. Indeed to be able to worke a won∣der, is an excellent gift of God, and may minister matter of reioycing, when it proceedeth from God: but seeing the deuill receiued this power by the gift of creation, our speciall ioy must not be therein, but rather in this, that we are the adopted sonnes of God, in which priuiledge the deuill hath no part with vs. And therefore the Apostle, 1. Cor. 13. making a comparison of the gifts of the spirit, as of speaking diuers tongues, of prophecying, and working miracles with loue; in the end, wisheth men to labour for the best gifts, which are faith, hope, and loue, because by these we are made partakers of Christ, on whom we ought to set our hearts, and in whome we are commanded lwaies to reioyce,
Phil. 4. 4. Secondly, we learne from hence, not to beleeue or receiue a doctrine now or at any time, because it is confirmed by wonders. For the deuill himselfe is able to confirme his errours and Idola∣trous seruices by strange and extraordi∣narie signes, by which vsually he labou∣reth to auouch and verisie the grossest points of falshood in matter of religion. On the contrarie, we must not reiect or contemne a doctrine, because it is not thus confirmed. This was a maine fault in the Iewes, who would not receiue the word preached by Christ, vnlesse he shewed them a signe from heauen. In∣deed in the primitiue Church it pleased God to confirme that doctrine which the Apostles taught, by great signes and miracles, but now that gift is ceased, and the Church hath no warrant to ex∣pect any further euidence of the religi∣on it professeth and enioyeth by argu∣ments of that kinde; yea rather it hath cause to suspect a doctrine taught for the wonders sake, whereby men labour to auouch it.
Sect. V. The last clause in the description,August. de Trin l. 3. c. 7. is this; so farre forth as God in iustice suffe∣reth: which I adde, for two causes. First, o shew that God, for iust causes, per∣miteh the Arts of Magicke & Witch∣craft, and the practises thereof. Now this he doth in his prouidence, either for the triall of his children, or for the punishment of the wicked. First therefore God permits these wicked Arts in the Church, to prooue whether his children wil steadfastly be∣leeue in him, and seeke vnto his word, or cleaue vnto the deuill, by seeking to his wicked instruments. This Moses plainely forewarned the Church of God of, in his time, Deuter. 13. v. 1. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a drea∣mer of dreames, and giue thee a signe or wonder, v. 2. and the signe and wonder which he hath told thee, come to passe, saying, Let vs goe after other gods, which thou hast not knowne, and serue them, v. 3. thou shalt not hearken to the words of that Prophet, &c. Againe, God suffereth them for the
punishment of vnbeleeuers and wicked men: for oftentimes God punisheth one sinne by an other, as the antecedent sinnes by the consequent. This Paul plainely sheweth (speaking of the daies of Antichrist) that because men receiued not the loue of the truth,2. Thess. 2. 10, 11. therefore God would send vpon them strong illusions, that they should beleeue lies. And we may resolue our selues, that for this very cause, God suffereth the practises of Witchcraft, to be so rise in these our daies, to punish the ingratitude of men, who haue the truth reuealed vnto them, and yet will not beleeue and obey the same, but tread it vnder their feete, 12. that all they might be condemned which beleeued not the truth, but tooke pleasure in vnrighteous∣nesse. Secondly, this last clause is added, to shewe that in the practises of sorcerie and witchcraft, the Deuill can doe so much onely as God permitts him, and no more. Doubtlesse, his malice reach∣eth further, and consequently his will and desire; but God hath restrained his power, in the execution of his malitious
poses, whereupon he cannot goe a whit further, then God giues him leaue and libertie to goe. The Magicians of E∣gypt did some wonders in shew like vn∣to the miracles wrought by Moses and Aaron, and that for a time, by changing a rodde into a serpent, and water into blood, and by bringing froggs through he sleight and power of the deuill; but when it pleased God, to determine their practises, and giue them no further li∣berie, they could not doe that, which in likelihood was the meanest of all the rest, the turning of the dust of the land into lice, and themselues gaue the true reason thereof, aving, That this was the finger of God, Exod. 8. 19. When the de∣uil went out and became a false spirit in the mouth of all Ahabs Prophets, to in∣tise him to goe to fall at Ramoth Gle∣d, he went not of his owne will; but by the authoritie of God, who comman∣ded him to goe entise Ahab, and suf∣fered him to preuaile, 1. King. 22. 20. nd the act was not the act of Satan, but of God, whose instrument he was; and therefore the holy Ghost saith by
Miaiah, The Lord-hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of all these thy Prophets, and the Lord hath appointed euill against thee, v. 23. Hence also it was, that the deuills, beeing cast out of the man that had an vncleane spirit, asked leaue of Christ to enter into the heard of swine, and could not enter in till he had permited them; Mark. 5. 12, 13. And we read oftentimes in the Gospel, that our Sauiour cast out many deuills by his word onely, there∣by shewing that he was absolute Lord ouer them, and that without his per∣mission; they could doe nothing. And thus much touching the gene∣rall of this Art. CHAP. II. The Ground of Witchcraft, and of all the practises thereof. THe Ground of all the practises of Witchcraft, is a league or couenant made betweene the Witch and the Deuill: wherein they doe mu∣tually
bind themselues each to other. If any shall thinke it strange, that man or woman should enter league with Satan, their vtter enemie; they are to know it for a most euident and certen truth, that may not be called into question. And yet to cleare the iudgement of any one in this point, I will set downe some rea∣sons in way of proofe. First, the holy Scripture doth inti∣mate so much vnto vs in the 58. Psal. v. 5. where, howsoeuer the cōmon translati∣on runneth in other tearmes, yet the words are properly to be read thus; which heareth not the voyce of the mutterer ioyning societies cunningly. And in them the Psalmist layeth downe two points. First, the effect or worke of a charme, muttered by the Inchanter; namely, that it is able to stay the Adder from sing∣ing those which shall lay hold on him, or touch him. Secondly, the maine foundation of the charme; societies or confederacies cunningly made, not be∣tweene man and man, but (as the words import) betweene the Inchanter and the deuill. The like we read, Deuter. 18.
11. where the Lord chargeth his people when they come into the land of Ca∣naan, that amongst other abominations of the heathen, they should beware least any were found amongst them, that ioyned societie, that is, entred into league and compact with wicked spi∣rits. A second reason may be this: it is the practise of the deuill to offer to make a bargaine and couenant with man. Thus he dealt with our Sauiour Christ,Math. 4. 9. in the third temptation wherewith he assaul∣ted him, promising to giue vnto him all the kingdomes of the earth, and the glorie of them, (which he shewed him in a vision) if Christ for his part would fall downe and worshippe him. The of∣fer was passed on the behalfe of Satan, and now to make a perfect compact be∣tweene them, there was nothing wan∣ting but the free consent of our Sauiour vnto the cōdition propounded. Where∣by it is manifest, that the Deuill makes many couenants in the world, because he findeth men and women in the most places, fitted for his turne in this kind,
who will not let to worship him for a farre lesse matter then a kingdome. And it is not to be doubted, that thousands in the world, had they been offered so faire as Christ was, would haue beene as willing to haue yeelded vpon such conditions, as the Deuill to haue offe∣red. Thirdly, the common confession of all Witches and Socerers, both before and since the comming of Christ, doth yet more fully confirme the same. For they haue confessed with one consent, that the very ground-worke of all their practises in this wicked art, is their league with the deuill. And hence it ap∣peareth, how and whereupon it is, that Sorcerers and Witches can bring to passe strange things by the helpe of Sa∣tan; which other men ordinarily can not doe; namely, because they haue en∣tred a league with him, whereby he hath bound himselfe to them, for the effecting of rare and extraordinarie workes, which others, not ioyned with him in the like confederacie, are not able either by his helpe, or any power
or policie of their owne to bring to passe. Hereupon it was, that the Witch of Endor shewed vnto Saul the appea∣rance of Samuel, which neither Saul himselfe, nor any in all his court could doe. There was no great vertue in the matter or frame of her words, for shee was ignorant and had no learning. By power she could not effect it, beeing a weake woman; neither was it like that she had more cunning and pollicie then any of the learned Iewes in those times had for such purposes. The main reason was, her league made with Satan, by vertue whereof shee commanded him to appeare in the likenes of Samuel, which neither Saul nor any of his com∣panie could doe, by vertue of such coue∣nant, which they had not made. The ende why the Deuill seeketh to make a league with men, may be this; It is a point of his policie, not to be readie at euery mans command to doe for him what he would, except he be sure of his reward; and no other meanes will serue his turne for taking assurance hereof, but this couenant. And why so? that
hereby he may testifie both his hatred of God, and his malice against man. For since the time that he was cast down from heauen, he hath hated God & his kingdome, and greatly maligned the happy estate of man, especially since the couenant of grace made with ou first parents in Paradise. For he thought to hau brought vpon them by their fall, eternall and finall confusion, but perceiuing the contrarie by vertue of the couenant of grace; then manifested, and seeing mn by it to be in a better and surer estate then before, he much more maligned his estate, and beares the ranker hatred vnto God for that his mercie bestowed vpon him. Now that he might shew forth this hatred and malice, he takes vpon him to imitate God, and to counterfeit his dealings with his Church. As God therefore hath made a couenant with his people, so Satan ioynes in league with the world, labouring to bind some men vnto him, that so if it were possible, he might drawe them from the coue∣nant of God, and disgrace the same. A∣gaine,
as God hath his word and Sacra∣ments, the seales of his couenant vnto beleeuers; so the deuill hath his words and certaine outward signes to ratifie the same to his instruments, as name∣ly, his figures, characters, gestures, and other Satanicall ceremonies, for the confirmation of the truth of his league vnto them. Yea further, as God in his couenant, requires saith of vs to the be∣leeuing of his promises: so the deuill in his compact, requires faith of his vas∣salls, to put their affiance in him, and re¦lie on him for the doing of whatsoeuer he bindes himselfe to doe. Lastly, as God heares them that call vpon him according to his will: so is Satan readie at hand vpon the premisses, endeauou∣ring to the vtmost of his power, (when God permits him) to bring to passe whatsoeuer he hath promised. And so much of the league in generall. More particularly, the league be∣tweene the Deuill and a Witch, is two∣fold: either expressed and open, or se∣cret and close. The expresse and manifest compact
is so tearmed, because it is made by so∣lemne words on both parties. And it is not so expressely set downe in Scrip∣tures, as in the writings of learned men, which haue recorded the confessions of Witches, and they expresse it in this manner. First, the Witch for his part, as a slaue of the deuill, binds himselfe vnto him by solemne vowe and promise to renounce the true God, his holy word, the couenant he made in Baptisme, and his redemption by Christ; & withall to beleeue in the deuil, to expect & receiue aide and helpe from him, and at the end of his life, to giue him either bodie, or soule, or both: & for the ratifying here∣of, he giues to the deuil for the present, either his owne hand-writing, or some part of his blood, as a pledge & earnest pennie to bind the bargaine. The deuill on the other side, for his part promiseth to be readie at his vassalls command, to appeare at any time in the likenesse of any creature, to consult with him, to aide and helpe him in any thing he shall take in hand, for the procuring of plea∣sures, honour, wealth, or preferment,
to goe for him, to carrie him whethr he will, in a word, to doe for him, whatsoeuer he shall commande. Many sufficient testimonies might he allead∣ged for the proofe hereof, but it is so manifest in daily experience, that it cannot well bee called into questi∣on. But yet if it seeme strange vnto any, that there should be such persons in the world, that make such fearefull couenāts with the deuill, let them consider but this one thing, and it will put them out of doubt. The nature of man is exceeding im∣patient in crosses, and outward afflicti∣ons are so tedious vnto mortall minds, and presse them with such a measure of griefe, that some could be contented with all their hearts to be out of the world, if thereby they may be released of such extremitie, and hereupon they care not what meanes they vse, what conditions they vndertake to ease and helpe themselues. The deuill finding men in these perplexities, is ready to take his advantage, and therefore per∣ceiuing
them now fitted for his purpose to worke vpon; he insinuates and offers himselfe, to procure them ease and deli∣uerance, if they will vse such meanes, as he shall prescribe for that purpose: and to a naturall man there is no greater meane then this to make him ioyne so∣cietie with the deuill. He therefore, without any further doubting or deli∣beration, condescendes to Satan, so as he may be based and releeued in these miseries. Againe, we are to consider, that in these cases, the deuil getteth the greater hold of man, and mooues him to yeeld vnto his suggestions the rather, because that which he promiseth to doe for him is present and at his command, and therefore certaine; whereas the thing to be performed on the behalfe of the par∣tie himselfe, as the giuing of bodie and soule, &c. is to come sundry yeares after, and therefore in regard of the particu∣lar time, vncertaine. Now the naturall man not regarding his future and finall estate, preferres the present commodi∣tie before the losse and punishment that
is to come a farre off, and thereby is perswaded to yeeld himselfe vnto Sa∣tan. And by these and such like antece∣dents are many brought to make open league with the deuill. The secret and close league between the Witch and Satan is that, werein they mutually giue consent each to o∣ther, but yet without a sworne couenant conceiued in expresse words and con∣ference. Of this there be two degrees. First, whē a mā vseth superstitions of prayer, wherein he expressely requi∣reth the helpe of the deuill, without any mention of solmine words or couenant going before. That this is a kind of com∣pact it is plaine, because herein there is a mutuall vnder-hand consent between the partie and the deuill, though it be not manifest. For when a to vse superstious formes of inuo∣cation, for helpe in time of need; by the very vsing of them, His heart consenteth to Satan, and he would gladly haue the thing effected. When therefore the de∣uill hath notice of them, and endea∣uo to effect the thing prayed for,
therein also he giues consent; so as though there be no expresse words of compact outwardly framed on both parts, yet the concurrence of a mutuall consent for the bringing to passe of the same things, makes the couenant au∣thentical. For according to the receiued rules of equitie and reason; mutuall con∣sent of partie with partie, is sufficient to make a bargaine, though there be no solemne course or forme of words to manifest the same to others. The second degree is, when a man v∣seth superstitious meanes to bring any thing to passe, which in his owne know∣ledge, haue no such vertue in thēselues to effect it, without the especiall opera∣tion of the Deuill. Superstitious meanes I call all those, which neither by order of creation, nor by the special appointment and blessing of God since, haue any vertue in them, to bring to passe that thing for which they are vsed. For example; A charme, consisting of set words and syllables, both rude, barbarous, and vnknowne, v∣sed for the curing of some disease or
paine, is a superstitious meanes; because it hath no vertue in it selfe to cure, ei∣ther by the gift of God in the creation, or by any speciall appointment after∣ward in his word, or otherwise. And therefore when this meane is vsed by man, which he knoweth hath no such vertue in it, for the effecting of that worke for which it was vsed, there is a secret league made with the Deuill. Yet here I adde this clause, in his owne knowledge, to put a difference betweene men, which vse superstitious meanes to bring some things to passe: For some there be, which when they vse them, know they be meerely superstitious, yea weake and impotent, hauing no vertue in themselues for the purpose whereto they are vsed; as the repeating of certain forms of words; the vsing of signes, cha∣racters, and figures, which in effect are meere charms, no whit effectuall in thē∣selues, but so farre forth as they serue for watchwords vnto Satan, without whose ayde nothing is done by them. A plaine argument that the vser hereof hath in his heart secretly indented with
Satan, for the accomplishment of his in∣tended workes. A second sort there is, which vseth them for some speciall end, beeing perswaded that there is vertue in the meanes themselues to bring the thing to passe, and yet not knowing that either they be superstitious, or haue their efficacie by the power and worke of the deuill. Such persons haue made as yet no league with Satan, but they are in the high vvay thereunto. And this course is a fit preparation to cause them to ioyne vvith him in couenant. I shew it by an example. A man is fallen into some extemitie, and findes him∣selfe bewitched; his paine is great, and he desires with all his heart to be cured and deliuered. Hereupon he sendeth for the suspected Witch; beeing come, he offers to scratch him or her, thinking by this means to be cured of the witchcraft. His reason is no other, then a strong persvvasion, that there is simply vertue in his scratching to cure him, and disco∣uer the Witch, not once suspecting that the helpe commeth by the power of the Deuill, but from the action it selfe. This
doing, he may be healed: but the truth is, he sinneth and breakes Gods com¦mandement. For the vsing of these meanes is plaine Witchcraft, as after∣vvard vve shall see. And yet for all this, the partie cannot be saide in present to haue made a league vvith Satan, because he thought, that though he yeelded to the vse of superstitious meanes for his curing, yet there had beene in the saide meanes a vertue of hling, vvithout a∣ny helpe or vvorke of the Deuill. CHAP. III. Of the kinds of Witchcraft, and first of Divination. WItchcraft is of tvvo sorts; Divining, or Working. For the whole nature of this art, consisteth either in matter of Diuina∣tion and coniecture, or in matter of practise. And in both
these it is to be remembred, that no∣thing can be effected, vnlesse the partie haue made a league with the Deuill, ex∣presse or secret, or at the least, a prepa∣ation thereunto, by a false and errone∣ous opinion of the meanes. Sect. I. Diuination is a part of Witchcraft, whereby men reueale strange things, either past, prese, or to come, by the assistance of the deuill. If it be here demanded, how the de∣uill beeing a creature, should be able to manifest and bring to light things past, or to foretell things to come; I answer, first generally, that Satan in this parti∣cular worke, transformes himselfe into n Angel of light, & takes vpon him the exercise of these things in an ambitious (though false) imitation of diuine reue∣lations and predictions, made and vsed by God in the times of the Prophets & Apostles. And this he doth (as much is in him lieth) to obscure the glorie of God, and to make himselfe great in the opinion of ignorant and vnbeleeuing
persons. Againe, though Satan be but a creature, yet there be sundrie waies whereby he is able to diuine. First, by the Scriptures of the Old & New Testament, wherein are set downe sundrie prophecies concerning things to come. In the Old Testament are re∣corded many prophecies concerning the state of Gods Church, from the first age of the world, till the comming of Christ. In the New Testament likewise are recorded others, touching the selfe same thing, from the cōming of Christ in the latter daies, to the ende of the world. Now the deuill beeing acquain∣ted with the historie of the Bible, and hauing attained vnto a greater light of knowledge in the prophecies therein cōtained, then any man hath; by stealing diuinations out of them, he is able to tell of many strange things, that may in time fall out in the world, and answera∣bly may shew them ere they come to passe. For example: Alexander the great be∣fore he made warre with Darius king of Persia, consulted with the Oracle, that is,
with the deuill, touching the euent and issue of his enterprise. The Oracle an∣swered him thus; Alexander shall be a Con∣querour; vpon the prediction of the Oracle,Ptarch. in vita A∣lex. Alexander wages warre with Darius, and inuades Asia, and hauing conquered him, translated the Empire from Persia to Greece, according as the Oracle had said. Now if question bee made, how the deuill knewe the euent of this warre, and consequently made it knowne to Alexander? The answer is, by the helpe of a prophecie in the Old testament; for this thing was particular∣ly set downe before hand by the Pro∣phet Daniel, Dan. 11. 3. where he saith; That a mightie King shll stand vp, and shal rule with great dominion, and doe according to his pleasure, and this was Alexander the great. Satan therefore knowing the secret meaning of the Angels wordes vnto Daniel, framed out of them a true and direct answer, whereas he was not able of himselfe to deine certainly of the euent of things to come in particu∣lar. The second meanes, whereby the
deuill is furnished for his purpose, is his owne exquisite knowledge of all natu∣rall things; as of the influences of the starres, the constitutions of men and o∣ther creatures, the kinds, vertues, and operations of plants, rootes, hearbs, stones, &c. which knowledge of his, goeth many degrees beyond the skill of all men, yea euen of those that are most excellent in this kind, as Philoso∣phers, and Physicians. No marueile therefore, though out of his experience in these and such like, he is able afore∣hand to giue a likely gesse at the issues and euents of things, which are to him so manifestly apparent in their causes. A third helpe and furtherance in this point, is his presence in the most places: for some deuills are present at all assem∣blies and meetings, and thereby are ac∣quainted with the consultations and conferences both of Princes & people; whereby knowing the drift and purpose of mens minds, when the same is mani∣fested in their speaches and deliberati∣ons, they are the fitter to foretell many
things, which men ordinarily cannot doe. And hence it is apparent, how Witches may know what is done in o∣ther countries, and whether one nation intends warre against an other, namely, by Satans suggestion, who was present at the consultation, and so knew it, and reuealed it vnto them. But how then comes it to passe, that the consultations and actions of Gods Church and chil∣dren, are not disclosed to their enemies? euen by the vnspeakeable mercie and goodnesse of God, who though for spe∣ciall causes sometimes, he suffers Satan by this meanes to bring things to light, yet he hath restrained this his libertie, and subiected it vnto his owne will, so as he keepes him out of such meetings, or compels him to conceale; whereas otherwise his malice is so great, tha not a word could be spoken, but it should be carried abroad to the hurt & disturbance both of Churches and com∣mon-wealths. The fourth way, is by putting into mens mindes wicked purposes and counsls; for after the league once made
he laboureth with them by suggestions and where God giues him , he ne∣uer ceaseth perswading, till he hath brought his enterprise to passe. Hauing therefore: first brought into the minde of man, a resolution to doe some euill, he goes and reueales it to the Witch, and by force of perswasion vpon the partie tempted, he frames the action in∣tended to the time foretold, and so final∣ly deludes the Witch his owne instru∣ment, foretelling nothing, but what himselfe hath compassed and set a∣bout. The fift helpe, is the agilitie of Sa∣tans nature, whereby he is able speedily to conuay himselfe from place to place, yea to passe through the whole world in a short ime. For God hath made him by nature a spirit, who by the gift of his creation, hath attained the benefit of swiftnes, not onely in dispatching his affairs, but also in the cariage of his per∣son with great expedition for the pre∣sent accomplishment of his owne de∣sires. Lastly, God doth often vse Satan as
his instrument, for the effecting of his intended workes, and the executing of his iudgements vpon men; and in those cases manifesteth vnto him, the place where, the time when, and the manner how such a thing should be done. Now all such things as God wil haue effected by the deuill, he may fortell before they come to passe, because he knowes them before hand by reuelation and assignment from God. Thus by the Witch of Endor he foretolde to Saul the time of his death and of his sonnes, and the ruine of his kingdome,1. Sam. 28. 19. saying, To morow shalt thou and thy sonnes be with me, and the Lord shall giue the hoste of Isra∣el into the hands of the Philistis; which particular euent, and circumstances ap∣pertaining, he did truely define; not of himselfe, but because God hath drawn away his good spirit from Saul, and had deliuered him to be guided by the de∣uill, whome he also appointed as a meanes; and vsed as an instrument to worke his ouerthrowe. The Scripture indeede maketh not particular mention of the time of Sauls death, it onely re∣cordeth
the manner thereof, and that which followed vpon his death; the translating of the kingdome to his neighbour Dauid after him; and yet be∣cause God vsed Satan as an instrument to bring this to passe, hereupon he was able to foretel the particular time, when the will of God should be wrought vp∣on him. And these be the ordinarie meanes and helpes whereby the de∣uill may knowe and declare strange thinges, whether past, present, or to come. Neither may this seeme strange, that Satan by such meanes should attaine vnto such knowledge, for euen men by their owne obseruations may giue pro∣bable coniectures of the state and con∣dition of sundrie things to come. Thus we read, that some by obseruation haue found out probably, and foretold the periods of famille and kingdomes. For example, that the time and continuance of kingdomes is ordinarily determined at 500. yeares, or not much aboue; and that great families haue not gone beyond the sixt and seauenth generati∣on.
And as for speciall and priuate things, the world so runnes (as it vvere) in a circle, that if a man should but or∣dinarily obserue the course of things, either in the vveather, or in the bodies of men, or othervvise, he might easily foretell before hand vvhat would come after. And by these and such like instan∣ces of experiences, men haue gessed at the alterations and changes of estates, and things in particular. Novv if men vvhich be but of short continuance, and of a shallovv reach in comparison, are able to doe such things, hovv much more easily may the Deuill, hauing so great a measure of knovvledge and ex∣perience, and beeing of so long conti∣nuance, hauing also marked the course of all estates, be able to foretell many things vvhich are to come to passe? spe∣cially considering vvhat the wise man hath set downe to this purpose, that that which hath beene, shall be; and that which hath beene done, shall be done; and there is no new thing vnder the Sunne, Eccl. 1. 9. If it be here alledged, that Diuination is a prerogatiue of God himselfe, and a
part of his glorie incōmunicable to any creature, Isa. 41. 23. I answer, Things to come must be considered two waies; ei∣ther in themselues, or in their causes and signes, which either go with them, or before them. To foretell things to come, as they are in themselues, with∣out respect vnto their signes or causes, is a propertie belonging to God onely; and the deuill doth it not by any direct and immediate knowledge of things simply considered in themselues, but onely as they are present in their signes or causes. Again, God foretelleth things to come certainely, without the helpe of any creature, or other meanes out of himselfe; but the predictions of Satan are onely probable and coniecturall: and when he foretelleth any thing certaine∣ly, it is by some reuelation from God, as the death of Saul; or by the Scripture, as Alexanders victory: or by some spe∣ciall charge committed vnto him, for the execution of Gods will vpon some particular places or persons, as before hath beene shewed. Thus much for the causes of Diuina∣tion.
Now followe the parts and bran∣ches thereof. Diuination is of two sorts; either in and by meanes, or without meanes. Diuination by meanes, is like∣wise of two sorts; either by such as are the true creatures of God; or those which are meerly counterfeit & forged. Sect. II. Diuination by the true creatures of God, is distinguished according to the number of the creatures, into fiue di∣stinct kinds, whereof foure are mentio∣ned in the Scriptures. § 1. The first, is by the flying and noise of birds. Sorcerers among the heathen, vsed to obserue foules in their flight; for example, whether they did flie on the right hand, or on the left; a∣boue them, or below by them; whether crosse and ouerthwart, or directly a∣gainst them. In like manner they obser∣ued the noise & sound of the foule. And both these waies, sometimes by the noyse, and sometimes by the flight, they diuined of things to come, both publike and priuate, of good and bad successe
in mans affaires; of the state of king∣domes, townes, families and particular persons. Now this kind of diuination is condemned by Moses, Deut. 18. 10. Let none be found among you that i a—diuiner of diuinations: that is, (as some intepret it) a marker of the flying of foules: or a charmer, or a consulter with spirits, or a soothsayer; that is, such a one as by ob∣seruing the flying and noise of fowles, takes vpon him to foretell good or bad successe. § 2. The second kind of creatures v∣sed for diuinatiō, are the intralls of beasts, of which mention is made Ezek. 21. 21. where Nabuchadnezzar being to make warre both with the Iewes and the Ammonites, and doubting in the way which enterprise to vndertake first, he offers a sacrifice to the Idol gods, and opening the bellie of the sacrifice, looks vpon the liuer, and by the signes therein found, he iudgeth what should be the issue of the warre. Which thing Nabu∣chadnezzar did according to the vsuall practise of the Heathen, who when they were to make warre, or to attempt any
businesse of importance, were wont to offer sacrifice to their gods, and to prie into the intralls of the beast sacrificed: for example, the heart, stomake, splene, kidneies, but specially the liuer, and by certaine signes appearing in those parts, the deuill was wont to reueale vn∣them what should be the successe of their affaires they had in hand. It were easie to exemplifie both these sorts of Diuination by sundrie particulars out of Heathen writers, but seeing the Scripture hath manifested that there are such, and experience shewes the same, I will forbeare that labour, and proceede. But here it is demanded, why both these kindes of Diuination should be condemned in Scripture, considering they had so great applause among the Heathen? I answer, because the flying of birds, and the disposition of the inward parts of creatures, are no true signes either of good or bad successe. For that which is a true signe of a future euent, must haue the vertue and power whereby it signi∣fieth,
from God himselfe, either by crea∣tion in the beginning, or by his speciall ordinance and appointment afterward. Now it cannot be shewed, that God in the creation infused any such vertue in∣to the natures and motions of these creatures, whereby they might signifie such things; neither is there any appa∣rent testimonie in the whole booke of the Scriptures, whereby it may be pro∣ued, that since the creation, they were appointed by God, to serue such vses and endes. And therefore howsoeuer they were esteemed of the Heathen, yet the word of God hath iustly censured them, as no true and proper causes of Diuination sanctified by God, but meerely diabolicall. It is alleadged, that Ioseph diuined by his cuppe, as may appeare both by his stewards speech, as also by his owne, Gen. 44. 5. & 15. and yet that cuppe re∣ceiued no power from God, either the one way or the other, to be a cause or meane of Diuination. The answer anciently and common∣ly made is this, that Iosephs steward
spake not as the thing was indeede, but as the common receiued opinion was among the Egyptians, who esteemed Ioseph to be a man of great skill and wisdome, able by sundrie meanes to di∣uine and prophesie. To this I adde a se∣cond answer, that the steward spake not as he thought, but his purpose was in those words, to cōceale the knowledge of Ioseph his master from his brethren, that thereby they might not discerne who he was, but take him to be an E∣gyptian. Thirdly, the words may not vnfitly admit this interpretation, as if the steward had said, Know ye not that this cuppe which I finde in the sackes mouth of your yongest brother, is that whereby my master will easily prooue what manner of men you are? this an∣swer is also auncient, and may well be receiued. It is further obiected, that our Saui∣our Christ by his speech vnto the Pha∣risies, seemeth to approoue of Diuining by creatures, as by winds, and by clouds; When you see a cloud (saith he) rising out of the West, straight way you say, a showre com∣meth,
and so it is: and when you see the South wind blow, ye say, that it will be hoate, and it commeth to passe, Luk. 12. 54, 55. Ans. There be some kinds of predi∣ctions that are and may be lawfully v∣sed, because they are naturall, of which sort are those that are made by Physici∣ans, Mariners, and husbandmen, tou∣ching the particular alterations and dis∣positions of the weather; and these bee∣ing agreeable to that order which God hath set in nature from the beginning; by them a man may probably gather the state of the weather, whether it will be faire or foule; and of these naturall signs our Sauiour Christ speaketh, not of dia∣bolicall, which haue no warrant, either from the common course of nature cre∣ated, or by any speciall appointment from God. So that whatsoeuer can be said in their defence, this yet remaineth certaine, that the slying and noise of birds, and the state of the intralls of beasts, are no true signes ordained by God, but inuented by the deuill and his instruments, and therefore all diuinati∣on by them is iustly condemned, as wic∣ked
and deuillish. Whence it appeareth, what iudge∣ment may be giuen of those common signes of Diuination, which are obser∣ued in the world, specially of the more ignorant sort. For example: A man finds a piece of yron, he presently conceiueth a prediction of some good lucke vnto himselfe that day. If he light on a peice of siluer, then he stands contrarily affe∣cted, imagining some euill will befall him. Againe, when a man is taking his iourney, if a hare crosse him in the way, all is not well, his iourney shall not be prosperous, it presageth some mischiefe towards him. Let his cares tingle or burne, he is perswaded he hath enemies abroad, and that some man either then doth, or presently will speake ill of him. If the salt fall towards a man at the ta∣ble, it portendeth (in common conceit) some ill newes. When a rauen stands vpon some high place, looke what way he turnes himselfe and cries, thence, as some thinke, shall shortly come a dead corps; albeit this sometime may be true by reason of the sharpe sense of smel∣ling
in the raven. These and sundrie o∣ther of the like sort, are meerely super∣stitious. For the truth is, they haue no vertue in themselues to foreshewe any thing that is to come, either in nature, or by Gods ordinance. Therefore what∣soeuer diuination is made by them, must needes be fetched from Satanicall illusi∣on. And though we cannot say they be soothsayings, or tearme the vsers and fauourers of them soothsayers, yet we may safely referre them to this kinde of diuining, beeing such as no Christian may warrantably vse, though some of them be not so grosse and palpable, as those that are condemned in the Scrip∣tures. § 3. The third kind of creatures vsed to diuine by, are the starres. Diuination by starres, s commonly called Iudiical Astrologie; of which we may read, Deu. 18. 10. 11. where the holy Ghost doth of purpose reckon vp all those kinds of deuillish arts, whereby men haue dea∣lings and societie with Satan, either in divining or practising▪ among which, this is the second.
The word there vsed. may carrie a double sense. For it signifieth either him that obserueth times, vnder which ac∣ception Astrologie is comprehended, or him that obserueth the clouds. And howsoeuer the best learned Interpre∣ters doe dissent about the notation of it, yet all agree in this, that this professi∣on of Diuining by the starres, is there condemned: and that it is to be num∣bred among the rest expressed in the prohibition, may further appeare by o∣ther places of Scripture, as in Isa. 47. 13. 14. where the Lord threatneth the same iudgements against Diuiners by the starre, that he doth against Soothsaiers and Magicians. Againe, in Dan. 2. 2. In∣chaunters, Astrologians, and Sorcerers are ioyned together, as beeing all sent for about the same busines, vz. to ex∣pound the Kings dreame. Nowe if the Lord himselfe haue allotted the same punishment to the Astrologer, which he hath to the Soothsaier & Magician, and account them all one; it is manifest, that Diuining by the starres ought to be held as a superstitious kind of Diui∣nation.
Here if it be thought strange, that predictions by so excellent creatures as the starres be, should carrie both the name and nature of diabolicall practi∣ses, which can be done by none but such as are in league with Satan: I answer, The reasons hereof are these: First, it must be considered, that the drift and scope of this art, is to foretell the particular euents of things contin∣gent, as the alteration of the states of kingdomes, the deaths of Princes, good or badde successe of mens particular af∣faires, from the houre of their birth, to the day of their death. And from this all men may iudge, what the art it selfe is. For the foretelling of things to come, which in their owne nature are contingent, and in regard of vs casuall (I say not in regard of God, to whome all things are certenly knowne) is a proper∣tie peculiar to God alone, and not with∣in the power of any creature, man, or Angel. A point that is plainely taught by the Prophet Esai, from the 4. chap. of
his prophesie, to the 48. The scope whereof is to prooue, that it is a prero∣gatiue appointed to the Deitie, and not communicable to the creature, to fore∣shew the euēt of things to come, which in our vnderstanding and reach, may ei∣ther be, or▪ not be; and which when they are, may be thus or otherwaies. It re∣maines therefore, that Diuinations of this kind, taking from God his right, and robbing him of his honour, are iust∣ly censured of impietie, & are in them∣selues wicked and abominable. It is alleadged, that starres in the heauens, are the causes of many things happening in the world, and therefore to practise by them in this manner, de∣serueth no such imputation. Ans▪ It cannot be denied that they are causes of some things, but I demand, what causes? not particular of particular euents but generall and common, that worke alike vpon all things: and no man can diuine of a particular euent, by a generall cause, vnlesse he also know the particular causes subordinate to the generall, and the particular dispositions
and operations of them. For example, let twentie or thirtie egges of sundrie kinds of birds be taken, and set vnder one and the same henne to be hatched; it is not possible for any man, onely vp∣on the bare consideration of the heate of the hen, which is the generall cause of hatching the egges, to set downe certainely what kind of bird each egge will bring forth, vnlesse he know what the egges were particularly. For a ge∣nerall and common cause, doth not im∣mediately produce a particular effect, but onely mooueth and helpeth the particular, immediate, and subordinate causes. Therefore the heat of the henne doth not make one egge to send forth a henne-chicken, another egge a ducke, a third a swanne, &c. but onely helpeth it forward by sitting and crouching vpon them. In like manner the starres are ge∣nerall causes of naturall things, as the heat of the hen is of the hatching of the egges, and by them no man can right∣ly define of particular euents, and there∣fore Diuination by the slarres, whereby are fore-told particular contingent e∣uents,
in kingdomes, families, or parti∣cular persons, is but a forged skill, that hath no ground in nature from the ver∣tue of the starres, for any such pur∣pose. A second reason may be this; All the rules and precepts of Astrologie, set downe by the most learned among the Chaldeans, Egyptians, and other A∣strologers, are nothing els but meer do∣tages and fictions of the braine of man: for the rules and conclusions of all good and lawfull arts, haue their ground in experience, and are framed by obserua∣tion, whereupon they are called Axioms, or positions of arte, so generally and vn∣doubtedly true, that they can not de∣ceiue: But these rules are of a contrarie nature, hauing no foundation in experi∣ence at all; for if they had, this must needes follow, that the position of the heauens, and the course of all the stars, must needs continue one and the same; for the principles of art ought to be im∣mutable: but neither the position of the heauens, nor the course of all the starrs, is alway one and the same. Againe, he
that would make sound rules of art by obseruation, must know the particular estate of all things he obserueth: But no man knoweth the particular estate of all the starres, and consequently none can gather sound rules of arte by them. Thirdly, no man knoweth or seeth all the starres, and though they might be all discerned, yet the particular vertues of those which are seene, can not be knowne, because their influences in the aire, and vpon the earth, are confused; and therefore by obseruation of them, no rules can be made, whereby to iudge of particular euents to come that be contingent. But experience teacheth (may some say) that if a man addicted to this course shall practise the rules of Astrologie, it will fall out that the most things he foretelleth shall be true, and come to passe accordingly: which beeing verifi∣ed in experience, it should seeme, that these principles are not vncerten: for how is it possible that vpō false grounds, should proceede true predictions? To this obiection, learned Diuines haue
framed answer thus. That in this there is a secret Magicke at the least, if not an open league with Satan. For looke what is wanting to the effect of the starrs, the Deuill maketh supply of it by his owne knowledge in things that are to come to passe. And this is the iudgement of them that haue knowne this arte, which was also receiued for true in the daies of the Apostles. The third reason. The man that re∣paireth to the Astrologian vpō the par∣ticular case for his helpe and counsell, must beleeue that he can and will doe for him; otherwise, if he come doub∣ting of his ability, or in way of tempting him, he can not helpe him. Now in common vnderstanding, if the Diuiner brings the thing to passe, here must needes be more then Arte. For he that is master of a lawfull arte, can worke by his rules, whether a man beleeue that he can or no; yea though all the men in the world should doubt, his rules would be effectuall. The arte therefore it selfe is the old superstitious arte of the Chaldeans, which they beeing Idola∣ters,
first ferched from the deuill, and his Oracles: yea, the practise thereof is no∣thing but superstitious sorcerie, and the vndertakers no better then Sorcerers. If any man doubt hereof, their writings are sufficient testimonies, and they thē∣selues auouch it. For it is a rule and maxime among them in all kind o Sor∣cerie, that the learner must come credu∣lous, and not doubting, or to tempt; o∣therwise no answer can be giuen. But notwithstanding all these rea∣sons alleadged for the proofe of this point, sundrie things are opposed to the contrarie. For first, it is saide that the Sunne, Moone, and Starres were created for signes, Gen. 1. 14. and therefore that it is lawfull to diuine by them, seeing that in so doing, we doe but vse them to the ende for which God made them. Ans. The reason is of no force. The starres indeede by this ordinance doe serue for signes, but of what? not of all things, but (as the text plainly sheweth) of daies, weekes, months, and yeare; yea, of the seasons of the yeare; as of
Spring, Summer, Autumne, and Win∣ter; yea further, of the alterations of the weather in generall; but all this maketh nothing to ratifie Diuination of parti∣cular euents in things cōtingent, which are to fal out in the state of kingdomes, families, and persons: for they are not causes, but Signes, and that of some ge∣nerall things onely, not of particular. Againe, it is said, that Moses & Da∣niel, two famous Prophets, are com∣mended for their skill in this art: for of Moses it is saide, Act. 7. 22. that he was learned in all the wisedome of the Egyptians: and Daniel, in all the wisdome of the Chal∣deans, Dan. 1. 17. 20. and we know, that the Egyptians and Chaldeans were the masters of Diuination, and eminent a∣boue all others in matter of Astrologie. Ans. 1. It cannot be prooued out of those places, that Moses or Daniel were trained vp in this art: and though it should be granted they were, yet it fol∣lows not, that they were practisers of it. at least continually. For albeit, beeing children and of tender yeares in the courts of Pharaoh and Nebuchadnet∣sar,
they had beene trained vp by their gouernours in this knowledge, it may not thence be concluded, that they fi∣nally submitted themselues to the pra∣ctise thereof; considering that a man may learne that when he is yong, which afterward vpon better iudgement and consideration, he may vtterly disclame. And so we are to thinke of them, that after God had called them, they did for euer lay aside all such wicked and deuil∣lish practises, forbidden by God, and yet in vse among the Egyptians and Chal∣deans. Thirdly, it is obiected; the starres are admirable creatures of God, and the causes of many straunge effects in the aire, in the waters, and vpon the earth also, in bodies of men and beasts: it may seeme therefore not vnlawfull to diuine by them. Ans. We graunt that the Sarres, and especially the Sunne and Moone, haue great vertue and force vpon the creatures that are below; partly by their light, and partly by their heat; but hence it will not follow, that they are, or may
be lawfully vsed for Diuination: for whereas it hath beene shewed, that the grounds of all good arts are gathered by obseruation and experience, it is not possible for any man, truly and certenly, to obserue all particular euents brought forth by the starres, whereupon hee might ground his rules. And for proofe hereof; Suppose there were a heape of all kinds of hearbs growing vpon the earth gathered together, which should be all strained into one vessell, and the liquour brought to the most skilfull Physitian that is, or euer was; can we thinke him able by tasting or smelling thereof, to distinguish the vertues of the hearbs, and to say which is which? To doe this when all were seuered each from other, is a hard matter, yet possi∣ble, considering they haue their seuerall natures and operations: but in this con∣fused mixture to discerne the seueralls, is a thing passing the skill of man. The like may be said of the particu∣lar vertue of euery star; for they all haue their operation in the bodies of men, and other creatures; but their vertues
beeing all mixed together in the subiect whereon they worke, can no more be knowne distinctly, then the vertues of a masse of hearbs of infinite sorts beaten together. For this is an vndoubted truth in nature: that the vertues of Celestiall bodies in their operations, are mingled with the qualities of the elements in the inferiour bodies, & the vertues of them all doe so concurre, that neither the heate or light of the starres, nor the ver∣tue of he elements, can be seuered one from another. And therefore though there be notable vertue in the starres, vet in regard of the mixture thereof in their operation, no man is able to say by obseruation, that this is the ver∣tue of this starre, and this of that. The seauen Planets beeing more notable, then the other lights of the heauen, spe∣cially the Sunne and the Moone, haue their operations and effects plainely and perfectly knowne: as for the other, there was neuer any man that could ei∣ther feele their heate, or certenly deter∣mine of any thing by them. There being th some stars, whose ver∣tues
are vnknowne, how can their ope∣rations and effects be discerned in parti∣cular? Therefore no rules can be made by obseruation of the vertues of the starres in their operations, whereupon we may foretell particular euents of things contingent, either concer∣ning mens persons, families, or king∣domes. A fourth reason. All starres haue their worke in the qualities of heate, light, cold, moisture, and drinesse, as for the secret influences which men dreame of, comming from them besides the saide qualities, they are but forged fancies. The Scripture neuer mentioneth any such, neither can it be prooued, that the Sunne hath any efficacie vpon inferiour bodies, but by light and heate; which because they are mixt with other qua∣litis, they afford no matter of pre∣diction touching particular euents. For hat though the celestiall bodies doe use in the terrestriall, heate and cold, drought and moisture? doth it therfore follow, that these effects doe declare be∣fore hand the constitution of mans bo∣die?
the disposition of mens minds? the affections of mens hearts? or finally▪ what successe they shall haue in their af∣faires, touching wealth, honour, and re∣ligion? Hence I conclude, that diuining by them in this sort, is meere superstiti∣on, and a kinde of sorcerie: for which cause in Scripture Astrologians are iust∣ly numbred among Sorcerers. Now that which hath beene saide touching this point, may serue for spe∣ciall vse. And first, it giues a caueat to all Stu∣dents, that they haue care to spend their time and wits better, then in the studie of Iudiciall Astrologie; and rather im∣ploy themselues in the searching out of such things, as may most serue for the glorie of God, and the good of his Church. It is the subtiltie of Satan to draw men into such meditations, and to make this studie so pleasant, that it can hardely be left, when it is once begun▪ but let them take heede betime. For as∣suredly these vaine and superstitious practises, are not the builders and fur∣therers, but the hinderers and destroy∣ers
of religion, and the feare of God. Againe, this must admonish them which suffer any losses, not to seeke for helpe or remedie at the hands of Astro∣logers, commonly called Figure casters, for their directions in the recouerie of thing lost or stollen, commeth not by the helpe of any lawfull art, but from the worke of the deuill, reuealing the same vnto them. And beter it were to loose a thing finally, and by faith to ex∣pect till God make supplie another way, then in this manner to recouer it again: yea, the curse of God hangeth ouer the head of him, that to helpe himselfe v∣seth diabolicall meanes. For put the case thing lost of great value, be againe re∣stored by the helpe of Satan: yet God in his iustice, for the vse of these vnlawful meanes, ma take from the consulter twice as much; or at least his grace, and so giue him vnto a reprobate sense, to beleeue the deuill to his vetter perdition. Thirdly, it serueth to admonish vs of some other vanities that accompanie Astrologie▪ specially of two. The first, is the obseruation of the signe
in mans bodie; wherein not onely the ignorant sort, but men of knowledge doe fare ouershoot themselues, super∣stitiously holding, that the signe is spe∣cially to be marked. An opinion in it selfe fantasticall and vaine, not groun∣ded in nature, but borrowed from A∣strologie. For the Astrologians for bet∣ter expressing and establishing thereof, haue deuised newe spheres in the hea∣uens, more then indeede there be, to wit, the ninth and the tenth; and in the tenth, commonly called the first mooue∣able, haue placed an imaginarie sphere, which they tearme the Zodiacke, and in the Zodiack twelue signes, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, and the rest, which they imagine to haue power ouer the twelue parts of mans bodie: as Aries, the head and face, Taurus necke and throat, &c. But these are onely twelue imaginarie signes: for in the heauens there is no such matter as a ramme, a bull, &c. And how can it stand with reason, that in a firmament fained by Poets and Philo∣sophers, a forged signe, which indeede is nothing, should haue any power or
operation in the bodies of men? Again, the very order of the gouern∣ment of these signes in mans bodie, is fond and without shew of reason. For according to this platforme, when the Moone commeth into the first signe, Aries, shee ruleth in the head; & when shee commeth into the second signe, Taurus, in the necke; and so descends downe from part to part, in some part ruling two, in some three daies, &c. Where obserue, that the Moone is made then to rule in the cold and moist parts, when shee is in hoate and drie signes: when as in reason, a more con∣sonant order were this; that when the Moone were in hoate and drie signes, as Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, shee should rule in hoat and drie parts of the bodie; and when shee is in colde and moist signes, shee should rule in the colde and moist parts of the bodies; and so still go∣uerne those parts, which in temperature come nearest to the nature of the signes wherein the Moone is. Besides this, some learned Physitians haue vpon experience confessed, that
the obseruation of the signe, is nothing materiall, and that there is no danger in it, for gelding of cattell, or letting of blood. Indeede it preuailes oftentimes by an old conceit and strong imaginati∣on, of some vnlettered persons, who thinke it to be of force and efficacie for restoring and curing: and yet the vani∣tie of this conceit, appeares in the com∣mon practise of men, who commonly vpon S. Stevens day vse to let blood, be the signe where it will; though it be in the place where the veine is opened. But the truth is, the signe in it owne na∣ture, is neither way auaileable, beeing but a fancie, grounded vpon supposed premisses, and therefore ought to be re∣iected, as a meere vanitie. The second thing belonging to A∣strologie, which ought to be eschewed, is the choice and obseruation of daies. Curious diuiners doe set apart certaine dayes, whereof some are (as they say) luckie, some vnluckie. And these they appoint to be obserued for the begin∣ning of ordinary works & businesses; as to take a iourney; to beginne to lay the
foundation of a building, to plant a garden, to weane a child, to put on new apparell, to flit into a new house, to traf∣ficke into other countries, to goe about a suite to a Prince, or some great man, to hunt and vse exercises, to pare the nayles, to cut the haire; in a word, to at∣tempt any thing in purpose or action, which is not done euery day. The effect and force of these daies, is not groun∣ded either in arte or in nature, but onely in superstitious conceit and diabolicall confidence, vpon a wicked custome, borrowed from the practise of diuiners: and the daunger of such confident con∣ceits is this; that the Deuill by them takes the vantage of fantasticall persons, and brings them further into league and acquaintance with himselfe, vnlesse they leaue them. And all such persons as make difference of daies for this or that purpose, are in expresse words plainly condemned, Deut. 18. 10, 11. § 4. The fourth kind of Diuination by true meanes, is the prediction of things to come by dreames. In the old Testament we read tha
Sorcerers and false Prophets vsed to foretell strange euents, by reuelations which they had in their dreames. Such diuiners were among the Iewes: and for that cause the people of God were ex∣pressely forbidden to harken vnto Drea∣mers of dreames, Deut. 13. 3. And the Lord himselfe by the Prophet Ieremie, taxeth the false Prophets, who broached false doctrine in his name by this deuil∣lish meanes, saying, I haue dreamed, I haue dreamed, Ier. 23. 25. Yet here it is to be remembred, that foretelling of future things by dreames, is not simply to be condemned, but one∣ly in part. For of dreames there be three sorts, Diuine, Naturall, and Diabolicall. Di∣uine, are▪ those which come from God: Naturall, which proceede from a mans owne nature, and arise from the quali∣tie and constitution of the bodie: Diabo∣licall, which are caused by the suggestion of the deuill. Touching Diuine dreames: that there are, or at least haue beene such, it is eui∣dent. For these be the words of God, Numb. 12. 6. If there be a Prophet of the
Lord among you, I will be knowne vnto him by a vision, and will speake vnto him by a dreame. And Iob saith, that God speaketh in dreames and visions of the night, when sleepe falleth vpon men, and they sleepe vpon their beds, Iob. 33. 15. Now these diuine dreames were caused in men, either im∣mediately by God himselfe, as the for∣mer places shew; or by meanes of some good Angel. In this latter kind was Io∣seph ofen admonished in dreames what to doe, by the ministerie of an Angel; as Matth. 1. 20. and chap. 2. 13. 19. and di∣uining by such dreames, is not condem∣ned▪ for by them the most worthie Pro∣phets of God haue reueiled Gods will in many things to his Church. Thus Ioseph by dreame had notice giuen him of his owne aduancement, Gen. 37. 7. 9. and by Pharaohs dreames which were sent from God, he also foretold the state of the kingdome of Egypt, touching prouision for seauen years dearth, Gen. 41. 25. By the same meanes the Prophet Daniel prophesied of the flourishing & fading of the chiefe Monarchies of the world, from his time to the comming
of Christ, Dan. 9. &c. these therefore beeing one of the extraordinary means, whereby God hath manifested his will vnto man in times past, more or lesse; diuination by them is not to be censu∣red as vnlawfull, but rather to be ho∣noured and esteemed, as the ordinance of God. For the second sort which be Natu∣rall, arising either from the thoughts of the mind, or the affections of the heart, or the constitution of the bodie: as they are ordinarie in all mē, in some more, in some lesse: so they vary according to the diuersitie of mens thoughts, affections, and constitutions: and by them a man may probably coniecture of sundrie things concerning the state and dispo∣sition, partly of his bodie, and partly of his minde. As first he may gesse in likelihood, what is his constitution, as the learned in all ages, doe constantly auouch. For when his mind in dreaming runnes vp∣on warrs, and contentions, fire, and such like, it argueth his complexion is cho∣lerick. When he dreames of waters
and , it betokeneth abun∣dance of phlegme. When his phantasie conceiueth heauie and dolefull things, full of griefe, feare, and horrour, it be∣wraieth a melancholike constitution. When his dreames be ioyfull and plea∣sant, as of mirth, pastimes, and delightful newes, his complexion is iudged to be sangi. Againe, by naturall dreames a man may gessar the corruption of his owne heart▪ and know to what sinnes he is most naturally inclined. For looke what mon doe ordinarily in the day time conceiue and imagine in their corrupt hearts, of the same, for the most part, they de corruptly dreame in the night. And this is the rather to be obserued, because though the wicked man shut his eyes, and stoppe his eares, and har∣den his heart, and will not take notice of his enormities by the light of the Law; yet euen by his owne dreames in the night, his wickednes shall be in part discouered, and his conscience thereby conuinced, and he himselfe left in the end inexcusable before God. Now albe∣it
a man may giue a probable conie∣cture of the premisses by natural drems; yet no diuination of things to come, whether publike or priuate, good or bad, can be made by them, either con∣cerning persons, families, or kingdoms. Therefore the common obseruations of dreames in the world, whereby men imagine things to come to passe, & ac∣cordingly foretel them by those means, are vaine and superstitious, and iustly so condemned in the places before na∣med, Deut. 13. Ier. 23. Concerning the thirde kinde of dreames, which are caused by the deuil; It hath beene granted in all ages for a truth, that Satan can frame dreames in the brayne of man, and by them reueale his diuiations. And it is plainly mani∣fested by the continuall obseruation of the Gentiles, before the comming of Christ. For when Oracles, (that is, an∣swers from the deuill) were in force, men that vsed to consult with them, and desired to be resolued in matters of doubt, were to lay them downe and sleepe beside the altar of Apollo, where
they had offred their gift, and sleeping they receiued in a dreame, the answer for which they came; and this dreame was framed in the braine of him that slept, by the deuill, and in it the an∣swer was deliuered by him speaking at or in the Oracle. So likewise in the Pri∣mitiue Church, since the comming of Christ, though Oracles then ceased, which were the greatest and strongest delusions that euer Satan had: yet he hath by dreames and visions wrought in the heads of many men most strange and curious conceis for the raising vp of heresies, to the great disturbance of the peace of the Church. For we read in Ecclesiasticall storis, that the Mani∣ches had their damnable opinions first inspired into them, and then confirmed by dreames. And in this age the first authors of the sect of the Anabaptists, had their curious conceits of reuelati∣on, partly in dreames, partly in visions. Likewise the Familie of loue haue their reuelations in dreames. For he that de∣sires to become one of that sect, must ascend thereunto by degrees, before he
can come to perfection to be an elder illuminate, or a man deified; to which estate when he is once come, he hath for his confirmation strong Illusions, both waking and sleeping in visions and dreames. Histories of latter times, and wofull experience sheweth this to be true, the deuill preuailing so strong∣ly, that many haue fallen away by this meanes, beeing corrupted by a doctrin meerely carnall, howsoeuer maintained with pretense of great holynes. Againe, as the good Angels may cause diuine dreames from God, and therei reuile vnto men his will and pleasure concer∣ning things to come: so no doubt the e∣uill spirits may cause in men diabolicall dreames, and therein reueile vnto them many strange things, which they by meanes vnknowne to men, may foresee and knowe. By all which it is euident, that there are and may be as well diabo∣licall, as diuine dreames. The conclusion then is this: That as diuining by the second sort is superstiti∣ous, hauing no ground from Gods word: so fortelling by this third sort
is flat Witchcraft, directly condemned in the places aforenamed, where men are forbidden to prophesie by them, or to regard them. Yet forasmuch as dreames be of sundrie kinds, as hath beene said, it shall not be amisse to set downe some notes of difference betweene them, whereby they may be knowne and distinguished each from other. Which point indeede hath long agone beene handled in the Pri∣mitiue Church, but hardly determined. For the learned of that age haue auou∣ched it a very hard matter, considering that the deuill in these, as well as in o∣ther things, can transforme himselfe in∣to an Angel of light. But howsoeuer the case be hard, and the deuil politicke, yet by light of direction from the word of God, there may some true differences be set downe betweene them; as namely these. First of all; diuine dreames haue al∣waies had their preeminence aboue o∣thers, that generally they haue concer∣ned the weightiest matters in the world; as the comming and exhibiting of the
Messias, the changes and alterations of Kingdomes, the reueiling of Antichrist, & the state of the Church of God. And this may plainly appeare by those which Ioseph expounded vnto Pharaoh, and Daniel vnto the Kings of Babel and Persia. But in the other sort it is other∣wise. For if there be any thing represen¦ted more then ordinarie in those that be naturall, it proceedeth meerely from fancie and imagination. And as for dia∣bolical, they are not of so waightie mat∣ters, nor so hard to foretell. For though the deuill haue great power and skill, yet it is aboue his reach to determine of such things as these are, or to foretell them without helpe from God. Secondly, diuine dreames be alwaies either plaine and manifest, or if they be obscure, yet they haue a most euident interpretation annexed vnto them. Of the plainer sort, were the dreames of Ioseph the husband of Marie. Matth. 1. Of the other sort were Pharaohs, very darke and hidden, but God raised vp Ioseph to giue them an casie inter∣pretation vpon the instant. Gen. 41.
Nebuchadnesars dreames were full of obscuritie, and many matters were con∣tained in thē, so as his spirit was troub∣led, and he forgat them; but God stirred vp Daniel and reuealed to him the se∣cret, so as he remembred it to the King, and declared the true meaning thereof, Dan. 2. 1. 28. 36. Lastly, Daniels dreames of the foure beasts, &c. were of like diffi∣cultie, but the Angel Gabriel was pre∣sently sent to make him vnderstand them, Dan. 8. 16. Now those that are caused by the Deuill, as they be obscure and intricate, so the interpretation of them is ambiguous and vncertaine, be∣cause he himselfe cannot infallably de∣termine how things shall come to passe, and thereupon is constrained to giue doubtfull answers by dreames. And such were not onely the auncient Ora∣cles among the heathen, where he gaue the resolution, but the moderne Pro∣phecies giuen by him to some of his in∣struments in later time. Thirdly, the dreame that comes from God, is alwaies agreeable to his reuealed will, and representeth nothing
contrarie to the same, in whole or in part: whereas those that proceed from nature, doe sauour of nature, and bee a∣greeable to mans corruption, which is repugnant vnto Gods will. And those that are suggested by Satan, are of the same nature; the generall scope whereof is to crosse the will of God, and to with∣drawe the heart from obedience there∣vnto. Fourthly, diuine dreames  a this ende, to further religion and plee, and to maintaine true doctrine: but the deuill, an enemie to God, worketh in his dreames the subuersion of true reli∣gion, & the worship of God, that in the roome thereof he may set vp Idolatrie and superstition. For so much we learne, Deut. 13. where the false Prophet brings his dreame, and vtters it, yea and confirmeth it by a wonder; but marke his ende: It was to draw men to Aposta∣cie: Let vs (saith he) goe after other Gods; which thou hast not knowne, and let vs serue them, vers. 2. Answerable to which, was the practise of the false Prophets after∣wardes, who caused the people to erre
y their lies and flatteries. Ierem. 23. 32. To conclude this point, it must be here remembred, that howsoeuer there re and haue beene distinct sorts of dreams, yet those which are from God, were onely in ordinarie vse in the old Testament, and in the Church of the New, are ceased, and take not place or∣dinarily. Whereas therefore men in their sleepes haue dreames, they must take them commonly to be naturall, & withall know that they may be diaboli∣call, or mixt partly of the one kind, part∣ly of the other. And howsoeuer there may be some vse of the naturall, as hath beene said, yet commonly they are not to be regarded. And for the other which are from Satan, or mixt, they are not to be receiued, beleeued, or made meanes whereby to foretell things to come, least by this vse of them, we grow into familiaritie with the deuill, and be∣fore God be guilty of the sin of Witch∣craft. § 5. The fift and last kind of Diuina∣tion by true meanes, is by Lots, when
men take vpon them to search out for∣tune (as they vse to speake) that is, good or bad successe in any busines, by casting of Lots, whether it be by casting a die, or opening of booke, or any such ca∣suall meanes. I mention this the rather, because among the ignorant and super∣stitious sort, such practises are cōmon & in great accoūt: the Lot is an ordinance of God, appointed for speciall ends and purposes, but when it is thus applyed, it ceaseth to be lawfull, because it is abused to other ends then God by his word & ordinance hath allowed. That we may the better knowe the abuse of a Lot in this kind, we must re∣member there be three sorts of Lots; the Ciuill, the Sporting, and the Diui∣ning Lot. The ciuill vse of Lots, is, when they be vsed for the ending of controuersies: the diuiding of lands and heritages: the disposition of offices amongst many that are equally fit, the trying of the right in doubtfull things, or lastly the discouerie of a malefactor hid amongst many suspected. By this vse of the Lot,
was Saul chosen to be king ouer Israel, 1. Sam. 10. 21. the skape-goate separa∣ted frō that which was to be sacrificed, Leuit. 16. 8. the land of Canaan diuided among the children of Israel, Iosh. 14. 2. &c. the trespasse of Achan found out, Iosh. 7. 15. and Matthias chosen to be one of the twelue, Act. 1. 26. and of this Lot Salomon saith, Pro. 18. 18. The Lot causeth contentions to cease, and maketh par∣titions among the mightie. Hereupon the ciuill vse of Lots hath his warrant in Gods word, so it be lawfully vsed in case of necessitie, with iuocation of the name of God, and with expectation of the euent from God, by whose hand & immeadiate prouidence it is disposed. For the Lot (saith Salomon) is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is from the Lord, Pro. 16. 33. The Sporting Lot is that which is commonly vsed for some vaine and vn∣necessary ende; as to set vp banck-rupts, or such like. This hath no warrant in the word of God whereupon men should vse it, and therefore is no better then an abuse of Gods ordinance, to speake
no more of it. Now the diuining Lot performed by the opening of a booke, or the casting of a die, or such like, thereby to declare good or bad successe, cannot be done without confederacie with Satan either explicite, or implicite. For the plaine cast of a die, or the opening of a booke without beleeuing, can doe nothing for discouering of future contingents. And what is there in the nature of these acti∣ons to produce such effects? or where, or when did God giue this vertue to them, certainely to determine of things hid∣den from man, and knowne onely to himselfe? Diuination therefore by them is to be holden as a practise, not onely sauouring of superstition, but procee∣ding from the arte of Witchraft and Sorcetie. And thus much of Diuination by meanes of the creatures; and the seueral kinds thereof. Sect. III. The second kind of Diuination, is by counterfeit, and forged meanes, which are
none of the creatures of God: whereof one kind onely is mentioned in Scrip∣ture, viz. when Satan is consulted with in the shape of a dead man. This is com∣monly called Neeromaneie, or the blacke arte, because the Deuill being sought vn∣to by Witches, appeares vnto them in the likenes of a dead bodie. And it is ex∣pressely forbidden, Deuter. 18. 11. yea condemned by the Prophet Esai, 8. 19, 20. who saith in plaine tearmes, that Gods people ought not to goe from the liuing to the dead, but to the Law and to the testimonie. A memorable example here∣of is recorded in 1. Sam. 28. the obserua∣tion whereof, will discouer vnto vs the chiefe: points of Necromancie. There Saul about to encounter the Philistis, beeing forsaken of God, who refused to answer him, either by dreames, or by Vrim; or by the Prophets, inquired for one that had a familiar spirit: and hea∣ring of the Pythonesse at Endor, went vnto her by night, and caused her to raise vp Samuel, to tell him of the issue of the warre. Now the Witch at his re∣quest raised vp the Deuill, with whome
shee was confederate, in Samuels like∣nesse; who gaue him answer concerning his owne ouerthrowe, and the death of his sonnes. Which example declareth plainely, that there is a kind of diuinati∣on, whereby Witches and Sorcerers reueale strange things, by means of the deuill appearing vnto thē in the shapes or shadowes of the dead. Touching the truth of this example, two Questions may be mooued. The first is, Whether that which ap∣peared, was true Samuel or not? Some say it was Samuel indeede: others (who hold that there are no Witches) denie that it was either Samuell, or the deuill; and affirme it to be some other counter∣feit comming in Samuels attire to de∣ceiue Saul: both which opinious are false and here to be confuted. And first, that their opinion which say that true Samuel appeared vnto Saul, is a flat vntruth, I prooue by these reasons. I. Before this time, God had with∣drawne his spirit from Saul, as himselfe confesseth, and denied to answer him a∣ny
more by ordinarie meanes, in such sort as before he had done. Hereupon I gather, that it is was not probable, that God would now vouchsafe him the fauour to suffer Samuel to come vnto him extraordinarily, and tell him what should be the end of his warre with the Philistins: and to this purpose it is affir∣med twise in that chapter, that God had taken his good spirit from Saul. II. The soules of the faithfull depar∣ted, are in the hands of God, and doe rest in glorie with himselfe, and their bodies are in the earth, and there rest in peace. So saith the voice from heauen, Reuel. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord: for they rest from their labours, and their works, that is the reward of their workes, follow them immediatly, or at the heeles, as the word signifieth. Now suppose the deuill had power ouer Sa∣muels bodie, yet to make true Samuel, he must haue his soule also. But it is not in the power of the deuill, to bring a∣gaine the soules that are in heauen vnto their bodies, and so to cause them to appeare vnto men vpon earth, and to
speake vnto them. The Deuills king∣dome is in hell, and in the hearts of wicked men on earth; yea whiles the children of God are in this world, he v∣surpeth some authoritie ouer them, by meanes of their owne corruption: But heauen is the kingdome of God and his Saints, where Satan hath nothing to doe, considering that there is no flesh or corruption, to make him entrance or yeeld him intertainement. Neither can it be prooued by Scripture, that the de∣uill can disturbe either the bodies or soules of them that die in the Lord: and therefore the Witch with all her power and skill, could not bring Samuels rot∣ten bodie (for so no doubt it was now) and soule together. III. This shape which appeared suf∣fered Saul to adore and worshippe it, where is the true Samuel would neuer haue receiued adoration from Saul the king, though it had beene in ciuill man∣ner onely. Whome then did Saul a∣dore? Answ. The Deuill himselfe, who beeing an enemie to the glorie of God, was content to take to himselfe that
honour, which a King in dutie is to per∣forme to God himselfe. IV. If it had beene true Samuel, he would certainly haue reproued Saul for seeking helpe at Witches, contrarie to Gods commandement, & that doctrine which he had taught him from God in his life time. But this counterfeit repro∣ued him not, and therefore it is not like to be the true Prophet of God, but Sa∣tan himselfe, framing by his art and skill the person and shape of Samuel. But it is alleadged to the contrarie, that Samuel ater his sleepe, prophesied of the death of Saul, Ecclesiastic. 46. v. 20. Ater his sleepe also he told of the Kings death, &c. Answ. That booke pen∣ned by Iesus the sonne of Sirach is a ve∣ry worthie description of Christian E∣thicks, contaming more excellent pre∣cepts for manners, then all the wri∣tings of heathen Philosophers, or o∣ther men. But yet it is not Scripture, neither did the Church euer hold and receiue it as Conicall: yea, the author himselfe sinuateth so much in the be∣ginning thereof: for in the preface he
disableth himselfe to interpret hard things, and after a sort craues pardon for his weaknesse, which is not the man∣ner of the men of God, that were pen∣men of Scripture. For they were so gui∣ded by gods spirit in their proceedings, that nothing could be hard vnto them. This priuiledge no ordinarie man hath assurance of: and therefore this author writing vpon his owne priuate motion, was subiect to error, and no doubt this speach of his, beeing contrarie to that which is recorded in the Canonicall Scriptures, is a flat vntruth. Secondly, it is obiected, that the Scripture calleth him Samuel, that ap∣peared vnto Saul. Ans. The scripture doth often speake of things, not as they are in themselues, but as they seeme to vs. So it is affirmed, Gen. 1. 16. that God made two great lights, the Sunne and Moone: whereas the moone is lesser then many starres, yet because in regard of her nearenesse to the earth, shee seemeth to vs greater then the rest, therefore shee is called a great light. In like manner Idols in the Scripture are
called Gods, not that they are so indeed, (for an Idoll is nothing, 1. Cor. 8. 4.) but because some men doe so conceiue of them in their mindes. In a word; the Scripture oftentimes doth abase it selfe to our conceit, speaking of things not according as they are, but after the man∣ner of men; and so in this place calleth counterfeit Samuel, by the name of the true Samuel, because it seemed so vnto Saul. The third obiection: That bodie which appeared, prophecied of things that came to passe the day after, as the death of Saul, and of his sonnes; which indeede so fel out, and at the same time, therefore was like to be Samuel. Answ. There is nothing there said or done, which the deuill might not doe. For when the Lord vseth the deuill as his in∣strument to bring some things to passe, he doth before hand reueile the same vnto him: and looke what particulars the deuill learneth from God, those he can foretell. Now the truth is, Satan was appointed by God to worke Sauls ouerthrowe, and it was made knowne
vnto him when the thing should be done; by which meanes, and by none o∣ther, the deuill was enabled to Foretell the death of Saul. Where (by the way) obserue, that in this case the deuill can reueale things to come certenly, to wit, if he be appointed Gods immediate in∣strument for the execution of them, or knowes them by light of former pro∣phecies in Scripture. Fourthly, dead men doe often ap∣peare and walke after they are buried. Ans. It is indeede the opinion of the Church of Rome, and of many ignorant persons among vs, but the truth is o∣therwise. Dead men doe neither walke, nor appeare in bodie or soule after death: for all that die, are either Righ∣teous, or wicked: The soules of the Righteous goe straight to heauen, and the soules of the wicked to hell, and their remaine till the last iudgement: and therefore of the iust it is said, that they are blessed when they die, because they rest from their labours, Apoc. 14. 13. But how doe they rest, if after they be dead they wander vp and downe in the earth?
If it be said, that Moses and Elias ap∣peared when Christ was transsigured in the mount; and that Lazarus rose again, and at Christs resurrection many dead bodies rose againe and appeared. I answer; there were two times when God suffered the dead to be raised vp a∣gaine; either at the planting of his Church, or at the restoring and establi∣shing of it, when it was rased to the foundation. Thus at the restoring of religion in Elias and Elishaes times, the sonne of the Shunamitish wo∣man, 2. King. 4. 34. and the widowes sonne at Sarephta, 1. King. 17. 21. were raised. Againe, when God would restore his Church, which was fallen to Ido∣latrie about the death of Elisha, he caused the like miracle to be wrought in the reuiuing of a dead man by the touching of Elishaes dead carkeise in the graue, thereby to assure the people of their deliuerance, and to cause them to embrace the doctrine of the Prophet after his death, which in his life they had contemned. In like manner at the establishing of the Gospel in the new
Testament, it pleased Christ to raise vp Moses and Elias, and to make them knowne to his Disciples by extraordi∣narie reuelation, that they might be∣leeue that the doctrine which hee preached was not newe, but the same in substance with that which was recorded in the Law and the Prophets, both which were represented by Moses and Elias. So also he wrought the miracle vpon Lazarus, the widowes sonne, and lairus daughter, thereby to sliewe the power of his Godhead, the truth of his calling, the testimonie of his Doctrine: lastly, to make knowne the power of his resurrection, he caused some to rise and appeare to others, when he himselfe rose againe. But out of these two times we haue neither warrant nor example, that God suffered the dead to be raised vp. Wherefore those instances will not any way confirme Samuels appearing, which indeed was not true, but counter∣feite and forged by the Deuill him∣selfe. Now for the second Opinion, of those which denie that there be any
Witches, and thereupon hold that this was a meere cosenage of the Witch, suborning some man or woman to coū∣terfeit the forme, attire, and voice of Samuel, thereby to delude Saul, that al∣so is vntrue. For he that spake fore∣tolde the ruine of Saul, of his sonnes, and of his armie, yea the time also wherein this was to come to passe: whereas in likelihood no man or wo∣man in all Israel, could haue foretold such things before hand of themselues. It was not then any cosenage, as is affir∣med, but a thing effected by the deuill, framing to himselfe a bodie in the like∣nesse of Samuel, wherein he spake. If therefore it be manifest, that by counterfeit apparitions of the dead Witches and Sorcerers can foretell things to come: hence sundrie points of Witchcraft may be obserued. First, that there is a league between the Witch and the deuill. For this was the cause which mooued Saul to seeke to Witches, because neither he him∣selfe, nor any of his seruants could raise vp Satan in Samuels likenesse, as the
Witch of Endor did. But Saul beeing a King, might haue commanded helpe from all the wise and learned men in Is∣rael, for the effecting of such a matter: why then would he rather seeke to a sil∣ly woman, then to them? The reason was, because shee had made a compact with the deuil, for the vsing of his helpe at her de aund, by vertue whereof he was as readie to answer, as she to call him; whereas Saul and the learned Iewes, hauing made no such league, nei∣ther he by his power, nor they by their skill, could haue performed such a worke. Secondly, the deuill will be readie at the call and command of Witches and Sorcerers, when they are intending a∣ny mischiefe. For here the Witch of Endor no sooner spake, but he appea∣red, and therefore the text giues her a name that signifieth one hauing rule and command ouer Pytho, that is, the familiar spirit: yet when he is comman∣ded, he yeelds not vpon constraint, but voluntarily, because he builds vpon his owne greater aduantage, the gaining of
the soule of the Witch. Where by the way, let it be obserued, what a pretious thing the soule of man is; the purchasing wherof, can make the proud spirit of Sa∣tan so farre to abase it self, as to be at the command of a silly woman. Againe, what an inueterate malice Satan bea∣reth to man, which for the gaining of a soule, will doe that which is so contrarie to his nature. It may teach man, what to esteeme of his soule, and not to sell it for so base a price. Thirdly, by this, the great power of the Deuill in the behalfe of the Sorce∣rer, is made manifest. For he was pre∣sently at hand to counterfeit Samuel, and did it so liuely and cunningly, as well in forme of bodie, as in attire and voice, that Saul thought verily it was the Pro∣phet: which may be a caueat vnto vs, not easily to giue credit to any such ap∣paritions. For though they seeme neuer so true and euident, yet such is the pow∣er and skill of the deuill, that he can quite deceiue vs, as he did Saul in this place.
Sect. IV. Hitherto I haue shewed the first kind of Diuination by meanes, both true and forged. Now followeth the second; pra∣ctised without meanes. Diuination without meanes, is the foretelling and reuealing of things to come, by the alone and immediate assi∣stance of a familiar spirit. This kind is mentioned and expressely forbidden, Leuit. 19. 31. Ye shall not regard them that worke with spirits. Againe, Leuit. 20. 6. If any turne after such as worke with spi∣rits, to goe a whoring after them, I will set my face against that person, and will cut him off from among his people. So, Deut. 18. 11. Let none be found among you that consulteth with spirits. In which places the holy Ghost vseth the word Ob, which more properly signifieth a spirit, or deuill, in which sense it is taken in Leuit. 20. 27. and in 1. Sam 28. 8. And by reason of the league which is be∣tweene the Witch and the deuill, the same is also giuen to the Witch, that worketh by the deuill: and therefore
the Pythonesse at Endor, is both called Ob, 1. Sam. 28. 9. and shee that ruleth Ob. v. 7, 8. Now this kind of Diuination is pra∣ctised two wayes: either inwardly, when the spirit is within the Witch: or out∣wardly, when being forth of the Witch he doth onely inspire him or her. An example of the former waie, the Scripture affordeth, Act. 16. 16. of a woman at Philippi, that had a spirit of Pytho; which gather master much vantage with diuining. And this spirit whereby she diuined was within her. For Paul beeing molested, said to the spirit, I cōmand thee in the name of Ie∣sus Christ, that thou come out of her, and he came out the same houre, v. 18. And be∣cause the deuill is wont in this kinde to speake out of the throat and brest, or bellie of the Witch pssessed, hereunto learned men haue thought that this name (Ob) is giuen to the deuill, because he speaketh out of the witch, as out of a bottell or hollow vessell: for so the word Ob, properly signifieth. Secondly, this may be practised
when the deuill is forth of the Witch, and then he either inspireth her, or els casteth her into a traunce, and therein reueileth vnto her such things as she would know. Of this kind, though we haue no ex∣ample in Scripture, yet the histories of the heathen doe affoard vnto vs many instances of experience therein. One of the principall is the historie of the ten Sibylles of Greece, who were most fa∣mous Witches, and did prophesie of many things to come, whereof some were true concerning Christ and his kingdome, which the deuill stole out of the Bible, and some other were false: and all of them they receiued by reue∣lation from the deuill in traunces. But it will be said, If the deuill reuei∣leth vnto his instruments strāge things in traunces, then how shall a man dis∣cerne betweene diabolicall reuelations, and the true gift of prophesie, which God in traunces reueileth vnto his Pro∣phets. Answ. In this point Satan is, (as it were) Gods ape. For as he in old time
raised vp holy Prophets to speake vnto the fathers for the building vp of his Church: so hath Satan inspired his mi∣nisters, and furnished his instruments with propheticall inspirations from time to time, for the building vp of his owne kingdome: and hereupon he hath notably counterfeited the true gift of prophecie receiued first from God him∣selfe. And yet, though in many things they be like, there is great difference betweene them. First, diuine trances may come vpon Gods children, either whē the soule re∣maineth vnited with the bodie, or else when it is seuered for a time. So much Paul insinuateth, when he faith of him∣selfe, 2. Cor. 12. . that he was rapt vp (as it were in a heauenly trance) into the third heauen, but whether in the bodie, or out of the bodie, he knew not. But in all diabolical ecstasies, though the body and senses of the Witch be (as it were) bound or benummed for the time; yet their soules still renaine vnited to their bodies, and not seuered from them. For though the deuill by Gods permission
may kill the bodie, and so take the soule out of it for euer; yet to take it from the bodie for a time, and to reunite them a∣gaine, is miraculous, and therefore be∣yond the compasse of his power. Secondly, in diuine trances the ser∣uants of God haue all their senses, yea all the powers of soule and bodie re∣maining sound and perfect, onely for a time the actions and operations are su∣spended and cease to doe their dutie: but in ecstasies that be from Satan, his instruments are cast into frenzies and madnesse: so as reason in them is darke∣ned, vnderstanding obscured, memorie weakned, the braine distempered; yea, all the faculties are so blemished, that many of them neuer recouer their for∣mer estate againe: and they that scape best, doe carrie their blemishes, as the deuills skars, euen vnto their graue. So kind is Saran to his friends, that he will leaue his tokens behind him, where e∣uer he comes in this sort. The seruants of God receiue no such blemishes, but rather a further good, and a greater measure of illumination of all the pow∣ers
of the soule. Thirdly, diuine ecstasies tend alway to the confirming of the truth of the Gospel, and the furtherance of true reli∣gion and pietie. Such was Peters, Act. 10. 11. which serued to assure him of his calling to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, and to informe his iudgement in this truth, that there was no accepti∣on of persons with God, and that to them of the new Testament, all things were cleane, and nothing polluted. But the scope of them that are from Satan, is principally the suppressing and hin∣derance of religion, the drawing of the weake into errours, the ratifying and confirming of thē that are fallen there∣into, and the generall vpholding of the practises of vngodlinesse. And by these and such like particular differences, hath God pulled off the Deuills vizar, and made him better knowne and discer∣ned of true Christians. And thus much concerning Diuination, the first part of Witch-craft.
CHAP. IIII. Of Operative or working Witch-craft. THe second part is that which consisteth in O∣peration, and is there∣fore called Operatiue or working Witchcraft. Witch-craft in Ope∣ration, is that which is employed in the practise and reall working of strange things or wonders, and it hath two parts, Inchantment, and Iugling. Sect. I. Inchantment is the working of won∣ders by a Charme. This the Lord ex∣pressely forbiddeth, Deuter. 18. 11. Let none be found among you, that is a Charmer. In this description, two points are to be considered: 1. what things may be done by inchantment, namely wonders, for I say it is the practise of wonders: 2. by what means these wōders are wrought,
that is, by a Charme. For the first: The wonders done by Inchanters are, 1. The raising of stormes and tempests; windes and weather, by sea and by land: 2. The poysoning of the ayre: 3. Blasting of corne: 4. Killing of cattell, and annoying of men, women, & children: 5. The procuring of strange passions and torments in mens bodies and other creatures, with the curing of the same: 6. Casting out of deuills. These and such like things Inchanters can doe by their charmes. And for proofe here∣of, we haue the vniforme consent of all ages, with the records of Witches con∣fessions to manifest the same; besides the testimonie of experience in this age: so as the man that calles it into question, may as well doubt of the Sunne shining at noone day. Yet for the further declaration there∣of, we will alledge what the Scripture saith in this point. Salomon saith, If the Serpent bite when he is not charmed, no bet∣ter is a babler, Eccles. 10. 11. thus the words are in our English translation: but they may better be thus read accor∣ding
to the originall: If the serpent bite before he be charmed, what profit hath the master of the tongue thereby; that is, the Charmer. And so they beard this sense: If the Inchanter be bitten, before the serpent be charmed, then he hath no benefit by his charme. For Salomon in that place giueth vs to vnderstand, what power Inhanters haue, and what they may doe by their charmes, if they come in time, namely, stay the poyson of the serpent, so as he cannot hint, ei∣ther by biting or stinging. When Balae intended euill against Israel, he hired Balaam to curse them, Num. . 6. Now this Balaam was an inchanting Witch; for though he be called a Pro∣phet, yet this was onely in the reputati∣on of the world; for his practise was to inehant by charmes of words: and to that purpose he was hired to curse Gods people, that is, to-bring mischiefe vpon them by charming; which thing he had often and inany to doe,  but that it pleased God contrary to his endea∣ours
out into these words: There is no sorcerie against Iacob, nor soothsaying against Isra∣el, Num. 23. 23. As if he should haue said, I know well that sorcerie is power∣full in many things, and of force to bring much mischiefe vpon men, yet it can take no place against the people of God, because he hath blessed them; and whom he blesseth, them no man can hurt by cursing. Inchanters there∣fore may vpon Gods permission worke strange things, as appeares by these pla∣ces, to name no more. The second point to be obserued, is the meanes whereby these wonders are practised; these are counterfeit and sup∣posed meanes, not ordained and sancti∣fied by God, which are commonly cal∣led Charmes. A Charme is a Spell or verse, con∣sisting of strange words, vsed as a signe or watchword to the deuil, to cause him to worke wonders. First, I say it is a Spell consisting of strange words, because in these inchant∣ments, certaine words or verses are se∣cretly vttered, which in regard of the
common formes of words are strange, and wherein there is thought to be a miraculous efficacie to bring some ex∣traordinarie and vnexpected thing to passe. A point of it selfe euident and needing no further proofe, considering it is not vnknowne to the more igno∣rant sort, who are better acquainted with these, then with the word of God. And these words are not all of one and the same kind; but some are rude and barbarous, neither knowne nor concei∣ued or vnderstood; of which the aunci∣enter sort of charmes were wont to be made especially, and some later. Some againe are plaine and knowne tearmes, which may be vnderstoode; as the names of the Trinitie, some words and sentences of Scripture, as In principto er at verbum, &c. Againe, charmes that consist of words, are not all of one sort, but some be imprecations, wishing some euill: others in shewe haue the forme of praises and blessings, whereby the Witch either flatteringly commen∣deth, or fauourably wisheth some good: others againe are made in forme of
prayer and petition: and they all are sometimes plainely conceiued, some∣times in ruder and more vnknowne words, as those well know, who haue heard them, or reade them where they are to be sound. Secondly, I adde, that the charme is vsed for a sign: and watchword to the deuill, to cause him to worke wonders, wherein standeth the nature and proper end of a charme. The nature, in that it is a dia∣bolicall signe: the end, to cause the de∣uill to worke a wonder: whereby it is distinguished from all other speeches of men. For all they commonly carrie the nature of the thing, whereof and whereabout they be made, but the Charme doth not alwaies follow the nature of the words, but hath another nature in regard of the immediate rela∣tion it hath to the deuill, to whome it is a signe. Againe, the charme pronoun∣ced doth not the wonder, but the deuil admonished by it as by the watchword to doe the feate. Now because some are of opinion, in regard of the ordinarie production of
strange effects by these meanes, that the Spell hath in selfe some vertuit and power to such and such purposes where∣into it is vsed; I will stand a little in the proofe of the contrarie. That a charme is onely a diabolicall watchword; and hath in it selfe no such effectuall power or possibilitie to worke a wonder. My reasons are these. First, this must be taken for a maine ground; That as there is nothing in the world, that hath beeing but from God, so nothing hath in it any efficacie, but by his ordinance. Now whatsoeuer effi∣cacie is in any creature from God, it re∣ceiued the same into it selfe, either by creation, or since the creation by some newe and speciall institution, appoint∣mēt, and gift of God. For example. The bread in the Saerament, by a naturall power giuen vnto it in the creation, serueth to nourish the bodie, and the same bread, by Gods speciall appoint∣ment in his word, feedes the soule, in that by his ordinance it is made to vs a signe and seale of the bodie of Christ broken for vs: And so it is in euerie crea∣ture;
if the effect be ordinarie and natu∣rall, it hath it by creation; if extraordi∣narie and supernaturall, it hath that by diuine ordination: So that whatsoeuer comes to passe by any other meanes, is by Satanicall operation. Now charmes and spells, standing of set words and sillables, haue no power in them to worke wonders, either by the gift of nature in the creation, or by Gods ap∣pointment since the creation: and ther∣fore they haue in them no power at all for any such purpose. This latter part of the reason, beeing the assumption or ap∣plication of the ground to the present instance, consisteth of two parts, which I will prooue in order. First then I af∣firme, that by the gift of nature, no words of charmes haue power in thē to worke wonders; & I prooue it in this manner. I. All words made and vttered by men, are in their own nature but sounds framed by the tongue, of the breath that commeth from the lungs. And that which is onely a bare sound, in all reason can haue no vertue in it to cause a reall worke, much lesse to produce a
wonder. The sounds of bells and of ma∣ny musicall instruments, and the voices of many bruit creatures, are fartr more strong and powerfull, then the voice of a man: yet who knoweth not, that none of all these is auaileable to such purpo∣ses. Indeede they haue power to affect the minde, by their sweetnes or other∣wise, but they are not able to bring to passe a reall worke, either by the infli∣cting of hurts and harmes, or by the procuring of good. I conclude there∣fore, that the voice of man by nature, hath no power to worke any wonders. II. Againe, euery thing which hur∣teth or affecteth another, must necessa∣rily touch the thing which it hurteth or affecteth. For it is a graunted rule in na∣ture, that euery agent worketh vpon the patient by touching:Omnea∣gen per cona∣et: But words vttered in Charmes are commonly made of things absent, and therefore though it should be graunted, that they had the power of touching a substance (which they cannot haue) yet of thēselues they are not auaileable to bring vpon things absent either good or euill.
III. Moreouer, if words conceiued in charmes and spells haue any such power as is pretended, why should not euery word that any man speaketh haue the same power, inasmuch as all words are of the same nature, beeing onely sounds framed in the breast, and vttered by the tongue in letters and syllables? But experience teacheth, that the same word spoken by another, hath not the same vertue; For the charme vttered by the Charmer himselfe, will take effect; but beeing spoken in the same manner by another man, that is no Inchanter, maketh to no purpose, for nothing is effected by it. IV. That which is in nature nothing but a bae signification, cannot serue to worke a wonder, and this is the nature of all words for as they be framed of mans breath, they are naturall, but yet in regard of forme and articulation they are artificiall and significant, and the vse of them in euery language is, to signifie that which the author thereof inten∣ded; for the first significations of words, deped vpon the will and pleasure of
man that framed and inuented them. Beeing therefore inuented onely to shew or signifie some thing, it remaines that neither in nature nor proper vse, they can be applied to the producing of wounderfull and strange effects. Thus the former part of the assumption is cleared. In the second place I affirme, that the words of charmers haue not this power in them, by any speciall gift, bles∣sing, or appoyntment of God, since the crea∣tion; which is the other part of the as∣sumption. And I shew it thus: whatsoe∣uer is powerfull and effectual to any end or purpose, by Gods gift, blessing, or ap∣pointment, the same is commanded in his word to be vsed, and hath also a pro∣mise of blessing annexed to the right vse therof. To vse the instance before made for explanation sake. The bread in the Lords supper, hath this power and pro∣pertie giuen it by Christ, to seale & sig∣nifie vnto euery beleeuing receiuer the bodie of Christ; and by this propertie giuen it, it is aeileable to this purpose; though it be a thing aboue the com∣mon
and naturall vse of bread; & there∣upon we haue warrant from Christs owne commandement, ordinance, and example so to vse it. But in the whole bodie of the Scripture, there is not the like commandement to vse the words of Charmes for the effecting of won∣ders, much lesse the like promise of bles∣sing vpon the same so vsed: therefore the conclusion is, that God hath giuen no such power vnto them in speciall. If it be asked then, what they are, and whereto they serue? I ansvver, they are no better then the deuills sacraments and vvatchvvords, to cause him to doe some strange vvorke. For the Inchanter hath relation in his minde to the deuil, vvhose helpe he hath at hand by coue∣nant either open or secret; or at least some superstitious opinion of the force of the vvords, vvhich is a preparation to a couenant. The truth of this doctrine, hovvso∣euer it be thus made manifest, yet it findes not generall intertainement at all mens hands. For there are and haue beene some learned men, in all ages,
who maintained the contrarie, both by word and writing; and namely, that there is great vertue & power in words pronounced in time and place, to effect strange things. For proofe wherof they alledge these reasons. First, that the bare conceit and ima∣gination of man, is of great force to doe strange things; and therefore words ex∣pressed much more. Ans. The ground of the reason is naught. Imagination is nothing els but a strong conceit of the minde touching any thing, whatsoeuer it be, and by reason of the communion that is betweene the bodie and soule be∣ing together, it is of great force to work within the man that imagineth diuerse∣ly, and to cause alteration in himselfe, which may tend either to the hurt or to the good of his owne bodie: but yet imagination hath no force out of a man to affect or hurt an other. A man (con∣ceiuing desperately of his owne estate) by the strength of imagination may kill himselfe; but the same conceit, be it ne∣uer to strong, can not hurt his neigh∣bour. For it is no more then Cesars i∣mage
vpon his coyne, which serueth onely to represent Cesar: so imaginati∣on is nothing but the representation of some thing in the minde by conceit, and therefore as the person of Cesar is nothing hurt though his image be de∣faced; so when we conceiue of men in our mindes, though neuer so badly and malitiously, yet all is of no force to hurt or annoy them, either in person or state. Secondly, they alleage that Wit∣ches by malitious and wrie lookes in anger and displeasure; may and do hurt those vpon whom they looke, whether they be men or other creatures. And it is an old receiued opinion, that in ma∣litious and ill disposed persons, there proceed out of the eye with the beams, noysome and malignant spirits, which infect the ayre, and doe poison or kill, not onely them with whome they are daily conuersant, but others also whose companie they frequent, of what age, strength, and complexion so euer they be. Ans. But the opinion is as fond, as it is old: for it is as much against na∣ture that such vertue should proceede
out of the eye, or such spirits breake out of the nerves to the partie hated, as it is for the blood of the bodie, of it selfe, to gush out of the veines. Yet for the ratifying of this opinion they alleadge that which is written in Gen. 30. 37. where Iacob laide spekled oddes before the sheepe in their wate∣ring troughes, & that by Gods appoint∣ment, for this ende, that they might bring forth partie coloured lambs. I an∣swer, that was not a worke of sight, but a speciall and exraordinarie worke of Gods prouidence vpon Iacob in his ne∣cessitie, as we may plainely see in the chapter next following v. 9. &. 11. yea it was taught Iacob by God himselfe: and f it had been an ordinarie work, doubt∣lesse the gaes thereof beeing so good, Iacob would haue done it againe after∣ward: but we neuer read that he did it againe. And be it granted it were a na∣turall worke, yet it cannot prooue wit∣ching by sight, because the sheepe re∣ceiued into their eyes the species and re∣semblance of the rodds, which is accor∣ding to nature: whereas in fasination
or bewitching by sight, malignant spi∣rits should not be receiued in, but sent forth of the eye, which is against na∣ture. Yea, but the Basiliske or Cockatrice doth kill man and beast with his breath and sight, yea, the wolfe takes away the voyce of such as he suddenly meetes withall and beholds, and why may not wicked men or women doe the like? An. Indeede it is a thing receiued by com∣mon errour, and held of some for a truth; but no experience of any man hath yet beene brought for the proofe thereof, and therefore it is to be reputed as fabulous. Thus much in probabilitie may be thought (if the allegatiō should be true) that the Basilise beeing posses∣sed of a thicke poyson, may by his breath send forth some grosse venemos va∣pours, and thereby infect the ayre, and poison the thing that is neere vnto him. And that the soddaine and vnexpe∣cted beholding of the venemous Cock∣trice, or the ravenous wolfe, (beeing creatures in their kind fearefull, especi∣ll to those that are not acquainted
with them) may cause present astonish∣ment, and consequently perill of death. But that this should be done by the eis of these creatures only, in māner afore∣said, it is not credible; and therefore A∣thors haue vpon good ground denied i as beeing confirmed neither by reason, nor experience. Thirdly, they reason thus; nchanters by whispering of words in charmes can stay the stinging and poisoning of ser∣pents: for so Dauid in effect speaketh; that the voice of the Charmer char∣meth the serpent, Psal. 58. 5. It may seeme therefore that there is no small force in words for the effecting of strange works. Ans. It must be granted that the charmer may inchant the ser∣pent: but how? not by vertue of the words in the Charme, but by the power of the deuill, who then is stirred vp, when the charme is repeated, to doe the thing intended. The truth of this answer appeares by the words of the text, as they are read in the originall, that the Inchanter ioyneth societies very cunningly, namely, with the deuill. Now
these scities betweene Satan and the Charmer, are the very ground of the worke vpon the serpent: which worke, vpon confederacie formerly made, is done by the deuill; and the words of the Charme are no more but the In∣chanters Item or watchword, to occasi∣on him thereunto. And let any other man reapeat the same words a thousand times, that either is not thus confede∣rate with Satan, or hath not a supersti∣tious opinion of Charmes, and al his la∣bour will be in vaine. Fourthly, the word of God is of great force in the hearts of men to con∣ert and change them, as it is vttered by the mouth of mortall man: and this force is not in the man by whom it is spoken: where then should it be, but in the ? and if in the words, why may not other words be of like beeing vttered by man? Ans. 1. The power of Gods word comme not from this, that it is a word, and barely vt∣tered out of the mouth of a man: for so it is a dad letter: but it proceedeth from the powerfull operation of the
spirit, annexed by Gods promise there∣unto, when it is vttered, read, and con∣ceiued which operation if it were taken away, the word might be preached a thousand yeares together, without any fruit or effect, either to saluation or con∣demnation. 2. The word of God is powerfull by the concurrence of the worke of the spirit, not in all things: as for example, in raising winds and tempests, in infect∣ing the ayre, in killing and annoying men or other creatures; but in the con∣uersion of sinners, in gathering the E∣lect, and in confirming those that be called: and this power it hath also by his speciall blessing and appointment. 3. Furthermore, the same word is not of power, when it is barely read, heard, or spoken, vnlesse it be also conceiued in the vnderstanding, receiued with reue∣rence, treasured vp in the memorie, and mingled with faith in the heart: where∣as the bare reading and muttering ouer the words of a Charme by an Inchan∣ter, though in an vnknowne togue, in ude and barbarous words, is sufficient
to procure the working of wonders. Now, though the word of God be in it selfe pure, and serue to excellent purpose, as hath beene saide, yet by the way we may remember; That as it is with all things that are most pretious, nothing is so excellent in it kind, which may not be abused; so it is with this hea∣uenly word: for it is and may be made a Charme two waies. First, when some part of it, is indeede vsed for a charme. Thus many Texts of Scripture, both in Latin and other languages, haue beene abused by Inchanters, as might easily be shewed. Secondly, when it is heard, read, recited, or made a matter of praier without vnderstanding. And thus the ignorant man, as much as in him lyeth, makes it a Charme. For in his ordinarie vse thereof, he neither conceiueth, nor taketh care to vnderstand it, as lamenta∣ble experience teacheth. Yet in neither of these is the very bare repeating of the word effectuall. For as when a man heares or reades it, vnlesse the Spirit of God inlighteneth his heart, it is to no purpose; so when it is made the matter
of a Spell, nothing will be effected, vn¦lesse the deuill either by confderacie, or superstitious conceit be drawne to conferre his helpe in the point, for his owne aduantage. Howbeit, of all Inchantments these are the most dishonorable to God, most acceptable to Satan, and most hurtfull to the charmer, which are made of the Scriptures. For beside the sinne of Witchcraft in the Charming, this in∣conuenience , that Satan procu∣reth more credite to one of thse, then to twentie other, because the words are Scripture; hereby cloing his mischie¦ous practises vnder the colour of holy∣nes, and so confirming the truth of that which the holy Ghost saith, that when he worketh most deceitfully, he trans∣formes himselfe into an Angell of lhgt, Cor. 11. 14. He knoweth well, that or∣dinarie words seeme nothing to some men, therfore he teacheth and suggest¦eth phrases and sentences out of the word, for such vngodly ends, that euen the grace of them fethed from the Scriptures, may make them sme¦full.
Wherefore let euery one that is indued with grace and knowledge, de∣ly consider this with himselfe. Cannot Gods word be effectuall, when it is vsed to edification, vnlesse the worke of his owne Spirit accompany the same? then surely it is impossible, that the same which is holy, beeing vsed to an euill ende, should be powerfull, except the deuill affordeth his helpe for the effect∣ing thereof. To conclude therefore, let men say what they will, the truth is this, that words of Inchantment, be they ne∣uer so holy or prophane, either by way of cursing or blessing, haue no power of themselues to the producing of strange workes: but are (as hath beene said) one∣ly diabolicall signes, admonishing the Deuill of some wickednes intended and desired, which he through his power must cause to be done. And thus much of Inchantment standing vpon the practise of wonders by a Charme. To this head of Inchantment, sundry other practises of Witches are to be referred, the chiefe whereof are these.
First, the vsing and making of Chara∣cters, Images, or Figures, specially the framing of Circles, for this end to work wonders by them. As, to draw the pi∣cture of a child, or mā, or other creature in clay, or waxe, and to burie the same in the ground, or to hide it in some secret place, or to burn it in the fire, therby in∣tending to hurt or kill the partie resem∣bled. Againe, to make an impression in∣to the saide picture, by pricking or ga∣shing the heart or any other place, with intent to procure dangerous or deadly pains to the same parts. This is a meere practise of Inchantment, & the making of the image, and vsing of it to this end, is in vertue a Charme, though no words be vsed. For the bare picture hath no more power of it selfe to hurt the bodie represented, then bare words. All that is done commeth by the worke of the de∣uill, who alone by the vsing of the pi∣cture in that sort, is occasioned so or so, to worke the parties destruction. Secondly, hither we may referre the vsing of Amulets, that is, remedies and preseruatiues against inchantments, or∣ceries,
and bewitchings, made of herbes or some such things, and hanged about the necke for that ende. Thirdly, the vsing of Exorcismes, that is, certaine set formes of words vsed in way of aduration, for some extraor∣dinarie ende. A practise vsuall in the Church of Rome, whereby the priest coiures the salt, holy-water, creame, pittle, oyle, pales, &c. all which are in truth meere inchantements. For howsoeuer the Councell of Trent hath ratified thē by their decrees,▪ & so com∣mended them to general vse within the compasse of the Popish Church; yet they haue in them no power or abiliie of blessing or cursing, either by nature, or Gods appoyntment. Fourthly, In this number we reckon the vsing of the name Iesus, to diue a∣way the deuill, or to peuent Witch∣craft; a common practise among the ig∣norant. Wherein the wonderfull ma∣lice of Satan bewaies it selfe, in making the ignorant people thinke that Christ is a coniurer, and that there is vertue in the naming o his name, to doe some
strange thing. Whereas the truth is, he careth neither for this name, nor for all the names of God, if a man goes no fur∣ther thē the bare repeating of them; but rather delighteth to see them so abused and disgraced. And hereupon it is, that in all coniurations, when he is raised by the Sorcerer, he is willing to be adi∣red by all the holy names of God that are in the Scripture, to the ende, that he may the more deepely seduce his owne instruments, and make them to thinke that these holy names will bind him, & force him to yeeld vnto their desires in the particular, when indeede there is no such matter. Which point through∣ly considered, may admonish vs to take speciall heede of these cunning glozes and deuillish insinuations, whereby he intendeth to delude vs; alway remem∣bring, that the Apostles themselues, to whom the power of working miracles was giuen, did neuer acknowledge the worke to be done by the name of Iesus, but as S. Peter affirmeth, through faith in his name, Act. 3. 6. 16. Fiftly, The crossing of the bodie, to
this ende, that we may be blessed from the deuill. A thing vsuall euen of latter times, specially in Popery; wherein the crosse carrieth the very nature of a Charme, and the vse of it in this māner, a practise of Inchantment. For God hath giuen no such vertue to a crosse, ei∣ther by creation, or speciall priuiledge and appointment. Sixly, the Scratching f a Witch to discouer the Witch. For it is a means which hath no warrant or power there∣unto, either by the word of God, or frō nature, but onely from the deuill; who if he yeeldeth either at crossing, or scrathing, he doth it willingly, and not by compulsion, that he may feede his instrument with a false faith and a super∣stitious cōceit, to the dishonor of God, and their owne ouerthrowe. In a word, looke whatsoeuer actions, gestures, signes, rites, and ceremonies are vsed by men or women to worke wonders, hauing no power to effect the same, ei∣ther by creation and nature, or by spe∣ciall appointment from God, they must all be referred to this head, and recko∣ned
for Charmes. The vse. Now considering that all kinds of Charmes are the deuills watch∣words to cause him to worke the won∣der, and haue no vertue in them, be the words wherein they are conceiued ne∣uer so good: hereby we must be admo∣shed, to take heede of the vse of them, and all other vnlawful ceremonies, both in respect of their formes, be they prai∣ses or praiers, or imprecations; as also in regard of their endes, be they neuer so good in outward appearance. But a∣las! the more lamentable is the case, Charming is in as great request as Phy∣sicke, and Charmers more sought vnto then Physicians in time of neede. There be charmes for all conditions and ages of men, for diuers kinds of creatures, yea for euery disease; as for head-ach, tooth-ach, stitches, and such like. Neuerthe∣lesse, howsoeuer some haue subiected themselues to such base and vngodly meanes, yet the vse hereof by the mer∣cie of God, hath not beene vniuersall. And those that haue sought for helpe, are to be aduised in the feare of God,
to repent of this their sinne, and to take a better course. Let them rightly consi∣der, that they haue hither to depended vpon Satan for helpe, and consequently haue dishonoured God, and renounced lawfull meanes sanctified by him, which should not haue beene done in case of the greatest worldly gaine. For no man may doe euill, that good may come of it. But they that vse the helpe of Char∣mers, and consult with Wisemen, are wont to alleadge something in defence or excuse of their practise. First, that they for their part, meane no hurt, they know no euill by the man whome they seeke to, they onely send to him, and he does them good, how, and in what manner they regard not. Ans. 1. Indeed many be ignorant of the Inchanters courses. But in cases of losse and hindrance, men ought not onely to inquire the meanes, but to waigh and consider the warrantablenes thereof, otherwise they doe not that they doe of faith, and so are guiltie of sinne before God, Rom. 14. last vers. 2. Put the case
they themselues meane no hurt, yet in this action they doe hurt to themselues, by reposing trust in things, which vpon better consideration they shall finde to be dishonourable, and therefore hate∣full to God. Secondly, they alledge; we goe to the Physician for counsell, we take his Recipe, but we know not what it mea∣neth; yet we vse it, and finde benefite; if this be lawfull, why may we not as well take benefit by the Wiseman, whose courses we be ignorant of? Ans. 1. Physick vsed in time and place, is a wor∣thy ordinance of God, and therefore beeing rightly vsed, God giues his bles∣sing to it. But for inchantment it was neuer sanctified by God, and therefore cannot be vsed in any assurance of his blessing. 2. The Physicians receit being a composition and mixture of naturall things, though a man knowes it not, yet he takes it into his stomake, or applies it to his bodie, and sensibly perceiues the vertue and effcacie thereof in the wor∣king: whereas the Charmers course consisteth of words, which neither are
knowne in themselues, nor are manifest in their vse to sense or vnderstanding. And hereby it is plaine, there is not the same reason of Physicke and charmes: the one hauing a sensible operation by vertue giuen it of God; the other in∣sensible, and wrought aboue ordinaric meanes by the worke of Satan. Thirdly, they alleadge, God is mer∣cifull, and he hath prouided a salue for euery sore, they haue vsed other means, but they haue not succeeded, and what should they doe more, may they not in extremitie repaire to the Inchaunter, and see what he can doe for them, ra∣ther then their goods and cattell should be lost and spoyled? Ans. 1. It were bet∣ter for you to bide by the losse, yea to liue and die in any sickenes, then to tempt God by seeking help at charmers hands: for their helpe is dangerous, and commeth from the deuill, where∣upon if ye rest your selues, ye ioyne league with him, and so hazzard eter∣nally the safetie both of bodies and soules. 2. Vse good meanes allowed of God, and when they haue beene vsed
often without successe, proceede not to other courses, but referre your selues to God, and say with Iob, The Lord hath gi∣uen, and the Lord hath taken away: blassed be the name of the Lord, Iob 1. 21. And thus much of Inchanting, the first part of O∣peratiue Witchcraft. Sect. II. The second part is Iugling. Iugling,Iugling is the deluding of the eye with some strange sleight done aboue the or linare course of na∣ture. In this description there are two points necessarily required in the point of Iugling, Delusion of the eye, and extra∣ordinarie Sleight. Delusion is then performed, when a man is made to thinke he sees that, which indeede he sees not. And this is done by the operation of the deuill di∣uersly, but especially three waies. First, by corrupting the humour of the eye, which is the next instrument of sight. Secondly, by altering the ayre, which is the meane by which the obiect or species is carried to the eye. Thirdly, by altering and changing the obiect, that
is, the thing seene, or whereon a man looketh. This deluding of the sense, is noted by Paul, Gal. 3. 1. O foolish Galtians, who hath. bewitched you? where the spirit of God eth a word borrowed from this kind of sorcerers, which in full meaning signifieth thus much: who hath delu∣ded your eyes, and caused you to thinke you see that, which you see not. As if he should haue said, Looke as the Iugler, by his deuillish art, deludeth the out∣ward eye, and maketh men thinke they see that, which indeede they doe not: Euen so the false Apostles, by their er∣roneous doctrine, haue deluded the eies of your minds, and haue caused you, Ga∣latians, to iudge that to be the word of God, which is not, and that to be truth, which is error and falshood. Paul giues vs to vnderstand by the very phrase v∣sed, that there is such a kind of Iugling, as is able to deceiue the eye: For otherwise his comparison would not hold. The second thing required in Iug∣ling, is a Sleight done aboue the order
and course of nature. This is the point which maketh those conueiances to be Witchcraft. For if they were within the compasse of nature, they could not be rightly earmed and reputed Sorceries; considering that diuerse men, by reason of the agilitie of their bodies, & sleight of their hands, are able to worke diuers feats, which seeme strange to the behol∣ders, and yet not meddle with Witch∣craft. Againe, some by the lawfull art of the Optiks, may shew strange & admira∣ble things, by meanes of light and darknesso, and yet may be free from im∣pution of Magicall worke; because they keepe themselues wholly within the power and practise of nature. But sleights done  ouer and aboue delusiō, must passe the ordinarie bounds and precincts of nature, and so are made points of Witchcraft. One memorable example, for the clearer manifestation of this point, we haue in the Scripture, by name in the 7, 8, and 9, Chapters of Exodus, where Moses and Aaron wrought wonders before Pharaoh, tur∣ning the rodde into a serpent, and
water into blood, with many other such like. Now Iannes and Iambres (for so Paul calleth them, 2. Tim▪ 3. 8.) the Magicians of Egypt, did worke the same miracles which Moses and Aaron had done: But here was the difference Moses made true creatures, and wrought true mira∣cles, whereas they did all in appearance and outward shew. For theirs were not true reall actions, but onely Magicall il∣lusions, wrought by the sleight & subtil∣ty of the deuil, in the practise of lugling. And because some thinke, that the serpents and froggs caused by the Ma∣gitians, were true creatures, and all their other workes as really and truely done, as those which Moses and Aaron did, I will here stand a little to shewe and prooue the contrarie, that they were onely in shew and appearance, and not in deede and truth. First then, if the frogs and serpents caused by Iannes and Iambres were true creatures indeede, and their other sleights true and reall works; then they were made and caused either by the de∣uill, or by God himselfe: (for no man
of himselfe can make a rod to become a true serpent.) But this was done neither by the deuill, nor by God, as shall ap∣peae in the sequel. They were not done by the Deuill; because the deuill cannot make a true creature, either serpent or frogge. Hovv doth that appeare? Ans. To make a true creature of any sort, by pro∣ducing the same out of the causes, is a vvork seruing to continue the creation, and is indeede a kinde of creation. Now the deuill as he cannot create a thing at the first, so he is not able to continue the same by a new creation: that beeing a propertie belonging to God onely. For better conceiuing hereof, we must know, that God creaeth two waies: ei∣ther primarily in the beginning, whē he made all things of nothing, Gen. 1. 1. or secōdarily, in the gouernment of the world, when he produceth a true crea∣ture in a true miracle: yet not making it of nothing (as he did in the beginning) but producing it by ministring and in forming the matter immediately by himselfe, without the aide of ordinarie
meanes and instruments appointed af∣ter the creation. The former is creation properly called; the latter a continu∣ance thereof. Both these God hath re∣serued to himselfe, as incommunicable to any creature. As for the succession and propagation of creatures in their kinds, as of men, beasts, birds, fishes, &c. it is onely a continuation of the crea∣tures in their kindes, and is wrought by ordinarie meanes of generation; but is no continuance of the worke of creati∣on. And the deuill by his power may make counterfeits of the true creatures of God, but neither by creating them, nor by continuing their creation; these two beeing workes peculiar and proper to the Deitie alone. Againe, if the deuill could turne a rodde into a true serpent, and water in∣to blood indeed, then his power should be equall to the power of the sonne of God himselfe. For the first miracle that he wrought, was the turning of water into wine, loh. 2. And that was no grea∣ter a worke, then the turning of water into blood, or a rod into a serpent. But
this were most horrible blasphemic, to match the deuill with the Son of God, and his finite power, with the power of the Godhead, by which miracles are wrought. And the truth is, Satan can worke no true miracles; neither doth the text import, that the Magicians did that which they did by miracle, but by Inchantment and Sorcerie, Exod. 7. 11. 22. & 8. 7. In the second place, I affirme that God did not create these creatures, or cause the works of the Magicians: to be effected. And this is prooued by the words of Paul, 2. Tim. 3. 8. who saith, that Iannes and Iambres (which did these workes) withstood Moses and Aa∣ron, whom God had sent, and by whom he wrought. If then God had wrought with the Magicians also, he should haue beene against himselfe, yea, he should haue wrought both waies, for himselfe, and against himselfe, and consequently should haue impeached his ovvne glo∣rie, for the manifestation vvhereof he wrought miracles by Moses and Aaron; which vve may not once thinke of God.
Seeing therefore that these serpents, if they were true creatures, were not crea∣ted either by Satan, because he could not, or by God himselfe, because he would not; it must needes remaine, that they, & all other the Magicians works, were meere illusions, & not otherwise. Yet for the further clearing of the matter in hand: the text it selfe yeeldeth sundrie reasons, to prooue that these acts of the Sorcerers, were but appea∣rances, and not things really produced. First, they that cā not do a lesser thing, can not possibly do a greater. Now Mo∣ses shewes that the Egyptian Inchāters could not do a lesser thing then the tur∣ning of rodds into true serpents, or wa∣ters into blood. For they could not by all their power & skill, preserue them∣selues from the plagues of Egypt, as the botch & other iudgements, Exod. 9. 11. which was a more easie thing, then to make or change a creature. Nay, they were not able to bring forth lice by their inchantment, which seemed to be the least miracle, but acknowledged that to be the inger of God, Ex. 8. 18, 19.
Secondly, the text saith, that Aarons serpent deuoured their serpents, Exod. 7. v. 12. hence it followeth, that theirs could not be true creatures. For in all likelihood they were all of the same kind, and of like quantitie, at least in shew. And it was neuer seene, that one creature should receiue into it selfe an other creature of equall bignesse, with preseruation of it selfe. Neither hath it been obserued ordinarily, that one crea∣ture shold deuoure another of the same kind. It was therefore a worke of Gods secret power in the true serpent, wherby he would shew that the other were not true and real, but formall & imaginarie. Thirdly, if the Magicians had beene able to haue made true frogges and ser∣pents, then by the same power they might have remooued those which Moses brought: for the like abilitie is required in both: yet this they could not doe, but were faine to intreat Moses, to pray for their remooueall. So saith the text, Then pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Pray, &c. Exod. 8. 8. Lastly, the frogges which Moses cau∣sed,
when they were remooued, beeing gathered on eapes, caused great cor∣ruption, and the whole land stanke of them, Exod. 8. 14. Againe, the water turned into blood, made the fish in the riuer to die, and the water to stinko, so that the Egyptians could not drinke of the water of the riuer, Exod. 7. 21. But we read of no such effect of the frogges and waters of the Inchanters, which doubtlesse would haue followed as well as the other, if both had beene true and reall creatures. It remaines therefore, that these were but meere appearances and Iugling trickes, and the Sorcerers themselues Iuglers, yea all their works but sleights, caused by the power and subtiltie of Satan, and no true works, as hath beene said. Thus I haue declared the whole nature, grounds, and kinds of this damnable Art.
CHAP. V. What Witches be, and of how many sorts. HAuing in the former part of this Treatise o∣pened the nature of Witchcraft, and there∣by made way for the better vnderstāding of this Iudiciall Lawe of Moses, I come now to shew who is the practiser hereof, whome the Text prin∣cipally aimeth at, namely, the Witch, whether man or woman. A witch is a Magician, who either by o∣pen or secret league, wittingly and willingly, consenteth to vse the aide and assistance of the Deuill, in the working of wonders. First, I call the Witch [a Magician] to shew what kind of person this is: to wit, such a one as doth professe and practise Witchcraft. For a Magician is a profes∣sor and practiser of this arte, as may ap∣peare,
Act. 8. 9. where Simon a Witch of Samaria is called Magus, or Simon the Magician. Againe, in this generall tearme, I comprehend both sexes or kindes of persons, men and women, excluding neither from beeing Witches. A point the rather to be remembred, because Moses in this place setting downe a Iu∣diciall awe against Witches, vseth a word of the feminine gender [ecasbe∣phah] which in English properly signi∣sieth, a woman Wicth: whereupon some might gather, that women onely were Witches. Howbeit Moses in this word exempteth not the male, but one∣ly vseth a notion referring to the fe∣male, for good causes; principally for these two. First, to giue vs to vnderstand, that the woman beeing the weaker sexe, is sooner intangled by the deuills illusions with this damnable art, then the man. And in all ages it is found true by expe∣rience, that the deuill hath more easily and oftner preuailed with women, then with men. Hence it was, that the He∣brues
of ancient times, vsed it for a pro∣uerb, The more women, the more witches: His first temptation in the beginning, was with Eue a woman, and since he pursueth his practise accordingly, as making most for his aduantage. For where he findeth easiest entrance, and best entertainement, thither will he oft∣nest resert. Secondly, to take away all exception of punishment from any partie that shall practise this trade, and to shewe that weaknes cānot exempt the Witch from death. For in all reason, if any might alledge insirmitie, and plead for fauour, it were the woman, who is wea∣ker then the man. But the Lord saith, if any person of either sexe among his people, be found to haue entred coue∣nant with Satan, and become a practiser of Sorcerie, though it be a woman and the weaker vessell, shee shall not escape, she shall not be suffred to liue, she must die the death. And though weakenes in other cases, may lessen both the crime and the punishment, yet in this it shall take no place.
The second point in the description, is consenting to vse the helpe of the deuill, either by open or secret league, wittingly and willingly: wherein standeth the very thing, that maketh a Witch to be a Witch: The yeelding of consent vpon couenaut. By which clause, two sorts of people are expressely excluded from be∣ing Witches. First, such as be tainted with phrenzy or madnes, or are through weakenesse of the braine deluded by the deuill. For these, though they may be said after a sort to haue societie with Sa∣tan, or rather he with them, yet they cannot giue their consent to vse his aide truely, but onely in imagination; with the true Witch it is farre otherwise. Se∣condly, all such superstitious persons, men or women, as vse Charmes and In∣chantment for the effecting of any thing vpon a superstitious and errone∣ous perswasion, that the Charmes haue vertue in them to doe such things, not knowing that it is the action of the de∣uill by those meanes; but thinking that God hath put vertue into them, as hee hath done into hearbs for Physicke. Of
such persons we gue (no doubt) abun∣dance in this our Land, who though they deale wickedly and sinne grieuous∣ly in vsing Charmes, yet because they intend not to ioyne league with the de∣uill, either secretly, or formally, they are not to be counted Witches. Neuerthe∣les, they are to be aduertisd in the meane time, that their estate is fearefull. For their present vngodly practises haue prepared them already to this cur∣sed trade, and may bring them in time to be the ranckest Witches that can be. Wherefore I aduise all ignorant per∣sons, that know not God nor the Scrip∣tures, to take heede and beware of this dangerous euill, the vse of Charmes. For if they be once conuinced in their consciences, and knowe that God hath giuen no power to such meanes, and yet shall vse them, assuredly they doe in effect consent to the deuill to be helped by him, and thereupon are ioyned in confederacie with him in the confi∣dence of their owne hearts, and so are become Witches. The third and last thing in the de∣scription,
is the end of Witchcraft; The wrking of wōders. Wōders are wrought three wayes (as hath beene shewed,) ei∣ther by Diuination, or by Inchātment, or by lugling: and to one of these three heads,  eates and practises of Witch∣craft to be referred. Now if any man doubt, whether there bsuch Witches indeede as haue beene escribed, let him remember, that beside experience in all ages and countries, wee haue also sundrie ex∣amples of them euen in the Scrip∣tures. In the old Testament we read of Ba∣laam, Numb. 23. who though he be cal∣led a Prophet, because he was so repu∣ted of men, yet indeede he was a noto∣rious Witch, both by profession and practise, and would haue shewed his cunning in that kind vpon the Israelits, if God had not undered him against his will. Of the same kinde were the In∣chanters of Egypt Exod. 7. the Witches of Persia, Dan. 2. and the Pythonisse of Endor, known for a renowned Sor∣cerer ouer all Israel, and therefore Sauls
seruants beeing asked, could presently tell of her, as we read, 1. Sam. 28. In the new Testament, mention is made of Simon, whose name declared his profession his name was Magus, and the text saith, that he vsed Witchcraft, and bewitched the people of , calling himselfe a great man, Act. 8. 9. Whence it was that after his death,Iust. Mart. Apolog. ad Anton. Pi∣um. there was a statue set vp in Rome in honour of him in the daies of Claudius Cesar, with this inscription; Simoni Deo sancto. And it is not vnlike, but Bar-jesus the false prophet at Paphus, was a man addicted to the practises of Witchcraft, and for that cause was called by a kinde of excellency, Elymas the Magician, Act. 13. 6. 8. that is, the great or famous Sor∣cerer. Lastly, the Pythonisse at Philippi, that gat her master much aduantage by diui∣ning, Act. 16. 16. And all these vsed the helpe of the deuill, for the working of wonders. Of Witches there be two sorts: The bad Witch, and the good Witch: for so they are commonly called. The bad Witch, is he or she that hath
consented in league with the Deuill, to vse his helpe, for the doing of hurt one∣ly, as to strike and annoy the bodies of men, women, children, and cattell with diseases, and with death it selfe: so like∣wise to raise tempests, by sea and by land, &c. This is commonly called the binding-Witch. The good Witch, is he or shee that by consent in a league with the deuill, doth vse his help, for the doing of good one∣ly. This cannot hurt, torment, curse, or kill, but onely heale and cure the hurts inflicted vpon men or cattell, by badde Witches. For as they can doe no good, but onely hurt; so this can doe no hurt, but good onely. And this is that order which the Deuill hath set in his king∣dome, appointing to seuerall persons their seuerall offices and charges. And the good Witch is commonly tearmed the vnbinding Witch. Now howsoeuer both these be euill, yet of the two, the more horrible & de∣stable Monster is the good Witch: for looke in what place soeuer there be any bad Witches that hurt onely, there also
the Deuill hath his good ones, who are better knowne then the bad, beeing cō∣monly called Wise-men, or Wise-women. This wil appeare by experience in most places in these countries. For let a mans childe, friend, or cattell be taken with some sore sicknes, or strangely tormen∣ted with some rare and vnknowne dis∣ease, the first thing he doth, is to bethink himselfe and inquire after some Wise∣man or wise-woman, & thither he sends and goes for helpe. When he comes, he first tells him the state of the sicke man: the Witch then beeing certified of the disease, prescribeth either Charmes of words to be vsed ouer him, or other such counterfeit meanes, wherein there is no vertue; beeing nothing els but the deuills Sacraments, to cause him to doe the cure, if it come by Witchraft. Well, the meanes are receiued, appli∣ed, and vsed, the sicke partie according∣ly recouereth, and the conclusion of all is, the vsuall acclamation; Oh happie is the day, that euer I met with such a man or woman to helpe me! Here obserue, that both haue a stroke
in this action: the bad Witch hurt him, the good healeth him; but the truth is, the latter hath done him a thousand fold more harme then the former. For the one did onely hurt the bodie, but the deuill by meanes of the other, though he haue left the bodie in good plight, yet he hath laid fast hold on the soule, and by curing the body, hath killed that. And the partie thus cured, cannot say with Dauid: The Lord is my helper; but the Deuill is my helper; for by him he is cured. Of both these kinds of witches the present Law of Moses must be vn∣derstood. This point well considered, yeeldeth matter both of instruction and practise. Of instruction, in that it shewes the cunning and craftie dealing of Satan, who afficteth and tormenteth the body for the gaine of the soule. And for that purpose hath so ordered his instrumēts, that the bad Witch giues the occasion, by annoying the body or goods; and the good immediatly accomplisheth his de∣sire, by intangling the soule in the bands of errour, ignorance, and false faith. A∣gaine,
this sheweth the blindnes of na∣turall corruption, specially in gnorant and superstitious people. It is their na∣ture to abhorte hurtfull persos, such as bad Witches be, and to count them execrable; but those that doe, them good, they honour and reuerence as wise men and woman, yea secke and vnto thē in times of extremitie, though of all persons in the world they be most odious: and Satan in them  the greatest friend, when he is most like himselfe, and intendeth greatest mis∣chiefe. Let all ignorant persons be adui∣sed hereof in time, to take heede to themselues, and learne to knowe, God and his word, that by light from thence they may better discerne of the sub∣tile practises of Satan and his instru∣ments. For matter of practise; Hence wee learne our duetie, to abhorre the wiz∣zard, as the most pernicious enemie of our saluation, the most effectuall instru∣ment of destroying our soules, and of building vp the deuills kingdome; yea, as the greatest enemie to Gods name,
worship, and glorie, that is in the world, next to Satan himselfe. Of this sort was Simon Magus, who by doing strange cures and workes, made the people of Samaria to take him for some great man, who wrought by the mightie power of God, whereas he did all by the deuill. He therefore beeing a good Witch, did more hurt in seducing the people of God, then Balaam a bad one could with all his curses. And we must remember that the Lord hath set a lawe vpon the witches head, he must not liue, and if death be due to any, then a thou∣sand deaths of right belong to the good Witch. But the patrones of Witches indea∣uour to delude the true interpretation of that lawe. For by a Witch (say they) we must vnderstand a poisoner, and they alledge for that purpose the 70. Inter∣preters, who translate the original word [Mecashephah] by , which signifi∣eth a poisoner. I answer: First; the word vsed by the 70. Interpreters signifieth indeede so much, yet not that onely, but also a
VVitch in generall, as may appeare in sundrie places of Scripture. The A∣postle, reckoning vp Witchcraft among the workes of the flesh,Gal. 5. 10. vseth the Greek word , not for poysoning, but for all Magicall arts, as Hierome testifi∣eth vpon the place. And that it must necessarily be so translated, it is euident, because in the next verse murther is ter∣med another worke of the flesh, vnder which, poisoning and all other kinds of killing are comprehended. And the same word is vsed in the like sense, Reu. 21. 8. and 22. 15. Againe, the word [Mecashephah] which Moses vseth, is ascribed to the In∣chanters of Egypt, in the 7. 8. and 9. chapters of Exodus; and to the wise∣men of Babel, Dan. 2. who are also cal∣led in the translation of the Seauentie: and both sorts of them were witches and sorcerers. The kings of Egypt and Babylon vsed these [Mecashe∣phim] for sundrie purposes, and made them of their counsell; and if they had beene according to this allegation, poi∣soners, it is not like they would haue so
fitted the humors of those two Princes, Pharaoh and Nebuchadnesar, much lesse that they would haue so ordinarily required their presence and assistance, in the businesse there mentioned. Thirdly, there is a peremptorie Law against the wilfull murtherer, Num. 35. 31. that he should be put to death, and that no recompence should be taken for his life. In which place all poisoners are condemned, because they are wilfull murtherers. Now if here in Exodus, by [Mecashephah] we should vnderstand a poisoner, then there should be one and the same law twice propounded for the same thing, which is not like: and there∣fore the word vsed by Moses in this text, signifieth not a poisoner properly, but a Witch.
CHAP. VI. Of the punishment of Witches. HItherto I haue treated of the nature of witch∣craft, both in generall, & particular, and haue also shewed what wit∣ches are, both good and badde. And now I proceede to the second point conside¦red in this Text, the Punishment of a Witch, and that is Death. In the Iudiciall laws of Moses (wher∣of this is one) the Lord appointed sun∣drie penalties, which in qualitie and de∣gree differed one from another, so as ac∣cording to the nature of the offence, was the proportion and measure of the punishment ordained. And of all sinnes, as those were the most heinous in ac∣count, which tended directly to the di∣shonour of God, so to them was assig∣ned death, the greatest and highest de∣gree of punishment. He that despised
the Law of Moses, died without mercy vnder two or three witnesses, Hebr. 10. 28. the punishment of the theefe, was restitution foure-fold, Exod. 22. 1. but the murtherer must be put to death, Numb. 35. 31. the Idolater and Seducer were commanded to be slaine, Exod. 22. 20. Deut. 13. 5. the Blasphemer must be stoned, Leuit. 29. 19. And the VVitch is numbred amongst these grieuous of fendrs: therefore his punishment is as great as any other. For the text saith, he might not be suffered to liue, Exod. 22. 18. But why should the VVitch be so sharply censured? And what should mooue the Lord to allot so high a de∣gree of punishment to that sort of offen∣ders? Ans. The cause was not the hurt, which they brought vpon men in bo∣die, goods, or outward estate. For there be sundrie that neuer did harme, but good onely. VVe reade not of any great hurt that was done by the Inchanters of Egypt, or by the Pythonisse of Endor, or by Simon Magus in Samaria. And those diuining VVitches, which haue
taken vpon them to foretell things to come, hurt not any, but themselues, yet they must die the death. This therefore is not the cause. But what if these doe hurt, or kill, must they not then die? yes verely, but by another law, the law of Murther, and not by the law of VVitch∣craft. For in this case, he dieth as a mur∣therer, and not as VVitch, and so he should die, though he were no VVitch. The cause then of this sharpe punish∣ment, is the very making of a league with the deuill, either secret or open, whereby they couenant to vse his helpe for the working of wonders. For by ver∣tue of this alone it commeth to passe, that VVitches can doe strange things, in Diuining, Inchanting, and Iugling. Now let it be obserued, of what horrible impietie they stand guiltie before God, who ioyne in confederacie with Sa∣tan. Hereby they renounce the Lord that made them, they make no more account of his fauour and protection, they doe quite cut themselues off from the couenant made with him in Bap∣tisme, from the communion of the
Saints, from the true worship and ser∣uice of God. And on the contrarie they giue themselues vnto Satan, as their god, whome they continually feare and serue. Thus are they become the most detestable enemies to God, and his peo∣ple, that can be. For this cause Samuel told Saul, that rebellion was as the sinne of Witchcraft: that is, a most heinous & detestable sinne in the sight of God. The traytour, that doth no hurt to his neighbour, but is willing and readie to doe him the best seruices that can be desired, is notwithstanding by the law of Nations, no beter then a dead man, because he betraies his Soueraigne, and consequently cannot be a friend vnto the Common-wealth. In like manner, though the Witch were in many re∣spects profitable, and did no hurt, but procured much good; yet because he hath renounced God his king and go∣uernour, and hath bound himselfe by other lawes to the seruice of the ene∣mie of God, and his Church, death is his portion iustly assigned him by God; he may not liue.
CHAP. VII. The application of the do∣ctrine of Witchcraft to our times. THus hauing deliuered the true sense and in∣terpretation of this Iu∣diciall Law, both con∣cerning the sinne of Witchcraft, & the per∣sons by whom this sinne is practised; it remaineth now that I should make some vse thereof, by way of application to the Witches of our times. In doing whereof, foure particular Questions of moment, are to be hand∣led. I. Whether the Witches of our times, be the same with those, that are here condemned by the law of Moses? for some there be, and those men of lear∣ning, and members of Gods Church, that hold they are not. II. If they be the same (as it shall appeare they are) then how we may in these daies be able to discerne, and discouer
a Witch? III. What remedie may be vsed against the hurt of Witchcraft? IV. Whether our Witches are to be punish∣ed with death, and that by vertue of this Lawe of Moses? Sect. I. I. Question. Whether the Witches of our times, be the same with those that are here condemned by Moses Law? Ans. If we doe well consider the qualitie, and condition of the Witches of our daies, we shall easily see that they be the same. For experience sheweth, that whether they be men or women, but especially aged women, they be such persons, as doe renounce God, and their Baptisme, and make a league with the deuil, either secretly or openly; in which the deuill bindeth himselfe to teach them certaine rites and ceremonies, whereby they may be able to worke wonders, as to stirre vp tempests, to re∣ueale secrets, to kill or hurt men, and cattell, or to cure and doe good, accor∣ding to the tenour of their couenant.
TheIoan. Fr. Pie. Mand. de praenot. l 1. c. 2. confessions of Witches recor∣ded in the Chronicles of countries through all Europe,Nicol. Remi∣gius, Daemo∣nola. c. 1. c. 5. doe with common consent declare and manifest this point. So that howsoeuer our VVitches may differ in some circumstances from those in the time of Moses, as either in the in∣struments, and meanes vsed, or in the manner and forme, or in some particu∣lar ends of their practises; yet in the sub∣stance and foundation of Witchcraft, they agree with them. For both of them haue made a couenant with the Deuill one way or other, and by vertue thereof haue wrought wonders aboue the or∣der of nature. Agreeing therefore in the verie foundation and forme of Witch∣craft, which is the league, and in the proper end, the working of wonders: they must needs be in substance and ef∣fect the same with the Witches menti∣oned by Moses. And yet this point is denied by some, and the Witches of these daies haue their patrons, who vse reasons to prooue, that now we haue none such as we speake of. Their reasons are specially three.
First, they labour to take away the forme of Witchcraft, affirming, that there can be no confederacie made be∣tweene the Witch and the Deuill, and that for foure causes. I. In euery league and contract the parties must be murally bound each to other: now betweene man or woman, and the deuill, there can be no bond made, and though there could, yet man is bound in conscience to God, to re∣nounce the bond of obedience to Sa∣tan, and to breake the couenant. Ans. There be two sorts of leagues; lawfull, and vnlawfull: in all lawfull leagues it is true, that there must be a mutuall bond of both parties, each to other, which may not be dissolued; but in vnlawfull compacts it is otherwise. And no man can say that this league betweene a Witch and the Deuill is lawfull, but wicked, and damnable, yet beeing once made, howsoeuer vnlawfully, it is a league and compact. This therefore prooueth not, that there can be no co∣uenant at all, but that there can be no lawfull couenant betwixt them, which
no man will denie. II. Satan and the Witch are of di∣uers natures: he is spirituall, they are corporall substances: therefore there can be no league made betweene them. Ans. The reason is not good. For euen God himselfe, who is of nature most simple and spirituall, made a couenant with Adam, renued the same vnto A∣braham, Isaac, and Iacob: and continu∣eth it with his Church on earth, from age to age. Hence it appeareth, that di∣uersitie of nature in the parties, can not hinder the making of a couenant. And therefore if man may make couenant with God himselfe, who is most spiritu∣all; then may he likewise come in league with the deuill, whose substance is not so pure and sprituall. Againe, we must remember, that in making of a coue∣nant, it is sufficient, that the parties con∣sent and agree in will & vnderstanding, though other circumstances and rites, which are but signes of confirmation, be wanting. Be it then, that Satan hath not a bodily substance, as man hath, yet considering that man is indued with
vnderstanding, to coceiue of things, as the deuill doth, and hath also will to yeeld consent, and approbation there∣unto, though in a corrupt and wicked manner, there may passe a confedera∣cie, and a couenant may be made, and stand in force betweene them. III. Whatsoeuer the deuill doth in this compact, he doth it in fraud and deceit, neuer meaning in his promises, as man doth, and when both parties meane not one & the same thing, how can they growe to agreement in any kind? Ans. Suppose this be true, yet it onely prooueth, that the couenant made betweene them, was deceitfull and vnlawfull. But what of that? stil it remaineth a bargaine howsoeuer: for it faileth onely in the circumstance, the substance, which is the consent of the parties, was not wanting. IV. VVitches of our times (say they) are aged persons, of weake braines, and troubled with abundance of melancho∣lie, and the deuill taketh aduantage of the humor, and so deludes them, per∣swading that they haue made a league
with him, when they haue not, and con∣sequently moouing them to imagine, that they doe, and may doe strange things, which indeed are done by him∣selfe, and not by them. Ans. This reason is a meere melancho∣like conceit, without ground. And the contrarie is a manifest truth, that they are not so, as is affirmed, parties decei∣ued by reason of their humors. For first, our VVitches are as wise and politike, yea as craftie and cunning in all other matters, as other men be; whereas brainsicke persons troubled with me∣lancholy, if their vnderstanding be dis∣tempered in one action, it will be faul∣tie likewise in others, more or lesse. A∣gaine, our VVitches know that they sinne in their practises of VVitchcraft, and therefore they vse subtill meanes to couer them, and he that would conuict them, must haue great dexteritie to goe beyond them. Now if they were per∣sons deluded, through corruption of any humors; looke what humour caused them to doe a thing, the same would vrge them to disclose it. Thirdly, they
are also of the same stamp, they take the same courses in all their practises, their consent in word and action is vniuer∣sall. Men of learning haue obserued, that all Witches through Europe, are of like cariage and behauiour in their examinations, and conuictions: they vse the same answers, refuges, defenses, protestations. In a word, looke what be the practises and courses of the Wit∣ches in England, in any of these parti∣culars, the same be the practises of the Witches in Spaine, Fraunce, Italie, Germanie, &c. Wherefore the case is cleare, they are not deluded by Sathan, through the force of humour▪ s is a∣uouched: for such persons, according as they are diuersly ake, would shewe themseles diuersly affected, and varie in their speeches, actions, and con∣ceipts, both publike and priuate. Fourth∣ly, our Witches are wont to communi∣cate their skill to others by tradition, to teach and instruct their children and posteritie, and to initiate them in the grounds and practises of their owne rade, while they liue, as may appeare
by the confessions recorded in the Courts of all countries. But if they were persons troubled with melancholie, their conceipts would die with them. For conceits, and imaginarie ancies, which rise of any humour, cannot be conuayed from partie to partie, no more then the humour it selfe. Lastly, if this slight might serue to defend Witches vnder pretence of delusion through corrupted humours, then here were a couer for all manner of sinnes. For example: a fellon is apprehended for robberie or murther, and is brought before the Iudge: Vpon examination he confesseth the fact, beeing conuicted the law proceeds to condemnation. The same mans freinds come in, and alledge before the Iudge in this māner: This man hath a crazie braine, and is troubled with melancholy, and though he hath confessed the fact, yet the truth is, it was not he, but the deuill, who him∣selfe committed the murther, and made him thinke he did it, when he did it not, & hereupon he hath confessed. Would any man thinke, that this were a reason∣able
allegation, and a sufficient meane to mooue the Iudge to acquite him? Assuredly if it were, vpon the same ground might any sinne be laid vpon the deuils backe, and all good lawes and iudiciall proceedings be made voide. Therefore howsoeuer the patrons of Witches be learned men, yet they are greatly deceiued in fathering the practises of Sorcerie vpon a melancho∣like humour. But for the further ratifying of their assertion, they proceede, and vse this ar∣gument: They which confesse of them∣selues things false, and impossible, must needs be parties deluded, but our Wit∣ches doe this, when they be examined or consulted with, as that they can raise tempests, that they are caried through the aire in a moment, from place to place, that they passe through key∣holes, and clifts of doores, that they be sometimes turned into catts, hares, and other creatures; lastly, that they are brought into farre countries, to meete with Herodias, Diana, and the Deuill, and such like; all which are mere fables,
and things impossible. Ans. We must make a difference of Witches in regard of time. There is a time, when they first beginne to make a league with Satan, and a time also after the league is made and confirmed. When they first beginne to grow in confederacie with the deuill, they are sober, and their vnderstanding sound, they make their match waking, and as they thinke wisely enough, knowing both what they promise the deuill, and vpon what conditions, and therefore all this while it is no delusion. But after they be once in the league, and haue beene intangled in compact with the deuill (considerately as they thinke, for their owne good and aduantage) the case may be otherwise. For then reason and vnderstanding may be depraued, memorie weakned, and all the powers of their soule blemished. Thus becom∣ming his vassalls, they are deluded, and so intoxicated by him, that they wil run into thousands of fantasticall imagina∣tions, holding themselues to be trans∣formed into the shapes of other crea∣tures,
to be transported in the ayre into other countries, yea to do many strange things, which in truth they doe not. I come now to their second reason. The Witches of our age (say they) were not knowne in the daies of Moses, nor of Christ, therfore that law concerneth them not. To this I answer two waies: First, that their argument is naught: for by the same reason the Papists might auouch the lawfulnes of the images of Saints, as of Peter, Paul, and others, yea of Christ himselfe, because they were not knowne in the daies of Moses, and therefore could not be condemned in the second Commandement. Whereas contrarily, the spirit of God, hath so fra∣med and penned the lawes Morall, and Iudiciall, which concerne man, as that they fetch within their compasse all sinnes of all ages, and condemne them. And therefore whatsoeuer is against the Law of God written by Moses, though it were not knowne, nor heard of, either when the Law was made, or afterward, is yet condemned by the same Law.
Againe, I answer, that our Witches are the same that were in Moses time: and therfore by their owne reason must needes be condemned by this Iudiciall lawe. For by the records of auncient writers it is prooued, that about a 1200. yeares before Christs birth, shortly af∣ter the Troian warre, which was 100. yeare and vpward before the building of the Temple by Salomon, there were the same VVitches that are now, as the Circes, and Syrenes, and such like, mentio∣ned in theHomer . lib 10. & 12. narration of that warre, as is manifest to them that knowe the sto∣rie. Againe, 500. yeares before Christ when the Romans made theirSub tit. de intur. als{que}; delit c. 9. Sence lib Nat . est 4. . &c. twelue Tables, which comprised all the lawes whereby that famons Commonvvealth vvas gouerned, they made one expresse∣ly against Witches, euen the same vvith these of our time, for practising the same things, as blasting of corne, hur∣ting of cattell, mer, vvomen, and chil∣dren, &c. And for the time of Christ, though there be no particular mention made of any such Witches; yet thence it
followeth not, that there were none: for all things that then happened, were not recorded: and I would faine know of the chiefe patrons of them, whether those parties possessed with the deuill, and troubled with strange diseases, whom Christ healed, and out of whom he cast deuills, were not bewitched with some such people, as our Witches are? if they say no, let them if they can prooue the contrarie. The third & last reason is this: Christ at his comming abolished all sinne, and therfore miracles & witchcraft thē cea∣sed also. The Apostle saith, that he spoiled principalities and powers, and triumphed o∣uer them vpon the crosse, Coloss. 2. 15. Ans. This argument is friuolous, ser∣uing as well to iustifie the traytor, the theefe, and the murtherer, as the witch. For whereas it is alleadged, that Christ abolished all sinne; we must vnderstand how: not simply, so as sinne should be no more, but onely in part, in this life, reseruing the final destruction thereof to the last iudgement. Againe, sinne is not abolished, no not in part vnto all,
but onely to the members of Christ. Whereupon the Apostle sah, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, Rom. 8. 1. because no sinne is imputed vnto them. But vnto Witches, and all the enemies of Christ, sinne is imputed, and not abolished. To conclude, howsoeuer much is said in their defence, yet the first part is cleare affirmatiuely, that the Witches of our time are the same with the Wit∣ches that were in Moses time, in truth and substance. And so much for the first Question. Sect. II. II. Quest. How we may be able in these our daies to discerne and discouer a Witch? Ans. The discouerie of a Witch is a matter Iudiciall, as is also the discoue∣rie of a theefe and a murtherer, and be∣longeth not to euerie man, but is to be done Iudicially by the Magistrate ac∣cording to the forme and order of Law; who therefore is set apart for such ends, and hath authoritie both to discouer,
and to punish the enemies of God and his Church. Now for the Magistrates directiō in this busines, we are to know, that in the discouerie of a VVitch, two things are required, Examination, and Conuiction. § 1. Examination is an action of the Magistrate, making speciall enquirie of the crime of Witchcraft. This action must haue the beginning from occasi∣ons, and presumptions. For the Magi∣strate though he be a publike person, and stand in the roome of God, for the execution of iustice, yet he may not take vpon him to examine whom, and how himselfe willeth, of any crime; neither ought he to proceed vpon sleight cau∣ses, as to shewe his authoritie ouer o∣thers, or vpon sinister respects, as to re∣nenge his malice, or to bring parties in∣to danger or suspition; but he must pro∣ceede vpon speciall presumptions. Those I call presumptions, which doe at least probably, and coniectutally note one to be a VVitch; and these are certaine signes, whereby the partie may be discouered: I will touch some
few of them. The first in order is this: If any per∣son, man, or woman, be notoriously de∣famed for such a partie. Notorious de∣samation, is a common report of the greater sort of people, with whom the partie suspected dwelleth, that he or she is a Witch. This yeeldeth a strong su∣spition. Yet the Magistrate must be wa∣rie in receiuing such a report. For it falls our oftentimes, that the innocent may be suspected, and some of the better sort notoriously desamed. Therfore the wise and prudent Iudge ought carefully to looke, that the report be made by men of honestie and credit: which if it be, he may then proceede to make further in∣quirie or the fact. The second is, if a fellow-witch or Magician giue testimonie of any person to be a Witch, either voluntarily, or at his or her examination, or at his or her death. This is not sufficient for conui∣ction, or condemnation, but onely a fit presumption to -strait examinati∣on of the partie to be made. Thirdly, if after cursing there follow∣eth
death, or at least some mischiefe. For VVitches are wont to practise their mis∣chieuous facts by cursing and banning. This also is a sufficient matter of Exami∣nation, not of Conuiction. Fourthly, if after enmitie, quarelling, or threatning, a present mischiefe doth follow. For parties deuillishly disposed, after corsings doe vse threatnings; and that also is a great presumption. Fiftly, if the partie suspected be the sonne or daughter, the manseruant or maidseruant, the familiar friend, eere neighbour, or old cōpanion of a known and conuicted witch. This may be like∣wise a presumption. For witchcraft is an art that may be learned, and conuei∣ed from man to man, and often it falleth out, that a VVitch dying leaueth some of the forenamed, heires of her witch∣craft. Sixtly, some doe adde this for a pre∣sumption, If the partie suspected be found to haue the deuills marke: for it is commonly thought, when the Deuill maketh his couenant with then, he al∣waies leaueth his marke behinde him,
whereby he knowes them for his owne. Now if by some casuall meanes, such a marke be descried on the bodie of the partie suspected, whereof no euident reason in nature can be giuen, the Ma∣gistrate in this case may cause such to be examined, or take the matter into his owne hand, that the truth may appeare. Lastly, if the partie examined be vn∣constant, or contrarie to himselfe in his deliberate answers, it argueth a guiltie minde and conscience, which stoppeth the freedome of speech and vtterance, and may giue iust occasion to the Magi∣strate to make further enquirie. I say nor if he or shee be timorous and fearefull: for a good man may be fearefull in a good cause, sometimes by nature, some∣times in regard of the presence of the Iudge, and the greatnes of the andience. Againe, some may be suddenly taken, and others naturally want the libertie of speech, which other men haue. And these are the causes of feare & astonish∣ment, which may befall the good, as well as the bad. Touching the manner of Examina∣tion,
there be two kinds of proceeding; either by a single Question, or by some Torture. A single question is, when the Magistrate himselfe onely maketh en∣quirie, what was done or not done, by bare and naked interrogations. A tor∣ture is, when besides the enquirie in words, he vseth also the racke, or some other violent meanes to vrge confessi∣on. This course hath beene taken in some countries, and may no doubt law∣fully and with good conscience be vsed, howbeit not in euery case, but onely vp∣on strong and great presumptions go∣ing before, and when the partie is obsti∣nate. And thus much for Examination: now followeth Conuiction. § 2. Conuiction, is an action of the Magistrate, after iust examination, dis∣couering the Witch. This action must proceed from iust & sufficient proofes, and not from bare presumptions. For though presumptions giue occasion to examine, yet they are no sufficient cau∣ses of conuiction. Now in generall the prooses vsed for conuiction are of two sorts, some be lesse sufficient, some be
more sufficient. The lesse sufficient proofes are these. First, in former ages, the party suspected of Witchcraft, was brought before the Magistrate, who caused red hoat yron, and scalding water to be brought, and commanded the partie to put his hand in the one, or to take vp the other, or both: and if he tooke vp the yron in his bare hand without burning, or endured the water without scalding, hereby he was cleared, and iudged free, but if he did burne or scalde, he was then con∣uicted, and condemned for a Witch. But this manner of conuiction, hath long agone beene condemned for wic∣ked and diabolicall, as in truth it is, con∣sidering that thereby many times, an innocent man may be condemned, and a rancke Witch scape vnpunished. Againe, our owne times haue affor∣ded instances of such weake and insuffi∣cient proofes. As first, Scratching of the suspected partie, and present recouerie thereupon. Secondly, burning of the thing bewitched, if it be not a man, as a hogge, or oxe, or such like creature,
is imagined to be a forcible meanes to cause the Witch to discouer her selfe. Thirdly, the burning of the thatch of the suspected parties house, which is thought to be able to cure the partie be∣witched, and to make the Witch to be∣wray her selfe. Besides these, in other countries they haue a further proofe iustified by some that be learned. The partie is taken, and bound hand and foote, and cast crosse waies into the water: if she sincke, shee is counted innocent, and escapeth, if shee fleete on the water, and sincke not, she is taken for a Witch, conuicted, and accordingly punished. All these proofes are so farre from beeing sufficient, that some of them, if not all, are after a sort practises of witch∣craft, hauing in them no power or ver∣tue to detect a Sorcerer, either by Gods ordināce in the creation, or by any spe∣ciall appointment since. For what ver∣tue can the Scratching of a Witch haue to cure a hurt? where doe we finde it in any part of the word of God, that scrat∣ching should be vsed? or what promise
of recouerie vpon the vse thereof. But how then comes it to passe, that helpe is often procured by these & such like meanes? Ans. It is the sleight and subtiltie of the Deuill vpon scratching the Witch, to remooue such hurts, as himselfe hath inflicted, that thereby he may invre men to the practise of wicked and superstitious meanes. And what I say of scratching, the same may be en∣larged to all other proofes of this kind before named. God hath imprinted no such vertue in their natures to these purposes, or added the same vnto them by speciall and extraordinarie assign∣ment. That therefore which is brought to passe by them when they are vsed, commeth from the Deuill. And yet to iustifie the casting of a Witch into the water, it is alleadged, that hauing made a couenant with the Deuill, shee hath renounced her Bap∣tisme, and hereupon there growes an Antipathie betweene her, and water. Ans. This allegation serues to no pur∣pose: for all water is not the water of Baptisme, but that onely whih is vsed
in the very act of Baptisme, and not be∣fore nor after. The element out of the vse of the Sacrament, is no Sacrament, but returnes againe to his common vse. To goe yet further, an other insuffi∣cient proofe, is the testimonie of some wizzard. It hath beene the ordinarie cu∣stome of some men, when they haue had any thing ill at ease, presently to go or send to some wise man, or wise wo∣man, by whome they haue beene infor∣med, that the thing is bewitched; and to winne credit to their answer, some of them haue offred to shew the Witches face in a glasse: whereof the partie ha∣uing taken notice, returnes home, and detecteth the man of woman of witch∣craft. This I graunt may be a good pre∣sumption to cause strait examination: but a sufficient proofe of conuiction it can not be. For put the case the grand-Iurie at the Assises goeth on a partie su∣spected, and in their consultation the Deuill, comes in the likenesse of some knowne man, and tells them the person in question is indeede a Witch, and of∣fers withall to confirme the same by
oath: should the Inquest receiue: his oath or accusation to condemne the man? Assuredly no: and yet that is as much as the testimonie of another wiz∣zard, who onely by the Deuils helpe re∣uealeth the Witch. If this should be ta∣ken for a sufficient proofe; the Deuill would not leaue one good man aliue in the world. Againe, all other presumptions com∣monly vsed, are insufficient, though they may minister occasion of triall: for ex∣ample; If a man in open court should affirme before the Iudge; Such a one fell out with me, and cursed me, giuing me threatning words, that I should smart for it, and some mischiefe should light vpon my person or goods, ere it were long. Vpon these curses and threats, presently such and such euills befell me, and I suffered these and these losses. The Magistrate thus informed may safely proceed to inquire into the matter, but he hath not frō hence any sure ground of conuiction. For it pleaseth God many times to lay his hand vpon mens per∣sons and goods, without the procure∣ment
of Witches. And yet experience shewes, that ignorant people, who car∣rie a rage against them, wil make strong proofes of such presumptions, where∣upon sometime. Iurers doe giue their Verdict against parties innocent. Lastly, if a man beeing dangerously sicke, and like to die, vpon suspition will take it on his death, that such a one hath bewitched him, it is an allegation of the same nature, which may mooue the Iudge to examine the partie, but it is of no moment for conuiction. The reason is, because it was but the suspition of one man, and a mans owne word for himselfe, though in time of extremitie, when it is likely he will speake nothing but the truth, is of no more force then another mans word against him. And these are the proofes, which men in place and time haue ordinarily vsed, for the detecting of such vngodly persons: but the best that may be saide of them, is, that they be all either false or vncertaine signes, and vnauaileable for the cōdemnation of any man what∣soeuer.
Now follow the true proofes, and sufficient meanes of conuiction, all which may be reduced to two heads. The first, is the free and voluntarie confession of the crime, made by the partie suspected and accused after ex∣amination. This hath beene thought generally of all men both Diuines, and Lawyers, a proofe sufficient. For what needs more witnes, or further en∣quirie, when a man from the touch of his owne conscience acknowledgeth the fault. And yet the patrons and aduocates of Witches, except against it, and obiect in this manner: That a man or woman may confesse against themselues an vn∣truth, beeing vrged thereto either by feare or threatning, or by a desire, vpon some griefe conceiued, to be out of the world; or at least, beeing in trouble, and perswaded it is the best course to saue their liues, and obtaine libertie, they may vpon simplicitie be induced to confesse that, which they neuer did, e∣uen against themselues. Ans. I say not, that a bare confession is sufficient, but a
confession after due examination taken vpon pregnant presumptions. For if a man examined, without any ground or presumptions, should openly acknow∣ledge the crime, his act may be iustly suspected, as groūded vpon by-respects; but when proceeding is made against him at the first, vpon good probabili∣ties, and hereupon he be drawn to a free confession, that which he hath manife∣sted therby, cannot but be a truth. Other points of exception vrged by them, are of small moment, and may easily be an∣swered out of the grounds before deli∣uered, and therefore I omit them. Now if the partie held in suspition, be examined, and will not confesso, but obstinately persist in deniall, as com∣monly it falleth out; then there is ano∣ther course to be taken by a second suffi∣cient meanes of conuiction: which is the testimonie of two witnesses, of good and honest report, auouching be∣fore the Magistrate vpon their owne knowledge, these two things: Either that the partie accused, hath made a league with the deuill; or hath done
some knowne practises of Witchcraft. And all arguments that doe necessarily prooue either of these, beeing brought by two sufficient witnesses, are of force fully to conuince the partie suspected. For example. First, if they can prooue that the par∣tie suspected, hath inuocated and cal∣led vpon the deuill, or desired his helpe. For this is a branch of that worshippe, which Satan bindeth his instruments to giue vnto him. And it is a pregnant proofe of a league formerly made be∣tweene them. Secondly, if they can giue euidence, that the partie hath intertained a fami∣liar spirit, and had conference with it, in forme or likenesse of a mouse, catte, or some other visible creature. Thirdly, if they affirme vpon oath, that the suspected person hath done a∣ny action or worke, which necessarily inferreth a couenant made; as that he hath shewed the face of a man suspe∣cted, beeing absent, in a glasse; or vsed Inchantment, or such like feats. In a word, if they both can auouch vpon
their own proper knowledge, that such a man or woman suspected, haue put in practise any other actions of Witch∣craft, as to haue diuined of things afore they came to passe, and that perempto∣rily; to haue raised tempests, to haue caused the forme of a dead man to ap∣peare, or the like, standing either in di∣uination or operation, it prooueth suffi∣ciently that he or she is a Witch. But some may say, if these be the one∣ly strong proofes for the conuiction of a Sorcerer, it will be then impossible to put any one to death, because the league with Satan is closely made, and the pra∣ctises of Sorerie are also very secret, and hardly can a man be brought, which vpon his owne knowledge, can auerre such things. I answer, howsoeuer both the ground and practise be secret, and to many vn∣knowne, yet there is a way to come to the knowledge thereof. For it is vsuall with Satan to promise any thing, till the league be ratified: but when it is once made, and the partie intangled in socie∣tie with him, then he indeauoureth no∣thing
more, then his or her diseuefie, and vseth all meanes possible to diclose them. So that what ende soeuer the Witch propoundeth to her selfe in the league, he intende nothing else, but her vtter confusion. Therefore in the iust iudgement of God, it often filleth out, that these which are true witches indeede; shall either by confession disco∣uer themselues, or by true testimonie be conuinced. The causes which mooue the deuill not onely to affect, but to ha∣sten this discouer it, are two principally. The first is, his malice towards all men, in so high a degree, that he cannot indure they should enioy the world, or the benefits of this life (if it were possi∣ble) so much as one houre. Though therefore by vertue of the precontract, he be cock-sure of his instrument, yet his malice is not herewith satisfied, till the partie be brought to light, and con∣demned to death? Which may be a ca∣ueat so all ill disposed persons, that they beware of yeelding themselues vnto him. The second, is his infatiable desire of
the present and full possession of them, whome he hath got within the bonds of the couenant. For though he haue good hope of them, yet is he not certen of their continuance, The reason is, be∣cause some united with him in confede∣racie, haue through the great mercie of God, by carefull vsage of holy meanes, and faith in Christ▪ been reclaimed and deliuered out of his bondage, and so at length freed from his couenant, so as he hath eternally left them. Hence it is, that he labours by might and maine, to keepe them in ignorance, and to pre∣uent the vsage of meanes effectuall to ther conuersion, by laying a plot for their discouerie. Bt how then comes it to passe, that all such persons are not speedily detected, but some liue long, and others die without any mans priui∣tie? Ans. The reasons hereof may be diuers. First, because some one or more of them may belong to Gods election; and therefore albeit for causes-best knowne to himselfe, he may suffer them for a time to be holden in the snares
of Satan, yet at length in mercie he re∣claimes them, and in the mene time suffreth not the deuill to exercise the depth of his malice in discouering them to their confusion. Againe, for others, the Lord may in iustice and anger suf∣fer them not to be disclosed, that liuing vnder the meanes, where they might be reclaimed, and wilfully contemning the same; they may liue to fill vp the measure of their iniquities, and thereby be made finally inexcusable, that they may receiue their iuster condemnation. Secondly, tho deuill suffereth some to liue long vndisclosed, that they may exercise the greater measure of his ma∣lice in the world; specially if they be parties malitiously bent to doe hurt to men, and other creatures. Thirdly, some Witches doe warily agree with the deuill, for a certaine tearme of yeares, dring which time he bindeth himselfe not to hurt them, but to be at their command. And Satan is carefull, specially in case of his owne aduantage, to keepe touch with them, that they may the more strongly cleae
vnto him on their parts. But if the case so stand, that neither the partie suspe∣cted confesseth, nor yet sufficient vvit∣nesses can be produced, vvhich are able to conuict him or her, either of these two waies: we haue no warrant out of the word either in generall, or in speci∣all, to put such a one to death. For though presumptions be neuer so strong▪ yet they are not proofes suffici∣ent for conuiction, but onely for exami∣nation. I would therefore with and aduise all Iurers, who giue their Verdict vpon life and death in courts of Assises, to take good hede, that as they he diligent in zeale of Gods glorie; and the good of his Church, in derecting of Witches, by all sufficient and lawfull meanes; so likewise they would be carefull what they doe, and not to condemne any par∣tie suspected, vpon bare presumptions, without sound and sufficient proofes, hat they be not guiltie through their owne  of shedding innocent blood.
Sect. III. Quest. III. Whether a man may pre∣uent the danger of Witchcraft, and if he may, than what Remedies he may lawfully and effectually vse against it? To this Question we answer affirma∣tiuely, that a man may. And for the ma∣nifestation of this point, the Remedies of Witch craft are to be considered. In the hadling whereof, I will proceede in this order. First, to set down the true, lawfull, and  allow¦ed and prescribed in the word. Second∣ly, the vnlawfull & superstitions meanes prescribed and practised in the Romish Church. Lawfull Remedies of Witchcraft, be of two sorts; Preseruatiue, and Restora∣tiue. Preseruatiue are those, which keep a man from the hurt of Witchcraft. And these be of two sorts; either such as keepe safe the persons of men, or such as preserue the places of mens aboad. For the persons of men, there is one soueraigne preseruatiue; And that is, to be within the couenant of grace,
made and confirmed in the Gospel by the blood of Christ, and that not out∣wardly in profession onely, as all those be which are within the compasse of the Church, but truly and indeede as all the elect are. And a man is then in the couenant, when God of his grace in the vse of the meanes, giues him a true knowledge of the nature of it, and of conditions required in the same on both parts: and withall giues him a true and liuely faith, to apprehend and apply to himselfe the promise of God in Christ, touching remission of sinnes, and life euerlasting; yet further to shew forth his faith by the fruits of true re∣pentance, and new obedience. When a man in this manner comes to be brought within the couenant, and is in Christ, he then receiues assurance of Gods auour, and to him belong the promises depending thereupon, to wit, not onely of the comfortable presence of Gods spirit, but of the presence and speciall protection of his holy Angels, to pitch their tents about him, to keepe him safe in soule and bodie, from the
power and malicious practises of Satan, and his members. The ground of this assistance is laide downe in the word, Psalm. 92. 10. He shall giue his Angels charge ouer thee, &c. And the speach of Balaam confirmeth the same, who when he was hired of Balac to curse Gods people, and had oftentimes assayed to doe it, but could not, at last he brake out into this confession, There is no witch∣craft against Iacob, nor sorcerie against Is∣rael▪ (for so the words are to be read, ac∣cording to the true meaning, and cir∣cumstances of the text.) As if he should haue said, I was of thine opinion (O Ba∣lac) that Israel might be cursed, but after triall made, I found by good ex∣perience, that I could doe that people of God no hurt by mine Inchantments. Howbeit we must here remember, that the promise of protection made vnto Gods children, is not absolute, but admitteth exception, as all other pro∣mises of temporall blessing doe, and that in this manner: Thou shalt be par∣taker of this or that blessing, and this or that curse shall be remooued, if it be ex∣pedient
for thee: but if for speciall causes to te thy faith, and to exercise thy pa∣tience, I make deniall, thou must rest thy selfe  in my good will and pleasure. By warrant of this doctrine, a questi∣on commonly mooued, may be resol∣ued: Whether the seruant and child of God, may be bewitched or nor? Out of that which hath beene said, I answer, he may; and that is plaine by the word. For by Gods permission, the holy bodie of Christ himselfe, was by Satan transported from place to place, Matth. 4. Righteous Iob was miserably afflicted in his bodie by the power of the deuill, and his children, who no doubt were Gods seruants, and brought vp in his feare, as their father was, were slaine by the same power. Yea, Christ himselfe testifieth, Luk. 13. 16. That a daughter of Abraham, that is, of the faith of Abraham, had beene troubled eighteene yeares with a spirit of infirmitie, which the deuill caused by bowing her bodie to∣gether, so as she could not lift her selfe vp. v. 11. And therefore whereas some
men are of this minde, that their faith is so strong, that all the Witches in the world, and all the deuills in hell cannot hurt them; they are much deceiued. This their faith is but a fond presumpti∣on, and no true faith. For no man in the earth can absolutely assure himselfe of safetie and protection from the De∣uill and if any could, it were the child of God; but Salomon saith, that all out∣ward things may come alike both to the good and to the bad, Eccle. 9. 2. Howbeit in this case there is great difference between the seruant of God, and an vnrepentant sinner. Though the godly man be not exempted from Witchcraft, yet he is a thousand folde more free from the power thereof, then other men are. For there is onely one case, and no more, wherein the Deuill hath any way power to hurt him, and that is, whē it pleaseth God by that kind of crosse, to make triall of his faith and patience, and out of this case, he is al∣waies free from the annoyance of the vilest Witches in the world. If then this be the onely soueraigne
preseruatiue to keepe a man safe and sure from the power of Witches, and of the Deuill, to haue part in the coue∣nant of grace, to be made partaker of Christ, by a true faith, testified by dying vnto all sinne, and liuing vnto God in ewnes of life: we must not con∣tent our selues with a formall confessi∣on, as many in the visible Church doe, which wanting the life of faith, doe not liue in Christ; but striue to goe further, and to adorne our profession, by fra∣ming our liues according to the word, that we may haue our portion in this excellent priuiledge of preseruation, from the power and malice of the ene∣mies of God, and all vngodly persons. Preseruatiues of the second sort, are such as concerne the places of mens aboad. For Satan contenteth not him∣selfe, to haue manifested his malice in afflicting mens persons, but he also en∣largeth the same to the molestation of the places where they dwell, by inse∣cting the ayre, and such like. The onely effectuall meanes to remedie this euill, is the Sanctification of the places of our
habitation. Looke as we are wont to sanctifie our meate and drinke, by Gods word, and by praier, and thereby pro∣cure his blessing vpon his owne ordi∣nance for our refreshing: so in like man∣ner may we sanctifie the places of our aboad, and thereby both procure the blessing which we want, and also auoid many curses and dangers, which other∣wise would fall vpon vs. If any shall thinke the Consecration of houses and places in this sort, to be a meere deuise of mans braine; let them remember, that in the Old Testament, besides the dedication of the Temple, allowed by all, there was a Law prescri∣bed to the Iewes, for the speciall dedi∣cation of euery mans house: If any hath built a new house (saith Moses) and hath not dedicated it, let him returne againe &c. Dut. 20. 5. As who should say, he hath omitted a necessarie dutie. Now this de∣dication was nothing els, but the sancti∣fication of them by word and prayer, wherein they made acknowledgement, that they became theirs by the free gift and blessing of God, and further desi∣red
a free and lawfull vse of the same to his glorie, and their mutuall good. A dutie which hath been performed by the seruants of God in ancient times. The first thing that Abraham did, when he came from Vr of the Chalde∣ans, to the land of Canaan, which God gaue him to possesse, was the building of an Altar for the worship of God, his sacrificing thereon; and calling vpon the name of the Lord, Gen. 12. 8. The same did Noah before him at his first comming out of the Arke after the flood, Gen. 8. 20. and Iacob after him in Bethel. And they were al mooued here∣unto, because they knew their comfor∣table aboad in those places, came not by their owne endeauour, but from the blessing of God. When the good king Hezekiah kept the passeouer in Ierusa∣lem, his principall care was, that the Priests and all the people might first be sanctified, and therefore he praied vnto God to be mercifull to them that were not sanctified, 2. Chron. 30. 18. And as he behaued himselfe in his kingdome, so should euery master of a familie be∣haue
himselfe in his house where he dwelleth, labouring to sanctifie the same, that it may be comfortable to him and his; least for neglect thereof, he pull vpon himselfe, and those that belong vnto him, the heauie hand of God in plagues and punishments. The second kinde of Remedies are Restoratiue, which serue to deliuer men from Witchcraft, by curing the hurts of Witches in the bodies of men, or other creatures. In the handling whereof, first we will consider, how whole coun∣tries, and then how euery priuate man may be cured and deliuered. Whole Countries and Kingdomes are freed and cured specially by one meanes; The publishing and embracing of the Go∣spel. When our Sauiour Christ had sent the seauentie Disciples to preach in Iu∣rie, at their returne he gaue this testi∣monie of the effect of their ministerie, That he saw Satan fall downe from heauen like lightening, Luk. 10. 18. his meaning was this; As lightning is suddenly and violently sent out of the cloud, and (as it were) cast downe to the earth by the
cracke of the thunders; euen so Satan the prince of the world, that ruleth in the hearts of the disobediēt, was cast down, and his kingdome ruinated by the pow∣er of the Gospel preached. In the times of ignorance the deuill triumpheth freely without controlment, but the mist and darkenes of his delusions can∣not possibly abide the bright beames of Gods glorious will reuealed by preach∣ing. The Lord of auncient times com∣manded his people not to doe accor∣ding to those nations, among whome they dwelt in Canaan, by practising Witchcraft, or following after Sorce∣rie, Deut. 18. 9. &c. And that they might be able to obey this commandement, Moses prescribeth vnto them this Re∣storatiue, the reuerent and obedient hea∣ring of the Lords Prophets, v. 18. In this our Church, if we would be healed of our wounds, and banish Satan from a∣mong vs, who greatly annoieth a great number of our people by his delusions and damnable practises of Sorcerie: the onely way to bring it to passe, is the maintaining of a learned Ministerie, the
aduācing of Prophets, by whose labors the Gospel may flourish. For the faith∣full dispensation thereof, is the Lords owne arme and scepter, whereby he beateth downe the kingdome of darke∣nesse, and confoundeth the workes and enterprises of the deuill. The second sort of Restoratiues, serue for the cure of particular persons: for howsoeuer the gift and power of casting out Deuills, and curing Witchcraft be ordinarily ceased, since the Apostles times, it beeing a gift peculiar to the Primitiue Church, and giuen to it one∣ly during the infancie of the Gospel; yet there may be meanes vsed, and that effe∣ctuall, for the easing of any person that is bewitched by Satans instruments. Those therefore that are in these daies ormented in this kind, must doe three things. First, they must enter into a serious examination of themselues, and consi∣der the cause for which it pleaseth God to suffer Satan to exercise them with that kind of crosse. And here vpon dili∣gent enquirie, they shall finde that their
owne sinnes are the true and proper causes of these euills. When Saul was disobedient to the commandement of God, the Lord sent vpon him an euill spirit to vexe him, 1. Sam. 15. Hymene∣us and Alexander for their pestilent er∣rors were both cast out of the Church, and giuen vp also to Satan, that they might learne not to blaspheme, 1. Tim. 1. 20. in the same manner was the incestuous person dealt withall, 1. Cor. 5. 5. Secondly, after this Examination, the same parties must shewe forth their faith, whereby they depend on the free fauour and mercie of God for their de∣liuerance. How may this be done? by heartie prayer vnto God, ioyned with fasting that the same may be more ear∣nest. In which prayer the maine desire of the heart must be absolutely for the pardon of their sinnes, and then for de∣liuerance from the hurts and torments of diabolicall persons: yet not absolute∣ly, as for the other, but with this condi∣tion, so farre forth as it stands with Gods glorie, and their owne good. For
these are the bounds and limits of all temporall good things; of them the Lord makes no absolute promise, but with these conditions & qualifications. Thirdly, the parties bewitched must patiently beare the present annoyance, comforting themselues with this, that it is the Lords own hand, by whose spe∣ciall prouidence it comes to passe, and who turneth all things to the good of his chosen. Againe, they are to remem∣ber, that he beeing a most wise God, and louing father in Christ, will not suffer them to be tried aboue that they are able to beare, but in his good time will grant a ioyfull issue. Now when the bewitched shall thus submit themselues vnto God, in the crosse, be it that he (vp∣on some causes) deferre their deliue∣rance, yet they shall not finally be de∣ceiued of their hope. For either in this life, at the appointed time, or in the end of this life, by death they shall be eter∣nally deliuered, and put in present pos∣session of euerlasting case and happines. Thus much of the true remedies against Witchcraft.
In the next place we are a little to ex∣amine the false and superstitious Reme∣dies, prescribed and vsed by them of the popish Church. The most learned Papists of this age doe teach and auouch, that there is in Gods Church an ordinarie gift & pow∣er, whereby some men may cast out de∣uills, and helpe annoyances that come by Witches. The Protestant is of a con∣trarie iudgement, and holdeth accor∣ding to truth, that there is now no such ordinary gift left to the Church of God, since the daies of the Apostles. Reasons of this opiniō may be these. First, casting out of deuills, and cu∣ring such annoyances, are extraordina∣rie and miraculous workes. For Christ accounteth handling of serpents with∣out hurt, speaking with newe tongues, curing of diseases by imposition of hands, (all which are things of lesse mo∣ment) to be miracles, Mark. 16. 18, 19. but all these lesser works, yea the ordi∣narie power of working them is ceased: for it was onely giuen to the Apostles in the Primitiue Church, as a meanes
to confirme the doctrine of the Gospel to vnbeleeuers, that neuer heard of Christ before. So Paul saith; Strange tongues (that is, the gift of speaking strange languages, without ordinarie teaching) are for asigne, not to them that beleeue, but to them that beleeue not, 1. Cor. 14. 2. And for the same ende were all extraordinarie gifts then giuen. Seeing therefore the doctrine of the Gospell hath beene alreadie established, and the truth thereof sufficiently confirmed by miracles in the Primitiue Church, the same gift must needes cease vnto vs. For if it should still continue, it would call into question the effect of the Aposto∣licall preaching, and implie thus much, that the Gospel was not well establish∣ed, nor sufficiently confirmed by their extraordinarie Ministerie, and miracles accompanying the same. Againe, if the gift of working miracles should re∣maine, then the promise of God for his speciall and extraordinarie assistance therein should yet continue: for the gift and promise goe together, so long as the promise is in force, so long is the
gift also: but the promise made by Christ, In my name shall they cast out deuills, and speake with new tongues, Mark. 16. was in force onely in the persons and Mini∣sterie of the Apostles, and those that had extraordinarie and immediate cal∣ling from God, and it ceased when they and their calling ceased. Therefore if Ministers now should lay their hands on the sicke, they should not recouer them: if they should annoint them with Oyle, it should doe them no good, be∣cause they haue no promise. Howbeit the Papists stand stiffely in defending the continuance of these gifts. First, they say, the Church of the New Testament is nothing inferiour to that of the Old. The Iewish Church be∣fore the comming of Christ, was the Church of the Old Testament, and had the power and gift of casting our De∣uills. So saith our Sauiour himselfe, Matth. 12. 27. If I through Beelzebub cast out Deuills, then by whome doe your children cast them out? In which words he ascri∣beth this gift vnto the Iewes, therefore
it should seeme, the same remaineth still in the Church. Ans. That place of Scripture is di∣uersly expounded. Some by children there mentioned, vnderstand the Apo∣stles, who were Iewes borne, and had receiued from Christ this gift & pow∣er to cast out deuills. Which if it be so, it maketh not for them, because they had it extraordinarily. But I rather thinke, that by children, are meant the Exorcising Iewes, before Christs time, who did cast out deuills among them, pretending an abilitie to doe this worke in the name of God; whereas in truth, they were all flat Sorcerers, and did it by vertue of a league & compact made with the Deuill. Which practise hath been of long continuance, and is at this day common and vsuall among the Po∣pish sort. And that there were such Ex∣orcists among the Iewes, it is euident. For such were those Vagabonds which came to Ephesus, and tooke vpon them to cast out deuills by the name of Iesus, and Paul, Act. 19. 13. but the man in whome the euill spirit was, (so soone as
they  adjuced the spirit) ranne vpon them, and mightily preuailed against them, v. 16. Now if they had done this great worke by the power of God (as they pretended) the holy Ghost would not haue called them Eorcists and Va∣gabonds neither could the euill spirit possibly haue ouercome them, as he did. Againe, in the histories of the Iewes are recorded many practises of stich as exercised this power among them. Ra∣phael the angel telleth Tobias, that a per∣fume made of the heart and liuer of a fish, will helpe a man vexed with an e∣uill spirit, Tob. 6. 7. which counsell is fla Magicke, for there is no such vertue in the liuer of a fish. And in other histories we read that one Bliazr a Iew, by the smell of a certaine roote put to the nose of a man possessed with a deuill,Ioseph. . 1. 8. c. 2. caused the deuill to come out of his nstrills; and forsake him; which thing was done in publike place before Vspasian and o∣thers. This also was effected by meere conjuration. For what vertue can there be in any roote or hearb in the world, a aileable to command and enforce Sa∣tan
to depart from a man possessed And yet such feaes were plaied by sundrie Magicins among the Iewes Where∣upon I conclude, that the meaning of our Sauionr in the place alleadged▪ is in effect thus much; If  the power of Beel∣zebub, &c. that is, you haue among you sundrie Magicians and Exorcists, who pretend and exercise the gift of casting out deuills, and you thinke they doe it by the power of God, why then do you not carie the same opinion of me also? Their second reason is grounded on the promise of Christ, Mark. 16. 17. These tokens shall follow them that beleeue, In my Name they shal cast out Duills, &c. whence they gather, that there shall be alwaies some in the Church, who shall haue power to cast forth Deuills, if they be∣leeue. Answ. That promise was made by Christ vnto his Church, to be fulfilled immediately after his ascension. It did not extend to all times, and persons, so long as the world endureth, but onely to the times of the primitiue Church, and to such as then liued. For to them
onely the doctrine of the Gospel was to be confirmed by signes and miracles. And this lasted about 200. yeares next after Christ his ascension. During which time, not onely the Apostles and Ministers, but euen priuate men, and souldiers wrought many miracles. The third reason is taken from expe∣rience, which (as they say) in all ages from the Apostles times to this day sheweth, that there haue beene alwaies some in the Church, which haue had this gift of casting out deuills, and cu∣ring the hurts of Witchcraft. Ans. This gift continued not much aboue the space of 200. yeares after Christ. From which time many here∣sies beganne to spread themselues; and then shortly after Poperie that mysterie of iniquitie beginning to spring vp, and to dilate it selfe in the Churches of Eu∣rope, the true gift of working miracles then ceased, and in stead thereof came in delusions, and lying wonders, by the effectuall working of Satan, as it was foretold by the Apostles, 2. Thess. 2. 9. Of which sort were and are all those mi∣racles
of the Romish Church, whereby simple people haue beene notoriously deluded. These indeede haue there con∣tinued from that time to this day. But this gift of the holy Ghost, whereof the Question is made, ceased long before. To proceede yet further, we are here to consider the particular Remedies, which they of the Popish Church haue prescribed against the hurts that haue come by Witchcraft. And they are principally fiue. I. The name Iesus. II. The vse of the Reliques of Saints. III. The signe of the Crosse. IV. Hallowed creatures. V. Exorcismes. I. First, for the name Iesus: Thus much we grant, that any Christian may lawfully call vpon the name of Iesus in prayer, for the helpe and deliuerance of those that are possessed and bewitched, but yet with the caueat and conditin before specified, If it be the wil of God, and if their recouerie may make for his glorie, the benefit of the Church, and the good of the parties diseased.
But the Papist by the vse of this name, intendeth a further mter, to wit, that the very name vttered in so many let∣ters and sillables, is powerfull to cast out Deuills, and to helpe those that are be∣witched. For when it is vttered, then (say they) the authoritie of Christ is present, that the worke may be done. A flat vntruth, and a practise full of daun∣ger. For let this be well considered, whatsoeuer any man doth in this case, he must doe it by vertue of his calling, and haue also his warrant for the doing threof out of the word; which if he want, and yet will vndertake such a worke, he may iustly feare the like e∣uent that befell the vagabond Iewes that were Exorcists, Act. 19. 13. Now the Church of Christ hath no warrāt in the word, to vse this name of Christ for any such purpose; neither hath any ordinary Christian a special calling from God so to doe. Therefore he may not doe it. And whereas they would beare men in hand, that the saide name, of all the names of Christ, and aboue all other things, is of most special vertue, though
it be vsed euen by a man that wanteth faith, because the Apostle saith, At the name of Iesus euery knee shall ow, both of things in heauen, in earth, and vnder the earth, Phil. 2. 10. and by things vnder the earth are meant the deuill: we must know that their allegation is weake, and that they greatly abuse the place. For there the name Iesus, is not onely a title of Christ, but withall signifieth the power, maiestie, & authoritie of Christ, sitting at the right hand of the father, to which all creatures in heauen, earth, and hell are made subiects; and by that power indeede (if they had it at com∣mand) they might be able to cure the hurts of Witchcraft. II. The second speciall Remedie, is the vse of Saints Reliques; as the bookes, bones, apparel, staues, or such like, which being but touched of the parties vexed, are excellent meanes to recouer them. Ans. The vse of these things, to the purposes aforesaid, is a meere superstiti∣ous practise. For first, they haue not the true Reliques of the Saints, as would plainely appeare, if a true Inuentorie
were taken of all such as they say are to befound in their Monasteries & Chur∣ches. Secōdly, though they had thē, yet they haue no  or calling to vse thē to this end: for in al the word of god, there is neither cōmandement to war∣rant the vse, nor promise to assure any man of a blessing vpon the vse of them. Albeit they would seeme to haue some warrant, and therefore they alleadge that which is written, 2. king. 13. 21. of a dead man, who beeing for hast thrown into the sepulchre of Elisha, so soone as he touched the bones of Elisha, reuiued and stood vpon his feete. To this also they adde the examples of cures done by Peters shadow, Act. 5. 15. and of sun∣drie diseases healed by Pauls handker∣chiefs, Act. 19. 12. Ans. These thingsin deede are true, but they serue nothing to their purpose. For first, the quickning of the dead souldier, came not from any vertue in the corps of Elisha; but it was a miracle, which it pleaseth God then to worke, by meanes of the corps, that the Iewes at that time might be confirmed in the truth of that doctrine, which Eli∣sha
had taught them from God, and which before his death they had, negle∣cted, as I haue before shewed▪ And it was a thing onely then done, and neuer since. It cannot therefore be a ground for the ordinarie vse of Reliques. A∣gaine, touching the other examples: I answer, that both Peter ad Paul had the gift of working Miracles, & hauing the gift, they might vse such meanes for the present to cure disease. But the Pa∣pists are not able to shewe, that God hath giuen them the like gift whereby they might be warranted for the vse of the like meanes: neither can they assu∣redly hope for successe, although they should vndertake to vse them. III. The third Remedie, is the signe of the Crosse, made vpon the bodie of the partie tormented. Behold to what an height of impietie they are growne, ascribing that to the creature, which is proper to the Creartor, For the power of working miracles, is proper onely to the Godhead. The Prophets and Apo∣stles in their times did not worke them of themselues, but were onely Gods pas∣siue
instruments, in this manner: When the Lord ended by them to worke a∣ny miracle, they receiued from him at the same time an extraordinarie & spe∣ciall instinct, whereby they were moo∣ued to attempt the worke. They there∣fore yeelded themselues to the present motion of Gods spirit, to be his instru∣ments onely in the dispensation of the worke▪ but the sole author and producer of the miracle, was God himselfe. And in this case the very manhood of our Sauiour Christ, considered apart from his Godhead, had no power of it selfe, but was onely the instrument of his Godhead, whensoeuer it pleased him in that kinde to manifest the same. Wherefore to ascribe this vertue to the Crosse, beeing a creature, or the worke of a creature, is to communicate the in∣communicable power of the Creator to it, which is plaine blasphemie. IV. The fourth Remedie, is the v∣sing of hallowed things; as hallowed graines, salt, water, bread, images; speci∣ally the image of Agnus dei. Ans. Hallowed creatures are in truth
vnhallowed superstitions. For euery creature is sanctified by the word and prayer, 1. Tim. 4. 4. by the word, when God in his word commands vs to vse it for some ende; and by prayer, when we giue thanks for giuing the creature, and withall desire his blessing in the vse thereof. Now let any Papists shew me one letter or sillable in all the Booke of God, commanding the vse of a creature for any such ende. They affirme indeede, that Elisha wrought miracles by hallowed salt, for by it he cured the bitter waters, 2. king. 2. 21. But the Prophet vsed not hallow∣ed, but common salt, and that not ordi∣narily, but onely then, as a means wher∣by to worke a miracle. It was therefore powerfull in his hands, because for the doing thereof, he had power and war∣rant from God extraordinarily: and it cannot be so in any other, which haue not the same gift. V. The fift and last Remedie, is Ex∣orcisine, which is an adiuring and com∣manding the Deuill in the name of God to depart from the partie posses∣sed,
and cease to molest him any more. This meanes was vsed by our Sauiour Christ himselfe, and after him by his A∣postles, and other beleeuers in the time of the Primitiue Church, when the gift of working Miracles was in force: but in these daies (a I said before) that gift is ceased, and also the promise of power annexed to the vse of adjuration: and therefore the means thereof must needs cease. And for an ordinarie man now to command the Deuill in such sort, is meere presumption, and a practise of Sorcerie. Sect. IV. IV. Quest. Whether the Witches of our age are to be punished with death, and that by vertue of this law of Moses? I doubt not, but in this last age of the world, and among vs also, this sinne of Witchcraft ought as sharply to be pu∣nished as in former times; and all Wit∣ches beeing thoroughly conuicted by the Magistrate, ought according to the Law of Moses to be put to death. For proofe hereof, consider these reasons.
First, this Law of Moses flatly enioy∣neth all men, in all ages, without limita∣tion of circumstances, not to suffer the Witch to liue, and hereupon I gather, that it must stand the same, both now and for euer to the worlds ende. Patrons of Witches except against this, holding that it was a Iudiciall law, which continued but for a time, & con∣cerned onely the Nation of the Iewes, and is now ceased. But I take the con∣trarie to be the truth, and that vpon these grounds. I. Those Iudiciall Lawes, whose pe∣naltie is death, because they haue in thē a perpetuall equitie, and doe serue to maintaine some morall precept, are per∣petuall. The Iewes indeede had some Lawes of this kind, whose punishments were temporall, and they lasted onely for a certaine time: but the penaltie of Witchcraft, beeing Death by Gods ap∣pointment, and the inlicting of that punishment, seruing to maintaine the equitie of the three first morall precepts of the first Table, which cannot be kept, vnlesse this Lawe be put in execution: it
must necessarily follow, that it is in that regard morall, and binds vs, and shall in like sort bind all men in all ages, as well as the Iewes themselues, to whome it was at that time personally directed. II. Euery Iudiciall law, that hath in it the equitie of the law of nature, is per∣petuall; but the Law of punishing the Witch by death, is such. For it is a prin∣ciple of the law of nature, holden for a grounded truth in all countries & king∣domes, among all people in euery age; that the traytour, who is an enemie to the State, and rebelleth against his law∣full Prince, should be put to death: now the most notorious traytour and rebell that can be, is the Witch. For shee re∣nounceth God himselfe, the King of kings, shee leaues the societie of his Church and people, shee bindeth her selfe in league with the Deuill: and ther∣fore if any offender among men, ought to suffer death for his fact, much more ought shee, and that of due desert. The second reason for the proofe of the point in hand, is this; According to Moses lawe euery Idolater was to be
stoned to death: Deut. 17. 3, 4, 5. If there be found any among you, that hath gone and serued other gods, as the Sunne, the Moone, or any of the hoast of heauen: if the thing vp∣on enquirie be found to be true and certen, thou shalt bring them forth vnto thy gates, whether it be man or woman, and shalt stone them with stones till they die. Now this is the very case of a Witch, shee renoun∣ceth the true God, and maketh choice to serue the Deuill, shee is therefore a grosse Idolater, and her punishment must be suitable. It is alledged by the fa∣uourers of the contrarie part, that Peter denied Christ, and yet was not put to death: I answer, there is great difference betweene Peters deniall of Christ, and Witches denying of God. Peters deni∣all was vpon infirmitie, and in hast: the Witch denieth God vpon knowledge, and deliberation, wittingly and willing∣ly. Againe, Peter did not vpon the de∣niall betake himselfe to the Deuill, but turned vnto Christ againe, which he te∣stified by his heartie and speedie repen∣tance: but Witches denie God, and be∣take themselues to the Deuill, of their
own accord, as is manifest euen by their own confessions at their arraignments. The third reason. Euery seducer in the Church, whose practise was to draw men from the true God, to the worship of Idols, though it were a mans owne sonne or daughter, wife or friend, by the peremptorie degree and commande∣ment of God, was at no hand to be spa∣red or pitied, but the hand of the wit∣nesse first, and then the hands of all the people must be vpon him, to kill him, Deut. 13. 6. 9. If this be so, no Witches connicted ought to escape the sword of the Magistrate: for they are the most notorious seducers of all other. When they be once intangled in the Deuills league, they labour to invre their dea∣rest fiends and posteritie, in their cur∣sed and abominable practies; that they may be the more easily drawne into the same consederacy, wherewith they thē∣selues are vnited to Satan. I might here alleadge that they deserue death, be∣cause many of them be murtherers, but I stand not vpon that instance, because I hold in the generall that Witches are
not to be suffered to liue, though they doe no hurt either to man or other crea∣tures, and that by vertue of Moses Law, onely for their leagues sake, whereby they become rebells to God, Idolaters, and seducers, as now hath beene shew∣ed. Notwithstanding all that hath beene said, many things are brought in defence of them, by such as be their friends and welillers. First, it is saide, that the hurt that is done, comes not from the Witch, but from the deuill: he deserues the blame, because it is his worke, and she is not to die for his sinne. Ans. Let it be gran∣ted, that the Witch is not the author of the euill that is done, yet shee is a con∣federate and partner with the Deuill in the fact, and so the law takes hold on her. See it in a familiar comparison. A companie of men conspire together in a robberie, by common consent some stand in open place to espie out the boo∣tie, and to giue the watchword, others are set about the passage, priuily to rush vpon the man, and to spoile him of his goods. In this case what saith the Law?
The parties that gaue the watchword, though they did nothing to the man, yet beeing accessories and abettors to the robberie by consent, they are theeues, and liable to condemnation and exequution, as well as the princi∣palls. Euen so stands the case with the Witch. In the working of wonders, and in all mischieous practises, he or she is partaker with the deuill by consent of couenant: the Witch onely vseth the watchword, in some charme or other∣wise, and doth no more; the deuill vpon notice giuen by the charme, takes his opportunitie, and works the mischeife. He is the principall agent, but the other yeeldeth helpe, and is rightly liable to punishment. The reason is, because if the deuill were not stirred vp, and pro∣uoked by the Witch, he would neuer do so much hurt as he doth. He had neuer appeared in Samuels likenes, had he not beene solicited by the Witch of Endor. He would not haue caused counterfeit serpents and frogges to appeare in E∣gypt, but for Ianes and Iambres, and o∣ther Inchanters. And in this age there
would not in likelihood be so much hurt & hinderance procured vnto men, and other creatures by his meanes, but for the instigation of ill disposed per∣sons, that haue fellowship and societie with him. Againe, they obiect, that Witches conuicted, either repent, or repent not: If they repent, then God pardoneth their sinne, and why should not the Magistrate as well saue their bodies & let them liue, as God doth their soules. If they doe not repent, then it is a dan∣gerous thing for the Magistrate to put them to death: for by this meanes he kills the bodie, & casts the soule to hell. Ans. All Witches iudicially & law∣fully conuicted, ought to haue space of repentance granted vnto them, where∣in they may be instructed and exhor∣ted, and then afterward executed. For it is possible for thē to be saued by Gods mercie, though they haue denied him. Secondly, the Magistrate must execute iustice vpon malefactors lawfully con∣uicted, whether they repent or not. For God approoueth the iust execution of
iudgement vpon men, without respect to their repentance: neither must their impenitencie hinder the execution of iustice. When the people of Israel had committed Idolatrie in worshipping the golden calfe, Moses did not expect their repentance, & in the meane while forbeare the punishment, but he and the Leuites presently tooke their swords and slue them, and the Lord ap∣prooued their course of proceeding, Exod. 32. 28. When Zimri an Israelite had committed fornication with Cozbi a Midianitish woman, Phineas in zeale of Gods glorie executed iudgment vp∣on them both without any respect vnto their repentance, Numb. 25. 8. and is therefore commended, Psalm. 106. 30. Warres are a worthie ordinance of God, and yet no Prince could euer at∣tempt the same lawfully, if euery souldi∣er in the field should stay the killing of his enemie, vpon expectation of his re∣pentance. And whereas they say, that by executing an impenitent Witch, the Magistrate casteth away the soule; we must know, that the nde of execution
by the Magistrate, is not the damnation of the malefactors soule, but that sinne might be punished: that others may be∣ware of the like crimes and offences, and that the wicked may be taken away from among Gods people. But some Witches there be that can not be conuicted of killing any: what shall become of them? Ans. As the kil∣ling Witch must die by another Lawe, though he were no Witch: so the hea∣ling and harmelesse Witch must die by this Law, though he kill not, onely for couenant made with Satan. For this must alwaies be remembred, as a con∣clusion, that by Witches we vnder∣stand not those onely which kill and torment: but all Diuiners, Charmers, Iuglers, all VVizzards, commonly called wise men and wise women; yea, whoso∣euer doe any thing (knowing what they doe) which cannot be effected by na∣ture or art; and in the same number we reckon all good VVitches, which doe no hurt, but good, which doe not spoile and destroy, but saue and deliuer. All these come vnder this sentence of Mo∣ses,
because they deny God, and are con∣sederates with Satan. By the lawes of England, the thiefe is executed for stea∣ling, and we thinke it iust and profita∣ble: but it were a thousand times better for the land, if all VViches, but special∣ly the blessing Witch might suffer death. For the theife by his stealing, and the hurtfull Inchanter by charming, bring hinderance and hurt to the bo∣dies and goods of meni but these are the right hand of the deuill, by which he taketh and destroyeth the soules of men. Men doe commonly hate and spit at the damnifying Sorcerer, as vn∣worthie to liue among them; whereas the other is so deare vnto them, that they hold themselues and their coun∣try blessed that haue him among them, they flie vnto him in necessitie, they depend vpon him as their God, and by this meanes, thousands are caried away to their finall confusion. Death there∣fore is the iust and deserued portion of the good Witch FINIS.
