21121 99841485 6071
The Vineyarde of Vertüe collected, compo∣sed, and digested into a tripartite order, conteining XXXII. most excellent plants of fruitful ver∣tue: In most beautiful and blessed maner enuironing the true elect Churche of God vpon earth. Euery Plant conteining this tripartite order: Namely Definition Testimonie Examples of vertue By R. R. Iohn.. 15. I am the true Vyne, and my father is the Husbandman: Euery branch that brin∣geth not foorth good frute, doeth my father plucke away: and euery branch that beareth frute, dooth my father purge, that it may bring foorth frute more abundantly. Imprinted by Thomas Dawson.
To the Godly, Vertuous, and woorshipful Gentleman. M. Edmund Vvedale aliâs Vdale of Shirburne in Dorset∣shier, long and happy increase of corporall, and spirituall good graces in this lyfe with the participation of eternall beatitude in Christe Iesus, for euer and euer. WEE are taught in that sa∣cred booke of diuine Wis∣dō, this most sacred lesson, worshipful Sir, Sapient. 15. Too knowe God, is perfect rightuousnes, and to knowe his rightuousnes & vertue, is the roote of immortality. A sentēce surely not so shorte and sweete, as effectually and at large comprehending firme comforte from the Crea∣tor God vntoo the creature man. From which God as we may define godlynes to proceed, tou∣ching his Godhead; and vertue also as touching his manhood: so this godlines and vertue inclu∣ding his perfect righteousnes is according to the measure of his grace, nowe and then infused vp∣pon mankinde. Lactantius Firmianus seemeth to affirme this by his testimony, in libro de opi∣ficio
Dei cap. 12. Where he saith. Vir dicitur, eò quòd maior vis est in eoquā in foemina, & hinc virtus nomen accepit. And although here man seemeth to haue the prerogatiue of vertue, as of most fortitude valiancy or manhood in him: yet we must not any thing exclude the feminin sexe, from the benefit of vnited godlines & vertue in the Lord. For asmuch as God by the mouth of his Prophet Dauid auoucheth by example, too compare as wel the godly & vertuous womā, as the godly and vertuous mā, Like vnto the tree planted by the riuer side which bringes foorthe his frute in due tyme & tyde. Psa. 1. ve. 3. But as this true tree of godlynes and vertue according to the prouerb may be planted by Paule; that is to say by the holy Ghoste, watered by Apollo; that is, by mans continual exercise, and by God and from God receaueth her increase: so it is oftentimes seene, where God hath his Church, there wil the Deuil haue a Chappel. Yea where hath any goodnes, godlynes or vertue takē root or florished at any tyme, or in any age, but euen there also enuy, malice & mischief would haue a fling? Plutarch in his morals could say, that as the shadowe followeth the body: so enuy euer∣more accompanieth vertue, and as where is no body, there is no shadow, so where is no felicity, there is none enuy. For the holynes of Dauid,
innocency of Iob, wisedome of Solomon, forti∣tude of Sampson, and vertue of the moste ver∣tuous amongst mankinde could not auoide en∣mity sufficiently, when the almighty Iehouah, and most holiest Messias had his moste cruell and spiteful enemies, the Iewes, Scribes, & Pha∣risees, euer emong inuaying against him, circum∣uēting of him, & subuerting his doctrine. Of the true knowledge of God, of his rightuousnes, and vertue rooted vnto immortality, in the hearts of those that beleeued in him. But in their greatest iolity of iustifying their owne wickednes, see∣ming to thēselues to haue perfect holines, when they had not, bearing the worlde in hande that they brought forth sounde frutes of vertue, whē they were filthily corrupted with alkind of vice: Our sauiour Christe euen then and therefore scourging them out of the Temple of Hierusalē, to their shame and reproch, put foorth the para∣ble of the Vineyeard, and of the labourers. Luc. 19. as thereby not onely confounding their fals∣hood and reuealing their painted hypocrisie: but also vtterly discouered thē to be voide of al true godlines & vertue, yea & also the most extreme enemies thereof. Touching the defect of this tree of true god∣lines and vertue, amōgst the worldly wyse Phi∣losophers, it hath beene from tyme too tyme
apparantly prooued, that neither the Acade∣mici resident in place where they taught morall vertue, the Peripatetici preiudicating euentes, the Cynici of baser cōuersatiō, the Eudomenees for al their woorking good effectes, the Philo∣tethes for al their arrogant glory in themselues disdaining others, as though they only had per∣fect zeale of trueth, the Phisici, for al their skil∣full knowledge in thinges natural, neither the Ethici, which taught their rules of good life and manners, neither yet the Dialectici, of singu∣lar dexterity in disputing and reasoning causes naturall, coulde euer sauoure the taste of the true knowledge of GOD and of his righteous∣nesse and vertue rooted vntoo immortality: al∣though in deede they tooke vppon them a kind of prophane, godly, and vertuous lyfe, which they thought in themselues to bee righte, which also they taught vntoo the worlde in their tyme. But they were farre wyde from the marke, they wādered in darknes for want of light, they swallowed the sowre grape in wāt of the sweet, and they crackte the shel, but founde no kernell, they were alwaies learning, but neuer learned in the lawe of the Gospell of Christe the Lampe of light vnto saluation for as Lactantius Fir∣mianus saieth libro. 3. diuinarum institutionum
they saw but a shadow, of true godlynes & ver∣tue, and not the light therof it selfe, and they la∣boured al their life for it but they coulde neuer finde it. Bicause (saith he) they eyther retained an vngodly religion, or else altogither maintai∣ned the same. But the Romishe Antichrist, and his cursed crew the suckblood successors of the Scrybes & Pharisees the broode of Belial, Nemrods neare kinsmen and adherents of wicked Achab, haue from tyme to tyme hearde seene, knowen and perceaued, The affspring of the roote of Iesse,Esay. 11. which (as Esay saith) shoulde ryse too beare rule ouer the Gentiles, and in whome the nations shoulde beleeue. Also they haue bene toulde (by the Doctrine of our sauiour Christ in his sacred Gospel, and by the testimonies of his Apostles, Patriarcks, and Prophets) who was, and is and euer shal bee the true vyne. The true husband∣man, and the true labourers:Iohn. 15. yet of wilful blind∣nes haue they refused too bee ingrafted in the vyne of the true knowledge of God,Mat. 20. of his righ∣teousnes and vertue rooted vntoo immortality. Yet of obstinate malice haue they not onely re∣fused the calling of the heauenly husbande man Christ Iesus to come as labourers intoo his vin∣yearde: But also with the wilde bore rooted vp euery vyne of good doctrine in the Churche of
God & with the wicked husbādmen slaine not only their Maisters seruauntes,Mar. 12. that is too say, a nūber of godly preachers and vertuous persons sent vntoo them; but also crucified the sonne of God anew, by their horrible disordered institu∣tions in their Churches and Synagogues. That most Princely Prophet Dauid (woor∣shipfull Sir) pronounceth al those too bee bles∣sed which dwel in the house of the Lorde, that is to say in the Churche of God, affirming fur∣ther, that they shal praise him deseruingly world without ende. Psalm. 83. Surely, if the Lorde GOD the holy one of Israel shoulde presently summon the husbandemen of his Vineyearde throughout the worlde, too giue perfect reckoning of due fructifying and happy state of his Churche at this day: I doubt whe∣ther any Nation vnder the Sunne, haue founde so greate felicitie and blessinges abounding in them, as this little Iland of ours, hath had in her of long tyme, neither that any Nation hath better cause too praise his holy name, for his gracious goodnes, then wee haue, euen worlde without ende. Considering hee hath long since out of this his Vineyearde in Englande pluckte vpp by the roote that vnfruiteful figge tree of the PopesLuke. 12.
planting: Considering also that the vyne of his glorious Gospel hath long florished, & stil doth without the annoyance of any populer tree of forraine Campania, maugre the malice of her malignant aduersaries, from day too daye fructifying in the true knowledge of GOD & of his righteousnes and vertue vnto immor∣tality. Wherefore as euery labourer in this Vine∣yearde is bounden in duetie too bring with him godly care for conseruation and preserua∣tion of the welfare thereof: so ought ech one faythfully to laboure in true godlines and ver∣tue too such effect, that whereas oure Sauiour Christe saith, there are yet foure Monethes, & the Haruest wil bee heere anone: Wee shoulde therefore be ready too reape the Haruest of the Lorde, that wee may receiue reward, & gather our fruites into the barne of euerlasting beati∣tude. Iohn. 4. To this ende and purpose (worshipful Sir,) as one moste simple of many others, and boun∣den in duetie with them of better ability I haue heere not onely brought my best good will but also abillity therewith: as too furder the welfare of the Churche of GOD amongst vs, if by any meanes it so please GOD may possible.
I haue therfore (pressing my selfe an vnwor∣thy labourer, lacking Columellaes cunning in contriuing or trying, Palladius his experience in planting and purging, and Verroes vertue in aduauncing the beautiful beatitude of a vine∣yeard) simply heere set downe the names & na∣tures of a fewe true vyne plantes, collected the branches out of sundry testimonies of sacred scriptures, and framed in order the fruiteful ex∣amples of oure sauiour Christe (or of as many most excellēt godly and vertuous persons as out of the scriptures onely sacred, I coulde select) to beautify and fructifie the state of Gods Church in this my natiue country: the patronaige wher∣of I haue vowed vnto your woorthy woorship (as amongst others godly and vertuous Gentle∣men my good benefactors) at this present cho∣sen for your liuely sinceare zele to Gods trueth, your vertuous example of godly conuersation, and singular loue to al good learning (proceeding from the roote and braunches of your woorthy progeny especially your right worshipful, grand∣father M. Nicholas Vdale a man for al rare re∣spectes of true Godlines and vertue beloued of God, his Prince the renoumed King Henry the VIII. his godly and vertuous spowse Queene Katherin, and the blessed King Edward the VI. and of al good and godly men) whose steypes as
you imitate, so therefore may you seeme woor∣thely answerable too the protection of this and farre better trauailes. To you therfore I say as a valley replenished with the vertuous plantes of your vertuous progeny, and as a florishing plant in these most florishing daies of our diuine De∣bora Queene ELIZABETH, whose gra∣tious and blessed raigne, the Lorde proro∣gate vnto the ende of the world) doo I with all humble and hearty good will consecrate this Vineyard of Vertue. And bicause good mea∣ning hath many enimies in these dayes, and true vertue neuer wanteth vniust enuie, I am in due∣tie bound to praye vnto the Almightie continu∣ally, that the Vineyard of the Lord so florishing at this day in Englande, may be by him still pre∣serued from those same popish perillous Coluol∣uoli, whose propertie is, euer to be gnawing vp∣pon fruitfull vines. And that my good meaning in this litle labour may be also defended agaynst that combersome neighbour the Collecabedge beeing farther contrariety of nature, namely, colde and moist alwaies noysome vnto the vine, and onely refused of her aboue al other plantes, roots, or trees. Vnto whom for her three harm∣ful discomodities in engendring Melancholy, in breeding noisom dreames, & hurting the lungs in mans body, I may wel resemble, pale maleuo∣
which cause Christ himselfe affirmed that many sinnes were forgiuen her, for she lo∣ued much. Luke. 7. Iohn. 11. Paule the chosen Apostle of Christ Ie∣sus, confessed that he esteemed all thinges as vile, in respect of the loue which he bare to God. Phil. 3. For other examples of the loue of God, looke. Matth. 21. 1. Iohn. 4 ¶As the great and inestimable loue of Christ the true Sámaritane appeare towardes vs in creating, redeeming, and preseruing vs from death to life: so should we with mutuall loue, help, ayde, and comforte our neighbours in all good and needefull cases. Luk. 10. The Centurion loued so his neighbours and the nations neere adioyning, that hee builded a Synagogue for them, so that too shewe their mutuall loue towardes him, they came to Christ, & besought him that he would vouchsafe to heale the Centu∣rions seruaunt lying sick, which thing hee accomplished. Luk. 7. The Samaritan expressed a notable testimony and example of godly loue to∣wards
the man which trauailed from Hi∣erusalem to Hierico, who beeing robbed, spoyled, and wounded by those theeues, was there pyttied by the Samaritane in such manner that he went to him, bounde vp his wounds, powred wine and oyle ther∣into, set him on his own beast, brought him to a common Inne, and made prouision for him to his greate reliefe and comforte. Luke. 10. Thomas the Apostle surnamed Didi∣mus (what time our sauiour Christ came to Lazarus and said plainly that hee was dead) he for the loue that he bare (as it se∣med) vnto Lazarus said vnto the rest of his fellowe Apostles, Let vs also goe that we may dye with him. Iohn. 11. For other examples of loue towards our neighbour, looke in Abraham, Gen. 18. Moses, Exo. 32. Iona∣thas, 1. Reg. 18. and Nehemias, 2. Reg. 19. The iiii. Plant, Hope or trust in God.
HOpe the very author of a Christi∣an life tossed and turmoyled with chaunces, hazards, perils, sorrowes, my∣seryes, calamities, and troubles in this world, is the assured stay and comfort of mans helpe and recouery in the Lord, which hope beeing extinguished, neither may chaunces casuall bee tollerate, ha∣zardes eschewed, perils preuented, sor∣rowes assuaged, myseries remedied, ca∣lamities comforted, nor troubles restrai∣ned. For as S. Paule saith this vertue Hope may well bee termed the Helmet of saluation. But this hope which hee so calleth is also gouerned by the assured promises of the true God and by precise bounds is to bee discerned from humane hope, which is false & vncertaine, which Aristotle termeth, The Dreame of him that waketh. For he counteth the hope of man in man, to be nothing esse but gol∣den blastes of leaues which nowe & then shake, now and then are still and within a while are vtterly blowen away. Wher∣fore mans speciall hope and trust ought to bee in God, whiche neuer fayleth his
faithfull ones, neither in this transitory life, nor in the life eternall. Haue hope and confidence in the Lord, with all thy heart, and leane not vnto thine owne wisdome, think vpon him in all thy wayes, and he shal direct and guide thy footesteppes. Prou. 3. They that hope in the Lorde shall chaunge their courage, they shall take them wings as Eagles, they shall run and not labour, they shall walke and not be weary. Esa. 40. Hee that ploweth, ought to plowe in hope to reape the fruite of his tra∣uaile. Cor. 9. Blessed is the man whose hope is in the name of the Lord. Psal. 39. Who so trusteth in the Lord, mercy embraceth him on euery side. Psa, 31. Blessed is the man which putteth his trust in the Lord. Hierem. 17. By hope in the Lorde we are saued. Rom. 8. Abraham hoped against hope, that is, he looked for the thing which was to bee
hoped for in the promise of God, yea al∣though the thing represented before his eyes expressed no cause of hope, namly that he should bee the father of many nations, &c. Gen. 13. 17. 22. Dauid amongst so many conflictes with his enemyes, seeing that his hope & trust in the Lorde was neuer made frustrate, taking great consolation therin, amongest others burst out with these words, namely, For this cause is my heart ioyfull, and my tongue reioyceth, yea and more∣ouer my fleshe shall reste in hope. Psal. 15. Iob the seruaunt of God, a perfect pa∣terne of patience, beeing oftentimes di∣uersly and greeuously afflected, acknowled∣ging the great mercies of God to be more then mans miseries confessed his hope to be such, that hee was sure his redeemer liued, and that he should rise againe out of the earth at the latter day. &c. Iob. 19. For other examples of Hope looke Iudi. 20. Tob. 2. Symeon, Luke. 2. of Paule, Actes 13. and his admo∣nition, 1. Tim. 6.
The v. Plant, The feare of God. GOD hath so created men, that in their mindes as it were certaine beames of light should enflame their affections to bee earnestly mooued with the knowledge of Gods wrath & iustice, seuerely beholding all thinges doone in his sight which are against his prescri∣bed will and ordinaunce; and that men knoweinge what doeth please him, shoulde feare to violate or transgresse from his gratious pleasure, and know∣ing also what doth displease him, shoulde seeke all meanes to auoyde the daunger of his displeasure. For as his holy worde is a woorthy witnesse of his will, so ought wee to take good courage vnto vs in fulfilling the same, and tremble with feare to followe a wrong way. The beginning or ground of wis∣dome is the feare of the Lorde, that is, to gouerne our life by the worde of God, so to obey God and his holy
will. Prou. 1. The feare of the Lorde is a stronge holde, and his Children are vnder a sure defence. The feare of the Lorde is a well of life to auoyde the snare of death. Prou. 14. The feare of the Lorde is the right Gods seruice that preserueth & iusti∣fieth the heart, and giueth mirth and gladnesse, &c. The feare of the Lord is the roote of wisdome, and her braun∣ches are long life. Ecclesiasticus. 1. Whoso feareth the Lord he shall be happy, and when hee hath neede of comfort he shall be blessed. Ibidem. I wil shew you whom you shall feare: feare him which after hee hath slaine, hath power to cast the same into hell fire. So I say vnto you feare him. Lu. 12 Thou shalte feare the Lorde thy God. Deut. 6. 10. Feare not him which killeth the bo∣dy onely, but rather feare him which can destroy bothe body and soule in Hell fyer. Matt. 10. The Lord God of Israel after hee had
drowned Pharaoh and his hoast in the red sea, was more feared of those Israelites, & they beleued in God, and gaue credite vnto the words of Moyses his seruant. Exo. 14. 19. and 20. Abdias the steward of the house of A∣chab feared greatly the Lord God of Isra∣el, for when wicked Iezabel had slaine the prophets of the Lord, he led with him 100. of those Prophets, & hid them from perse∣cution, & was afraide. 3. Kings. 8. Tobias the elder, taught his sonne To∣bias also euen from his infancy to feare the Lord, & made to be called vnto his feast such persons as feared God. Yea more fea∣ring God then the king, vnder whose iuris∣diction he lyued, he tooke away the bodies of those that were slaine by the enemyes of Gods church & buryed them. Tobi. 1. Other notable Examples of the true feare of God are commemorated in Iudith. 8. in Iob. 1. 2. 31. Iosaphat, 2. Chr. 19. Loth, Gen. 19. The mid∣wiues for whome the Lorde erected dwelling houses. Exod. 1. Sara the daughter of Raguel. Tobi. 3. and in yong Tobias as it appeareth. Tob. 9.
The vi. Plant, Humilitie. CHriste God and man our onely saui∣our & redeemer, the very fountaine of all perfect felicitie exhorteth vs vnto true Humilitie, and for that cause tryeth and exerciseth vs by so many miseries, as we bothe naturally feele in the fleshe and in the world also. So that least wee should be either presumptuous too much in pride of hearte, and ouermuch disdai∣ning others, the Lorde doeth by diuerse meanes reclaime vs to knowe his soue∣raigne salue, by planting this vertue hu∣militie in our hearts, whereby wee ac∣knowledge our sinnes towards God and man, our infirmitie of nature, and the fil∣thynesse thereof, and fortifie our mindes and soules in the feare of God, and in confidence of his onely diuine helpe, and whereby also we are moued to performe the dueties of our vocation in farre bet∣ter manner without disdayning others, to help them what lyeth in vs, and in all aduersities casualties or miseryes to bee subiect and humbly to submit our soules,
bodyes, and goodes, vnto the gratious good will of the same our God and mer∣cifull sauiour which will not suffer vs to be tryed, tempted, nor troubled, beyonde our strength and abilitie of sufferaunce. Blessed are the meeke and humble of heart, for they shall receiue the in∣heritance of the earth. Matth. 5. The Prayer of him that humbleth himselfe in the sight of God, pearceth the very cloudes, til she come nigh she will not bee comforted, nor goe her waye till the hyghest God haue re∣spect vnto her. Ecclesi. 35. Howe much greater thou art, so much the more humble thy selfe to∣wards all men, and thou shalt finde fa∣uour in the sight of God, because great is the power of God only, and he shall be honoured of men, Ecclesiastes 3. Whoso exalteth him selfe, shall bee brought lowe, and he that humbleth him selfe shall be exalted. Luk. 7. 18. Let the meeke brother reioice in his exhortation, and the rich man in his humility because hee shall away hence
as the flower of the grasse. Iam. 1. Haue patience when thou arte brought lowe, because in the fire is Golde & siluer tryed, and men accep∣table vnto God are tryed by the fur∣nace of aduersities. Except you be conuerted, & become as one of these litle ones, you shall not enter into the kingdome of Heauen. Whosoeuer therfore shal humble him selfe as one of these little ones shall be greatest, &c. Matt. 18. Christe Iesus our Sauiour the syncere fountaine of humilitie admonisheth al men to learne Humilitie of him, saying, Learne of me because I am humble & meeke of heart. Matt. 11. The Angel of God, said vnto Agar, Returne againe vnto thy mistresse and humble thy selfe vnder her handes▪ Gen. 16. Abraham spake humbly vnto the Lord saying, I will yet speake vnto my Lord although I am but earth and ashes. Gen. 18. Iacob humbled himselfe very much
before his brother Esau, and so pacified his wrath. Gen. 33. Moyses excused himself fiue times be∣fore hee would take vpon him the leading foorth of the people, which yet the Lorde enioyned him, and hee was not perswaded vntil he perceiued that the Lorde was an∣gry. Exod. 3. Gedeon (when the Angell said vnto him goe, in thy strength shalt thou deliuer Israel) humbly aunsweared, Beholde my stocke is weake in Manasses, and I my selfe am the leaste in the house of my fa∣ther. Iud. 5. Dauid beeing tryed in manifolde trou∣bles, and finding greate comforte at the hands of God thus said, It is good for mee that thou O Lorde hast chastised me. Psal. 119. vers. 71. Note his humi∣litie beeing crowned king by Samuell 1. King. 17. before Saule. 1. King. 19. The prodigall childe returning to his father humbled himselfe. Luke. 15. For other Examples, looke Saule. 1. King. 9. Elisius, 4. King. 2.
The vii. Plant, Patience. THis vertue Patience is of great excellencie amongst humane kinde, and best beseeming Christians; namely tending to this effect, that God may bee duely obeyed in our aduersities, so as we doe nothing against the commaunde∣ments of God, neither doe heape vppon vs his heauy displeasure, but that for Christe his sonnes sake wee shoulde ac∣knowledge him by saith, to bee pacyfied and mercifull vnto vs, that wee shoulde looke for his helpe, and craue his miti∣gation of such afflictions as he in iustice layeth vpon vs; and so in this Fayth & hope should patiently beare whatsoeuer burden is layd vpon vs. For the word of God doth highly extoll Patience, com∣maunds vs to vse the same, promiseth Gods help and deliuerance, and teacheth that the godly ones are not heere afflic∣ted by chaunce, but by the will & know∣ledge of God, not that we should perish, but that we should prosper more & more
after perils, and as Saint Paule sayth Rom. 8. beeing made like vnto the sonne of God by afflictions, should with him be like partakers of eternall glory. A patient man is better then one that is strong, and he that can rule his affections is of more force, then one that layeth siege vnto Cities. Prou. 16. The Furnace tryeth the vessel of the potter, so doth the tryall of troubles proue those that are righteous. Ecc. 27 Troubles worketh patience, pati∣ence maketh tryall, and tryal bringeth hope. Rom. 5. My Brethren, count it for exceding ioy, when you fall into diuers tempta∣tions, knowing that the tryall of your faith worketh patience, and patience maketh your worke perfect that you may be perfect and vpright, not fain∣ting in any thing. Iam. 1. Now therefore keepe secret thy so∣rowe within thee, and suffer manfully whatsoeuer chaunces shal happen vn∣to thee. 3. Esdras. 10. Blessed is the man which suffereth
temptation, because when he shall be tryed, he shall receiue a crowne of life, which God hath promised vnto all those that loue him. Iam. 1. 2. Bee patient therefore one with an other, and confirme your heartes be∣cause the comming of the Lord is at hand. Iam. 5. Our sauiour Christ Iesus, the most ex∣cellent mirror of perfect patience, was first tempted of Sathan: Matth. 4. Despised, hated, and disdained of the wicked world∣lings: Ioh. 17. and lastly persecuted and put to death by the cursed Iewes: Mar. 15 leauing vs example that we should suffer iniuryes doone vnto vs, and remit the re∣uenge vnto him that sayth, Mine is ven∣geance, and I will rewarde againe. &c. Deut. 32. Isaac suffered gladly that iniury to be offered him, when his Father Abraham would haue sacrifized him. Gen. 22. Ioseph patiently put vppe the cru∣eltie of his brethren, when they solde him and woulde haue put him into the pit. Gen. 37. 45.
Moyses prayed for Mary which spake so iniustly against him, & by his prayer she was healed. Numb. 12. Dauid fleeing from the face of Abso∣lon said patiently vnto Sadoch, If I finde fauour in the sight of the Lord, he wil bring me againe. 2. King. 15. 16. Tobias when he became blinde shew∣ed a woonderfull Patience vnder the Lords scourge, and against the derision of his wife and his friendes. Tob. 2. 3. Other notable Examples, were Iob. 1. 2. The three Children in the Ouen. Dan. 5. and Eleazarus, 2. Machab. 6. The viii. Plant, Perseueration in god∣lynesse. PErseueration or continuaunce of vertuous and godly life, is the limit∣ted path of perfection, which GOD re∣quireth of all his chosen seruants which haue begun to runne the race of righ∣teousnesse, not to stay in the middest,
neither to start aside, neither yet to looke back at any time, but to goe forwardes without wauering, or distrust in the ac∣knowledgement of God, and in the faith of Christe constantly and for euer, so con∣tinuing vntill the very last breath of our life, and not to be discouraged by any si∣nister chaunces or aduersities, neither suffer our selues to bee seduced from so good a purpose by any maner of meanes; because whosoeuer haue once tasted the comfortable sweetnesse of Gods good graces, may be well assured if they con∣tinue with a stedfast faith in Christe vn∣to the end, they shall inherite the promi∣sed rewarde, euen the Crowne of life for euer. Apo. 2. My sheepe heare my voice, and I giue them eternall life, & no man shall take them out of my hands. Iohn. 10. God is faithful which suffereth not vs to be tempted aboue our strength, but giueth an end with tēptation, that we may be able to goe thorowly with our vocatious. Cor. 10. I will not leaue you destitute of
comforte but I will come vnto you, I will pray my Father and he shall sende vnto you another comforter, euen the spirite of trueth which shall remaine with you for euer. Iohn. 14. My little Children despise not the correction of the Lorde, nor faint not when thou art chastised, for the Lord chastiseth euery sonne which he recei∣ueth, Goe on forwardes in discipline, God offereth himself vnto you as to his childrē, for what sonne is he whom the father chastizeth not. Heb. 12. Put vpon you all the whole armour of God, that you may bee able to re∣sist in the euill day, and that you may stand stedfastly in all thinges that you haue done. Ephe. 6. So runne, that you may receiue. 1. Cor. 9. But whosoeuer continueth vnto the ende shalbe saued. Matt. 10. Our Lorde and sauiour Christe Iesus, giuing light to the borne blinde person, by vertue of the holy Ghost made him con∣stantly perseuer against the Phariseis and
to withstand them. The Apostles constantly perseuered in preaching, teaching, and working woon∣ders in the name of Christe Iesus passing from place to place, and from countrie to countrie. Acts. 1. 4. 11. 13. & 20. Ioseph (notwithstanding his Mistresse whome he serued, did dayly molest & seeke to discredite him) yet he for all that shew∣ed himselfe dutifull & faithfull in his ser∣uice, & continewed so to his great perfer∣ment. Gen. 39. Dauid beeing sore rebuked of his el∣der brother, & also dissuaded from his pur∣pose by Saule, did not yet any whit shrinke from his purpose, but fought manfully & ouercome Goliah. 1. King. 17. Ioab constantly perseuered in the seege of Rabbath, till he had woon the cittye. 2. King. 12. Also in the battell against Absolon. 2. King. 18. Although Nehemias was oftentimes hindred in building, yet he ceased not from his woork till hee had fullye built vppe she wall. Nehemi 4. & 6. Eliachym the high Preest spake vnto all the people of Israell, saying, Knowe
you that because the Lord hath heard our prayers, if you continew still in fasting & prayer in the sight of God. &c. Iudith. 4. The Sociates of Daniel, constantly said vnto the King of Babylon, be it kno∣wen vnto thee O King that we worshippe not thy Gods. &c. Dan. 3. Other notable Examples were Da∣niel, Dan. 6. Susanna, Dan. 13. The vii. brethren, 2. Mac. 7. The blinde borne, Ioh. 9. The Apostles, Acts. 1. The ix. Plant, True Inuocation vpon GOD. AS in the heart of man God (the true knowledge of God, feare, faith and loue of God) ought to shine and fer∣uently appeare: So our Prayer is the moste excellent instrumentall meane or witnesse of the minde, & ought godly to confesse and pronounce the Lord God, & ought rightly to vse the name of God in
al puritie and sanctifie or honor the same with all dutifull, reuerent, and louing feare. For to that ende hath God giuen the benefite of the tongue and speech vn∣to men: especially, that they should de∣clare the goodnesse of God towardes them, that they should praise him in his holinesse, pray vnto him for continuance of his gratious goodnesse, & giue thanks vnto him for the same, & excite others vn∣to the consideration of their dueties in those respectes. For God requireth that we shuld wt thanksgiuing, confession, sup∣plications and prayers, come vnto him, and to none other God, because he hath made vs as the sheepe of his hands, and people of his pasture. Psal. 94. vers. 7. Thou shalt worship the Lorde thy God, and him onely shalt thou serue. Matth. 4. Whilst thou liuest & bearest breath, thou shalte confesse thy sinnes vnto God, and thou shalt praise him, & re∣ioyse in his mercies, because great is the mercy of the Lord, and he helpeth and is gracious vnto those that turn
vnto him. Ecclesiastes. 17. Before thou prayest prepare thy soule, and be not as a man that temp∣teth God. Ibidem. 18. When thou prayest, thou speakest with God, when thou readest, God speaketh vnto thee. Aug. sup. Psal. 85. Prayer is good with fasting and al∣moyse, yea of more valure it is then to heape vp treasures of Golde. Tob. 12. The continuall prayer of the iuste person preuayleth much. Iam. 5. Greate is the vertue of syncere pray∣er, for as a faythfull messenger, per∣formeth duetie enioyned, and pear∣ceth whether as no fleshe can attaine. August. super Psal. 65. Watch and pray, least you fall into temptation. Matt. 26. Verely, verely I say vnto you, what∣soeuer good thing you doe aske of my father in my name, he shall surely giue it you. Iohn. 16. You shall pray for all men, especial∣ly for Kings and Princes and those in authoritie. 2. Tim. 2.
Christe Iesus our onely Lorde and sa∣uiour, in teaching his Apostles to pray, set∣teth vs to schoole by that example how to pray. Luke. 11. Also he not onely prayed for him self, that the cuppe of bitter perse∣cution might passe from him: Matth. 26. but for his very enemyes & persecutors he prayed. Luke. 23. Moreouer he prayed for all those his chosen children which his father had giuen him, that they might bee saued. Iohn. 17. Paule the electe vessell of God, gaue thanks vnto God for al them of Thessalo∣nia, & prayed for their prosperous pro∣ceeding in the faith. 1. Thessa, 1. Abraham prayed vnto the Lorde, to spare the Sodomites from destroying them. Gen. 18. Iacob prayed vnto the Lorde, con∣fessing his infirmitie and want of abilitie. Gen. 32. Moyses prayed diuerse times & was hearde of the Lorde. Exod. 7. 8. 9. 10. 14. 17. 32. Num. 11. 12. 21. Samuel praying for the Israelites against the Philistians was heard of God 1. King. 7.
King Iosophat fearing sore the power and multitude of his enemies, which he heard say came against him, prayed ear∣nestly vnto the Lorde, and his prayer was hearde. 2. Chro. 20. Manasses beeing king of Iuda, pray∣ed meruelous humby, deuoutly, & effectu∣ally with a repentant heart. 1. Chro. 23. Ezechias turning his face to the wall prayed vnto the Lord bitterly weeping, & the Lorde hearing him, graunted his de∣sire: 4. Kings. 20. namely long life and prosperitie vpon earth. For other examples of praiers, Anna, 1. King. 1. Dauid, 2. Kin. 12. Idem, 2. King. Elyas, 3, Kin. 18. Iosophat, 2. Chro. 20. & Esdras, 1. Esdra. 1. 8. Nehemias, 1. Iud. 4. & 8. Hester. 4. Ieremy. 11. Daniel. 6. 9. 13. Ionas, Iudas Machabeus, 1. Mach. 4. The x. Plant, Thankes giuing. THankes giuing is a vertue which ought to bee euermore grounded in
the heart & minde of man, and euermore redy to be vttered wt the tonge, that good thinges are not bestowed vppon vs by chaunce, or by good hap as we vse to say, but that God is rightly the author of all benefits. And that it is our duties by this our thankfulnes to exhort & inuite others to the due acknowledging and seruing of the true God: that they may also per∣swade themselues, that it is God onely which hath care ouer them, and that we are heard by him, if we craue any thing of him in faith. And therefore as hee is altogither more ready to giue, then wee to receiue, and more beneficiall and gra∣cious in giuing, then we are thankful & dutifull towardes him: so are wee euer∣more debters vnto him, and neuer able to repay that we owe him, howbeit sith he requireth a thankfull heart and true repentant life according to his will, wee ought neuer to be slack or slowe, in testi∣fying our vtermost power & good willes in giuing of thanks for his benefits, and in liuing so thankfully, that his continu∣ed mercie may bee a salue to our my∣serie.
Reioyce alwaies, pray without cea∣sing, and giue thanks in all things, for this is the will of God in Christ Iesus towards you all. 1. Thessa. 5. What better thing may we beare in our minde, expresse with tongue, or set foorth with penne, then Thankes bee to God? Then this, nothing can bee spoken more shorte, more ioyfully heard, more thankfully vnderstoode, nor more frutefully be perfourmed. Augustine in Epist. ad Marcil. Let euery one as hee hath receiued the good grace of God, despise the same vnto an others benefite, as the good stewards of the manifolde grace of God. 1. Pet. 4. The best conseruer of benefites, is the remembrance of those benefites receiued, and the continual thankful∣nesse which wee ought to render for the same. Chry. Homi. 25. super. Matt. I exhorte you that you doe alwayes giue thankes vnto the Lorde, if euill chaunces happen vnto you, blesse yee the Lorde, & those euils shall be taken away, if prosperous good things hap∣pen
vnto you, blesse the Lord, & they hall continue still with you. Chrys in tract. de Symbol. Thankesgiuing is a moste pure & perfect Balme, and therefore it requi∣reth a pure sound, & profound vessel for the same. Brent. super Can. Christe Iesus our Lorde and Sauiour oftentimes lifting vppe his eyes vnto the Heauens, would giue thankes, as in brea∣king the Bread, in multiplying of Breade to his Disciples, in reuyuing Lazarus, & in the institution of the holy Eucharist. Matt. 26. The Lorde commaunded that his deli∣ueraunce of the Children of Israel out of Aegypt, should neuer departe out of their mindes. It shall be (saith he) as a signe in thy hand, and as a monument be∣fore thy eyes, that the law of the Lorde may be euer in thy mouth. Exod. 13. Moyses and the Israelites sung a song vnto God, and said, Let vs sing vnto the Lorde, that is to say, after they had mer∣uelously passed through the red Sea. Exod. 20.
Dauid when he heard the Reuelation which God made vnto Nathan touching the continuance of his kingdome, gaue ve∣ry humble & deuoute thankes therefore vnto God. 2. King. 7. We ought heere in England to prayse God greatly for his goodnesse, which pros∣pereth the reigne of our so gratious soue∣raigne lady Queene Elizabeth, according to that saying, Blessed be God which hath giuē vs Dauid a most wise Prince to gouerne the people, &c. 3. Kin. 1. and 15. When Tobias had recouered againe his sight, both he, his wife, & all they which before had seene him blinde, glorifyed GOD. Tob. 11. For other Examples of Thankes∣giuing, looke Cyrus, 1. Esdras. 1. The Israelites, Iudith. 16. Nabu∣chodonozer. Dan. 2. Iudas Ma∣chabeus. 2. Mach. 1. The blessed virgin Mary, Luk. 1. Zacharias, Luke. 1. Matt. 9. Luk. 7. and other places.
The xi. Plant, True Preaching. TRue Preaching is the message of the great God and embassage of the highest King of kings: & the same is an office of effectuall vertue & vertuous effect of glad tydings, and of saluation bestowed vppon mankinde, by the Al∣mightie Messias in the light of his holy lawe and Gospell reuealed, and in the true testification of his grace and grati∣ous goodnesse towardes man, as S. Paul descrybeth the same more amply in the 1. Cor. 14. & 1. Tim. 4. That is to say, it consisteth in Doctrine, Exhortation, and consolation: and thervnto is applyed the exposition or interpretation of any parte or portion of the Scriptures. The effi∣cient causes of which office and function duely applied are these. The holy Goste by the will of God enioyning the Apo∣stles first to performe this office. Mat. 10 The tongue which ought to be the trum∣pet sounding the glory of God his wrath towards sinners, and mercie towardes
those that heare his will and fulfill the same. The faithfulnesse, diligence, and constancy by the Preacher obserued heerin, to the end that God may be obey∣ed, rightly honoured and acknowledged, & that many soules may be woon as co∣heyres with Christ in his kingdome for euer. And the Lord saide, I will rayse vnto them a prophet out of their Brethren, which shall bee like vnto thee, and I will put my woords in his mouth, and hee shall speake vnto them all those things which I shal prescribe him: and he that will not heare him speaking in my name, I will bee reuenged vppon him. Deut. 18. Howe beautiful vpon the hilles are the feete of him that bringeth & prea∣cheth peace? Esay. 52. Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. Luk. 4. Thou shalt heare the word procee∣ding out of my mouth, and thou shalt tell it them from me. Ezech. 3.
Goe your wayes throughout all the world, preach the Gospell to eue∣ry creature, teaching al nations & bap∣tizing them. Matt. 28. Reproue, Exhorte, blame, and re∣buke with all patience, and doctrine. 1. Tim. 5. For the worde of God is liuely and effectuall, and pearceth more then doth a two edged swoorde, entering euen into the deuision of the soule & the spirite, &c. Heb. 4. Iesus Christe our Redeemer and Sa∣uiour, comming into this worlde to call sinners to repentaunce, first preached the Gospell and deliuered the Lawe vnto the Prophetes,Luke. 5. he himselfe affirming, that he is the true light of the worlde, whome who so did followe should haue light of life. Iohn. 8. Iohn Baptist preached repentaunce, and the kingdome of GOD in the de∣serte of Iudaea and preuayled therein. Matt. 3. The twelue Apostles were sent of the Lord to preach, & had power giuen them
to caste out vncleane spirites, & to heale the diseazed by vertue of the holy Ghoste and efficacie of the Gospell, and namely these for the testimonie of the trueth suffered persecution, Sainte Peeter was crucifyed, S. Paule at Rome behea∣ded, Saint Iames the brother of our Lord stoned at Hierusalem,Pantaleon in Chronogra∣phia Eccisiae. Iames the bro∣ther of Iohn be headed there: S. Philippe in Scythia, S. Bartholmewe in India. S. Matthias in Iudaea, S. Andrew in Scy∣thia, S. Matthew in Aethiopia, suffered martyrdome, all within the space of 85. yeeres after the birth of Christ. Ionas was sent of the Lord to preach at Niniue, fortie dayes respite before they should bee destroyed, and yet the Lord knew that they would repent, whereby hee spared them, and withdrewe his scourge. Ionas. 3 For other Examples, look in Acts. 2. 3. 4. 5. and 11. besides other places in Paule, Peter, Iames, and Iohn, concerning Preaching.
The xii. Plant, Confession vnto God. COnfession, is a constant and perpe∣tuall desire (while we beare aboute vs this earthly and corruptible taberna∣cle of the flesh) to acknowledge the true doctrine of the Gospell before God and man, and to confesse our sinnes and ma∣nifolde infirmities vnto God, who onely is the promised comforter in our myse∣ryes, the only redeemer of vs from sinne, death, and hell, and the onely sauiour of our soules and bodyes in this life vnto life euerlasting. And this confession ought to bee so feruent in our mindes, hearts, and soules, that no selfeloue of our selues ought to reiecte the same. It ought to be so frequented in our conuer∣sations, that no worldly suggestions oughte to seduce more or abandon vs from fructifying therein. It ought so to shine in all maner of perfection amongst the faithfull which sauoure of Christ and syncere liuing, that the very infidels (if by any possible meanes it may be) might
by our godly life and vertuous examples be conquered vnto Christ in this world, that we with them and they with vs ac∣knowledging, confessing, and firmely beleeuing in one eternall and euerliuing God (as one sheepfolde vnder one shepe∣heard Christ Iesus) may be gathered to∣gither in one faith against his comming, to be called not onely but also to be adop∣ted Citizens of the heauenly Hierusa∣lem. Apoc. 12. The Lord spake vnto Moyses saying, speake thou vnto the sonnes of Israel. The man or the womā when they haue done concerning all the sinnes which were wont to happen vnto men, and haue by negligence transgressed the commaundements of the Lorde, and haue doone offence they shall confesse their sinnes vnto me. Num. 5. He that confesseth me before men, I will acknowledge him before my father which is in Heauen: and who soeuer denyeth mee before men, him wil I also deny before my father which is in Heauen. Matt. 10.
with the hearte doe wee beleeue vnto righteousnesse, but with the mouth we confesse vnto saluation. Euery one that putteth his trust in him shall not be ashamed. Rom. 10. Confession worketh the health of the soules, is the vanquisher of vices, the restorer of vertues, the scourge a∣gainst the Deuils, what more? It stop∣peth the iawes of Hell, and openeth the gates of that celestiall Paradice. August. lib. De poenitentia. Let thy confession be simple, hum∣ble, pure, faithfull & frequent, naked, discreet, gladly, shamefast, vpright, se∣cret, mornefull, speedy, strong, accu∣sing thy selfe, and prepared to punishe it selfe by repentaunce. Item, who, what, where by whome, howe often, why, how and when, to profite others by faith. Bar. Amantius. Who so hydeth his sinnes shall not be saued, but he that confesseth them and forsaketh them, shal obtaine mer∣cie. Prou. 28. Adam was admonished of the Lorde,
after hee had sinned to acknowledge his fault, but hee after a sorte layed it vppon God & vppon his wife, and his wife vpon the serpent, but afterwards hee repented himselfe. Gen. 3. Pharaoh the tyrant confessed that hee had sinned against God, and the Israelites acknowledging God to bee a iust God, and that he & his people were wicked. Exo. 9. Tobias, although he feared God from his infancie, & kept his commandements, yet hee humbly saide acknowledging his faultes: We haue not done according to thy commaundements, & we haue not walked syncerely before thy face. Tob. 3. The three Children and Sociates of Daniel, which liued so holy amongst the Chaldeans (and for whom the Lorde had wrought such a meruaile in the fornace,) did not at al murmure against the Lord, as though they had suffered such things vn∣iustly, but Azarias said, We haue sinned, we haue doone wickedly. Dan. 3. Other notable Examples of Acknow∣ledging & confessing Gods mercies and wrath for sinnes, are extant in
Daniel. 9. 2. Mach. 2. Matt. 3. &. 8. Luke. 15. and 17. S. Paule and other the Apostles of Christ, whose cōstant confession of Christ and his Gospel, woon very many to the faith. The xiii. Plant, Obedience. OBedience towardes Gods lawes and also the ordinances of superior power, as Kings, Princes, magistrates, and officers appointed in the ministerie to the honor of God, and common vtilitie of all men, is a most speciall, necessary, and godly meane to make vs both to knowe God, our duetyes towardes him, and to feare his iudgementes: as also in him and for him to acknowledge our du∣ties towards those that haue his authori∣tie ouer vs vpon earth: and consequently euery one in his vocation to vse al dutiful submission towards his better and supe∣rior, that God may thereby be gloryfied, and the common wealth fortified against assaults of the deuil, inuasions of forraine
enemyes against ciuil disobedyence and dis∣corde; for to obay the will of God in righte∣ousnesse of life, is the perfect fruite of righ∣teousnesse vnto life euerlasting: And to obey the will of superior power in the righteous∣nesse of God, heapeth vp the blessinges of peace, plentie, prosperous, ioyful, and hap∣py welfare, neuer decaying, but more and more increasing vnto the perfectiō of the life euerlasting, which dueties who so doth not obserue, are not onely cursed of God, woor∣thyly punished by him, & by man for him in this life, but are reiected as reprobate from the blessed societie of Christe and his elect for euer. Obedience is better then sacrifice. 1. King. 15. Who so keepeth the commandements of God, shal not suffer any euill. Eccle. 8. The obedient person shall glory in vi∣ctory ouer his enemyes. Prou. 21. Wee ought to obay God more then men. Acts. 5. Giue vnto Caesar that which is Caesars; & vnto God that which is Gods Luke. 2. Let euery soule submit themselues vn∣to the hyer powers, for there is no power
but of God, the powers that be, are or∣dained of God, therefore who so resis∣teth the higher powers resisteth the ordi∣nance of God, which who so resisteth shal receiue damnation. Rom. 13. I exhorte you that prayers, petitions, supplications & thankesgiuings be made for all men, but especially for Kings, & all that are set in authoritie vnder them, that you may liue a peaceable and quiet life, with all godlynes & honestie. 1. Tim. 2. Obedience is not to be put in vre with seruile feare, but with entire affection of loue, not for feare of paines or punishmēt but for very loue towards iustice. Grego. lib. 12. moralium. If thou wilt be wise therefore, be obe∣dyent: for so it is written, Desirest thou wisedome, keepe his commaundements, and the Lord shall giue it vnto thee. Ber. in sermo. de Epiphania. Our sauiour Christ obediently went with his parents vnto Hierusalem & was subiect vn∣to them. Luc. 2. Because Abraham obayed the voyce of God, & kept his precepts & commandements, therfore the Lorde promised Isaac that hee
would multiply his seed as the fltars of heauen, & he said also, I wil giue all the nations vpon earth vnto thy posteritie, & all the nations of the earth shalbe blessed in thy seede. Gen. 26. Noah diligently obeyed the Lorde in all things which he commanded him to do before the deluge, and he was saued. Gen. 6. 7. The children of Israel promised great obe∣dience, saying, All things which the Lorde hath spoken, we wil doe, & we wil be obe∣dient, but afterwards with their works they did contrary, for they worshipped the golden calf, but they smarted for it. Exod. 24. & 32. Because Achan transgressed the comman∣dement of Iosua the Lords annoynted, there∣fore hee was ouercome in battell and after∣wards stoned to death of the people. Iosu. 7. Saule offering burnt sacrifice against the commaundement of Samuel appointed of the Lord was made a reprobate. Likewise because he spared Agag the king of Amelech, the stock of sheepe, and other precious things, and then said Samuel vnto him, Obedience is better then sacrifice. 1. King. 13. The Apostles obediently left their nettes, & followed Christ our Lord. Matt. 4. For other examples of Obedience, looke Abraham, Ge. 17. 22, Moyses, Exo. 34.
Numb. 9. Dauid, 1. King. 15. 17. the man of God, 3. Reg. 13. Naaman. 4. King. 5. Tobias. 1. Hester. 2 and the Recabites, Iere. 35. The xiiii. Plant, Concorde. COncorde is a vertue, which esteeming very humbly of her selfe, restrayneth and moderateth anger, charitably bearing with others infirmities, forgiuing very iniu∣ryes, maintaineth peace of conscience, and common tranquilitie: and is earnestly stubi∣ous that neither any thing be committed by vs offensiue to the state of the Church and cōmon wealth, neither that any iniury shall be offered by one or other to the disturbance let or hynderaunce of any good proceeding, which is a gift so excellent beseeming men, that in the increase thereof, the societie of mankinde is compared to a second heauen, euen vppon earth: and euery soule that see∣keth the due obseruation of Concorde is compared to an Angell of Heauen. For as the three persons intrinitie is one Godhead and one maiestie diuine, vnder whome all
the Angels in heauen agree in mutuall vni∣tie and concorde of minde: So ought man∣kinde vpon earth, seruing this God in trini∣tie, and trinitie in vnitie, be of mutuall con∣corde in him, & in all thinges which he be∣stoweth vppon vs for our welfare, to showe naturall agreement of minde one towardes an other to his glory. Be you of like minde one towards an other, hauing charitie, beeing of one wil, and of one vnderstanding, let euery one by lowlynesse deeme others to be better, neither let any of you regarde his owne cōmoditie so much, but euery one of you regard the commoditie of others. Phi. 3. I beseech you for our Lorde Iesus Christs sake, that you be at concorde and vnitie one with an other, & that there be no discentions amongst you, but that you be all one perfect body, of one minde & purpose in the Lord. 1. Cor 2. Followe peace and concorde with all men, and embrace holinesse of life, with∣out which no man shall see God. Heb. 12. He that hath not peace in heart, word, and work, ought not to be called a Chri∣stian, he that hopeth not in this putteth
bothe his foote yea and his whole life in a slippery place, he anchoureth his Ship in a tempestuous Sea, he ensnareth him∣selfe in the pit of destruction, and soweth his seede in the sand. Augustinus. As there is nothing more precious vnto God thē the vertue of louing concord, so the deuill desireth nothing more then the extinction of louing concord. Gre. in Past. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shalbe called the children of God. Mat. 5. Our Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus com∣maunded his disciples to haue peace amongest themselues. Mar. 9. When the fiftie dayes were come to an end, the Apostles were all of one minde at Hieru∣salem, and there appeared vnto them clouen tongues like fire, & they lighted vpon them, & they were all filled with the holy Ghost. Act. 2. The Angels at the birth of Christ brought glad tydings of peace, saying, Glory to God on hye, on earth peace, and vnto men a good will. Luc. 2. The Gabaonites hearing what Iosua had doone at Hierico and at Hai, came vnto him, and as his seruants, made an acceptable peace with him. Iosu. 9.
Phinees & others the Embassadors which were sent vnto Rubens sonnes, hearing their excuse were pacifyed, and heard their wordes with a great good will. Iosu. 22. The people blessed all those persons, which offered themselues voluntarily to come and dwell in Hierusalem, which was interpreted the vision of peace. Nehemi. 11. The cause of peace which was in the time of Onyas, is excellently descrybed: namely, the ready gratious good will of a wise and godly prince, & the goodnesse of such subiects, 2. Mach. 3. God is greatly to be praised, when he giueth to his people quietnesse, peace, & concorde, as it was with Solomon & his people. 3. Kin. 5. Dauid exhorteth the faithful to pray for the peace of Israel. Psal. 121. The xv. Plant, Amitie. AMitie or friendship is a vertue, which rendreth due beneuolence for mutuall good wil receiued betweene man and man, and bringeth foorth the communicating of humane societie, after such sorte that in na∣ture
it sociateth man with God, it maketh the Country church and common wealth in respecte of the Law, equall to the heauenly habitacle of the most highest: and in vse, it maketh neighbours, companions of one of∣fice, and brothers of one societie, to prosper with many mutuall benefites vpon Earth: so as in common shee maketh a firme knot of indissoluble felicitie vppon earth. Espe∣cially if they holde fast the linck of fidelitie, which ought to appeare in worde, work and good wil, for this vertue hath woonderfull effectes euen in the very brute and vnrea∣sonable creatures, which doe associate them¦selues with their like of kinde, which doe nourish and defend one another, and which do as it were striue with nature, to ouercome nature in naturall affections, and naturall conditions. Howe much more then in due beneuolence one towardes another ought the woorthy will and minde of man, resem∣bling outwardly the image of the Creator of all creatures, both by word and work re∣compence al dutiful desertes, deserued good will from time to time. Thou shalt loue thy friende as thy self. Leuit. 19.
Study not to work any euil against thy frend, seing he puts his trust in thee. Pro. 3 Who so is a freind indede, at all times wil shewe friendship, & a brother is try∣ed and knowen in aduersitie. Prou. 18. A faithful friend is a strong defence, who so findeth such a one, findeth a trea∣sure. Eccle. 6. Who so taketh away or withdraweth mercie from his friende, forsaketh the feare of God. Iob. 7. Better are the zealous stripes of him that loueth faithfully, then the flattering kisses of him that hateth extremely. Pr. 17 Amitie is sweete by reason of the vnity of many mindes. Augst. lib. 3 conf. A certain person spake rightly & wel of his friend, when he tearmed him the one half of his soule, for I vnderstand that my soule and the soule of my friend are both one soule in two bodyes by reason of the earnest affection of loue. Ibidem. That is a right and necessary member of amitie, which is ioyned with the glewe of Christe, which not the vtilitie of worldly substance, not the present of bo∣dyes onely, nor the deceitful and hollow-harted flattery, but with the feare of God
and zeale of his holy woorde coupleth togither. Hier. ad Paulinum. The Galathians shewed such tokens of true friendship vnto Paule, as hee confessed that they receiued him, as if he had beene an Angell. &c. Gal. 4. Onesipherus his familie in the zeale of God oftentimes refreshed Paule, and visited him when he lay in prison. Phil 4. Ruth bare such faithfull friendship in the Lord to his wiues mother Noemi, and saide vnto her, Wheresoeuer thou goest, I will go with thee: and wheresoeuer thou tary∣est I will tarry with thee also. Ruth. 1. The soule of Ionathas and the soule of Dauid was of faithfully fixed eche to others, that Ionathas stripped him selfe of his owne cote to giue it vnto Dauid. 1. King 18. Abner sent Messengers vnto Dauid say∣ing, Be freends with mee, and my handes shall be with thee, and I will bring all Is∣rael vnto thee. 2. King. 3. The 3. friendes of Iob when they hearde of all the euill which had happened vnto him, they came euery one from his dwelling place, and vizited him with comfort. Iob. 2. 6. The Lorde commended the vniust Stew∣arde
which got himselfe friendes by the wise disposing of his Maisters goods: so likewise ought euery faithfull Christian iustly to seeke the louing fauour of God in this life time, that we may bee deliuered from death eter∣nall, to liue with him in ioy and blisse for euer. Luke. 16. The xvi. Plant, Gratitude. GRatitude or thankfulnes is the true te∣stimonie of dutifull good will to bee rendered in and for any benefite bestowed vpon the inferiour person by any of better calling. And it is a vertue of excellent effect, euen amongst meanest persons, which ac∣knowledging good will or any benefite pri∣uately bestowed, doe also count them selues bounden detters towards regratifying like good wil, & so far as abilitie extendeth doe requite the same, which proceedeth not but from a woorthy mind obaying the comman∣demēt of God, & the law of nature enioyning the obseruation of true meaning and equali∣tie of good wil, which are the necessary meanes whereby humane kinde is con∣serued
and preserued which ought also to be testified by speech as the instrument of the minde, and by externall giftes as the comprobation and satisfaction of both their expectations. Now the matter or ground whence Gratitude groweth to be considered off, contayneth seuen seuerall particula∣rities: First, God, 2. our Parentes, 3. our Schoolemaisters, 4. our Magistrates, 5. Ministers of the Church, 6. our Countrie, and seuenthly our benefactors and friends, which calling this dutiful regratulation & repensation, least we incurre that penaltie of Ingratitude whiche threateneth, The plague shall not departe from the house of the vnthankful. Prou. 17. To him that giueth or bestoweth any benefite, there can nothing be requited more thankful by the receuer, thē as if he take that acceptably, which was bestow∣ed willingly and with a good will. For he dooth iniurie the spirite of grace, which taketh not with thankful minde that be∣nefite of him that bestoweth it. Ber. ad Imericū cancel. A wise man wil examine al things with him selfe, how much he hath receiued, of
whome, when, where, what and how: Therefore we deny that no man can giue thankes or bee thankfull but a wiseman. Seneca ad Luci. episto. 8. The remembrance of benefites recei∣ued ought neuer to wax olde. Idem lib, de beneficiis. A good turne doone or freendly bene∣uolence bestowed, ought euermore to be had in remembrance. Ibidem. Wee ought to render all possible re∣quitall, although we can not render suffi∣cient woorthyly, as towardes God & our Parents we are not able to render equall. Aristot. For towards God, our Parentes, and maisters we can not make due requitall. Aristo. 8. &. 9. Ethicorum. Vnto whome so great thanks can not be giuen as is due, to them yet must wee yeelde such possible thanks, as our minds are able to comprehend. Cicero in Phil. Our Sauiour Iesus Christe the fountaine of all grace and goodnesse, for the entire sor∣rowe & repentance of Mary Magdalen and other testimonyes of loue towardes him, for∣gaue her her sinnes. Luc. 7.
Pharao a very tyrannicall King, did not∣withstanding thankefully rewarde Ioseph for expounding his dreame, and highly exalted him. Gen. 41. Iethro the Priest of the Madianites was thankefull for that cause, whereas Moyses had saued and defended his daughters, when they went to water their flock, wherevpon he made him to bee called home to his house, to eate meate with him, and gaue him one of his daughters in mariage. Exod. 5. Dauid saide vnto Abiathar whose father loued the same Dauid, tary with me & feare not, if any man seeke to take away thy life, hee shall also take away mine. 1. King. 22. By reason of the great good wil that Da∣uid bare to Ionathas the sonne of Saule, hee made inquirie if there were any of his kindred yet aliue, yea or no, and he ordayned Miphi∣boseth the sonne of Ionathas to be a conti∣nuall guest at his table. 2. King. 9. The Queene of Saba brought many gifts vnto Solomon, and hee to gratifie her good will, gaue her all such thinges as she desired, except those things which she of her volunta∣ry good will, had brought him as a Princely present. 3. King. 10.
The xvii. Plant, Hospitalitie. HOspitalitie is rightly tearmed friendly entertainment of equall personages, and charitable harboring of inferiour per∣sons for some good consideration: although nature hath generally appoynted all men a resting place for a time (as Cicero saith) and not a continuall dwelling place vppon earth. And this is vsed amongst men after two manners, the one necessary without ne∣cesitie, as in entertayning those wealthy which trauel from place to place in worldly affayres & are able to requite it. The other needeful and not vnnecessary, in harbow∣ring the poore abiects of this worlde, either impotent, sick, sore, or otherwise, constray∣ned to seeke releefe, help & succour, which are not able of themselues to requite so cha∣ritable deedes. Although yet who so shew∣eth compassion and succour vppon such: to them doeth Christe our Sauiour acknow∣ledge and confesse, saying, That they gaue him to eate when hee was an hungered, they gaue him drink when he was thirsty, clothed him beeing naked, vizited him
beeing sick, and harboured him beeing comfortlesse, for the which cause hee shall say vnto them, Come yee blessed of my fa∣ther &c. Matt. 25. The Scripture now and then commen∣deth vnto vs this vertue Hospitalitie: namely, Moyses saide vnto the people: Loue thou straungers, because thou and thy brethren were strangers in the land of Egypt. Deut. 10. Forget not Hospitalitie, for by meanes theereof haue some receiued euen very Angels as guestes vnto them. Heb. 13. Before all things, haue mutuall charity one towardes an other, in all godlynesse and honestie. &c. Be harborours one to∣wardes an other without grutching. 1. Pet. 4. Welbeloued thou doost well, what so∣euer thou workest towards thy brethren, and specially such as are strangers. Ioh. 3. Hospitalitie is so thankfully accepta∣ble before God, that not so much as a cup of colde water giuen with good wil, but it shall bee rewarded againe and re∣compensed fine folde. Amb. li. de Officiis. Looke what rewarde he hath at Gods
hande which trauaileth in Gods behalfe, suche a rewarde hath hee and shall haue, which intertayneth wel such a trauailer, and their recompence shalbe equall, both his which he relieueth for Gods sake, and his which trauaileth for Gods sake. Iohn Chrysost. super Mat. Learne therfore without curiositie good Christiā to minister hospitalitie, lest hapi∣ly he whō thou shuttest out of thy house, and whom thow deniest suche charita∣ble reliefe, be Christe him selfe. 1. August: contra haereses. Our Sauiour Iesus Christe sending foorth his disciples, affirmed to preache, whosoeuer succoured them, succored him: and whosoeuer despised them, despised him. Luke 10. when he himselfe went through the worlde, hauing not where to lay his head, he was lodged at Mar∣thas house. Luke. 9. Abraham very diligently and gladly re∣ceiued Angels into his house, and caused such thinges as was needefull and necessary for thē being strangers too bee ministred vnto them. Gen. 18. Loth also entertaining Angels into his house, whom he thought had beene men, did so
honour them, and so worthily entreate them offering all things that were needeful for thē. Therefore was he saued from the firie plague of Sodom. Gen. 19. Rebecca also ministred godly help of hos∣pitalitie vnto those straungers which shee re∣ceiued, furnishing them with lodging, mans meate, and Horse meate for the time of their abode. Gen. 24. Iethro with smal entreatie or petitiō made receiued Moyses guestwise, for the which cause hoth Iethros daughter and his Ne∣phews were by Moyses greatly aduanced and hand in reputation. Exod. 9. 2. The spies which Iosua sente foorth were frendly and faithfully entertayned by the har∣lot Raab, and afterward let goe agayne. Ios. 2. & 6. Zacheus gladly receiued our Lorde Iesus into his house, and the same our Sauiour much more made him reioyce agayne saying, This day is health happened into this house. Luke. 19. For other notable examples of hospitalitie looke Iudicum 19. as Beniamin in Ga∣ba, Elias. 3. King. 17. the Sunanite, 4. King. 4. Iob. 31. the Apostles, Act. 10.
The xviii. Plant, Liberalitie. LIberalitie is that vertue which procee∣deth from good will or affection of the minde, of him which fauoureth either neces∣sitie, vtilitie, honestie, decencie, or sincere godlines especially, not so muche weighing the priuate satisfaction of a mans owne minde as in bestowing his liberalitie to the effectual reliefe, help, commoditie and com∣forte of others, according to his power and abilitie, in geuing and rewardinge not soo much for worldly prayse to be spoken of, as of meere good wil for vertuous considerati∣on, respecting what to geue, where to geue, when, and to whom and wherefore. For wee ought to take heede, as Seneca sayth, that wee deale not our almes at a wrong dore, that is to say in bestowing benefits in vaine, as in geuing weapons too women, bookes to ploughmen, and nettes too them which be geuē to studies of learning. Ther∣fore who so in bestowing their benefits haue these considerations, they surely saith Cicero which for zeale to vertue and godly studies, are bountifull and beneficiall in this maner,
these men howe muche they profite many o∣thers, so many moe worthy helpers and wel willers shall they gayne vnto them selues, and againe by custome of this beneficencye shal they be better prepared, and as it were better exercised to deserue wel of many men Cicero lib. Offici. Riches well bestowed and to good vse, doe gaine many friendes to him that so employeth them Prouer. 19. For distributiō of almes to the poore, reade Eccle. 4. For God loueth a cheerefull geuer. 1. Cor. 7 Let not thy left hand knowe what thy right hande doeth. Mat. 7. Let thy welspringes flow abrode, and thy riuers into the streates. Prouer. 5. Geue, and it shalbe geuen vnto you, &c Luke. 6. Minister vnto the necessitie of the holy ones of God. Rom. 12. Forget not due beneuolence and good wil one towards an other: for with such sa∣crifices is God pleased. Heb. 13. Breake thy bread vnto the hungrye. Esay. 58. Euery one of a good purpose and mea∣ning
that is to say willingly and francklye bestowe your benefites, not grudging or with compulsion. 1. Cor. 7. Liberalitie is not defined in the quan∣titie of the beneuolence geuen, but in the qualitie of zeale or affection in him that geueth. Hier. de viduis. That is called perfect liberalitie, when a man with silence concealeth his bene∣fits emploied for the necessities of others, whom the poore mans mouth commen∣deth and not his owne lips. Moreouer perfect liberalitie is com∣mended by faith, because by the conueni∣ent place and time especially towards the housholde of faith. Ambro. lib. 1. de offici. Our Lorde and Sauiour Christe Iesus the liuely and most large fountaine of liberalitie perfourmed and alwayes wil performe, a hun∣dred folde in this life, and life euerlasting in in the world to come, to al such as for his sake shall forsake all worldly goodds to follow him. Mat. 19. Mar. 10. & Luke 18. Zacheus was very liberally disposed, when he saide vnto the Lord: Beholde Lorde, the half of my goods I geue to the poore, & if I haue doone any man wrong, I restore
him foure folde. Luke 19. The children of Israel with a diligent and godly minde offered their deuotions to builde the worke of the Tabernacle, and whatsoeuer else was nccessarie for the ceremoniall vse thereof, so that the woorkemen were enforsed to say vnto Moyses, the people offereth more then is necessarie or needeful. Exod. 25. 36. To bias endeuoured to imparte vnto the brethren of his kindred suche thinges as they needed, he also fed the hungry and clothed the naked as appeareth. Tobi. 1. Godly, liberall, and mercifull was Iob vn∣to the poore saying: I haue bin a comfort vnto the hart of the widowe, and a father of the poore Iob. 29. 31. The widowes Mite was a slender token of beneuolence, and yet esteemed by Christe with the giftes of rich men. Luke 21. The Apostles against a dearth, determined to succour the brethren in Iudaea with corne, which they sent by Barnab. & Saule Act. 11. The xix, Plant. Mercie. MErcy is a woorthy vertue which may bee rightly called not onely a griefe of
minde conceiued, sorowing for an others mi∣sery & calamitie, especially of good, godly, learned, honest and vertuous persons, but also effectually working by external meane to help, relieue, cōfort & succour others, so far as equity & brotherly charitie may extend. This mercy and compassion saith Lactanti∣us Firmianus lib. 6. cap. 12. is a singuler or∣nament appertaining vnto iustice, to succour and defende the Orphanes, Widowes and helples, because the whole law of GOD so cōmaundeth. Besides these as Cicero saith, we ought to be merciful vnto those especial∣ly which by reason of infortunitie, casualtie of goodes, or losse of liues, either for ex∣treame miseries (and not for any maner of trespasse against God, and man greeuously committed) do stand in neede of our commi∣seration. This vertue thus rightly to vse (sayth he) of many vertues is mercy more wonderful and more gracious. For men do not in any thing more resemble or come neare vnto the likenesse of God, then in re∣lieuing and shewing mercy one towardes an other. Heerein fortune hath nothing greater wherof shee may, nor nature any thing bet∣ter whereof she would impart from her owne brestes Cicero in Oratio. pro. Qu. Ligurio.
A great trauel is there ordeined for all men, and a great burden for all the chidrē of Adam, from the day of their birth, vn∣til the day of their graue the mother of all thinges. Eccle. 40. Mercy and trueth shall preserue the King, and with mercy his Throne shal bee established for euer. Prouer. 20. Blessed are the mercifull, because they shall receiue mercy. Mat. 5. Goe rather and learne what that mea∣neth: I will haue mercy and not sacrifice. Mat. 9. Forgeue your offenders with mercy as equitie requireth, & you your selues shall haue your offences forgeuen you. Luk. 6. Who so hath this worldes good and seeth his brothers neede, and shal shut his compassion from him, how dwelleth the loue of God in that man. Iohn 1. 3. Mercy is the safegarde of health, the Ornamēt of faith, the offered satisfaction by Christ for our sinnes. This is she which commendeth the iust, strengtheneth the holy ones, and aduaunceth the worship∣pers or seruauntes of God. Ioh. Chrysost. super Matthaeum. Mercy is there more bountifull, where
faith is more ready. Nothing so muche cōmendeth a Christian, as the charitable mercye of one man towardes another. Ambro. de officiis. Our Sauiour and redeemer Christe Iesus, the most excellent mirrour of milde mercie, by his example biddeth vs to be mercifull, be∣cause (saith he) your heauely father is merci∣full. Luke. 6. Also saying, you shall finde rest vnto your soules in so doing. Mat. 11. So had hee compassion vpon the woman whose sonne was dead, when he said vnto her, weepe not, so that hee raised her sonne from death to life. Luke 7. Vnto the sicke of the Palsey, did he shew al∣so his meruaylous mercy, both in curing his disease and forgeuing his sinnes. Mat. 9. Vpon the woman diseased with the blooddy Issue, vpon the two blinde, and vpon the posses∣sed with a dumbe spirite, did hee worke his wonderful mercies, to the greate admiration of the multitude standing by. Mat. 9. Ruben and Iudas were mooued with na∣turall compassion to withstande the other bre∣thren which would haue slayne their brother Ioseph, whom although they brought not a∣gaine to their father, yet by their meanes his
life at that ttme was saued. Gen. 37. When the children of Israell had taken 200000. of their enimies, men, women & chil∣dren prisoners, they spared them, & sent them backe againe vnto their owne dwelling places appareling thē and relieuing them. 2. Par. 2. Nehemias hearing of the miserable state of the Citie of Hierusalē, wept many dayes, & both procured oportune helpe and counsell to remedie the distressed state therof. Neh. 1. 2. The xx. Plant, Innocencie. INnocencie is a most notable vertue, signi∣fiyng that purenes of minde which abhor¦reth from all reuenge of priuate iniurie done to vs by any man, & not onely in our selues, ought this to be for our soules saluation, for the sauegarde of our owne life, goods, and good name, but also inasmuch as in vs lieth, we are bounde to instruct, teach and exhort this vertue vnto all others, that by all good meanes they may be harmelesse of thought, deede and woorde free from offence, blame, or shame. So ought we to haue Adams in∣nocencie in our minds: before he was temp∣ted
how cleare he was, and when he tasted the fruite how much he had defiled him self. Wherefore let vs alwaies liue like litle in∣fantes in respect of true innocencie (which as S Hierom. saith) proceede not in wrath, remember not harmes doone to them, lust not after the eye, thinke not one thing and speake an other. This innocencie ex∣cept we haue (saith S. Herome) we shall not as the children of God enter into the king∣dome of heauen. super Matt. cap. 18. Blessed are ye when men reuile you, and shall falsly speake al maner of euill against you for my sake. Mat. 5. . Verily I say vnto you, except ye repent and become as litle children, you shal not enter into the Kingdome of Heauen. Mat. 18. 3. Who so receiueth one of these litle ones in my name, receiueth me. And who so offendeth one of these litle ones, which beleeueth in me, it were meete that a Mil∣stone were hanged about his necke, and that he were cast into the bottome of the Sea ibidem. . 6. You haue heard how it hath been said, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth,
But I say vnto you resist not euill with e∣uill. Mat. 5. The simple beleeue euery woorde, so long as the innocent cleane vnto righte∣ousnes, they shal not be ashamed. Pro 14. See that you render not euill for euill, but alwayes persiste in dooing good. 1. Thes. 5. Who is innocent? hee which neither hurteth others, nor himselfe, for hee that hurteth himselfe, is not innocent. Aug. super Psal. 35. Bee glad of thine innocencie and re∣ioyce, be glad I say, because she is harme∣lesse in euery place, & safe in euery place. If thou bee tempted, thou profitest: if thou beest brought lowe, thou shalt bee exalted, if thou fightest, thou winnest: if thou be slayne, thou shalte bee crowned. Chrysost in Homil. Lord who shal enter in∣to thy holy hil euen he that is innocent of his handes and pure of heart, which hath not taken his soule in vayne, nor hath sworne to deceaue his neighbour, he shal receiue blessing from the Lorde and mer∣cie from God his Sauiour. Psal. 25. That most innocent Lambe Christe Iesus
our Sauiour in whose mouth was founde none euil, & in whose heart was foūd no guyle, both liued in innocencie as he taught, & died in in∣no ēcie for our example, that we should refuse no domage, daunger, nor iniurie for the testi∣monie of a good conscience towardes God in true innocencie of life. Mat. 23. Iohn. 19. Susanna was innocent from that heynous fact, wherewith the false iudges charged her: for testimony of which truth God sent Daniel his seruaunt to diiudicate the cause of her in∣nocencie, and to condemne the false iudges of their mischeuous malice. Dan. 13. Dauid serued Saule in all innocencie, truth, & fidelitie, a long time: yet was he persecuted by him, but in the end he was crowned king after Saule. 1. Reg. 28. vs{que}, ad 26. cap. Ioseph was also innocent, iust, & faith∣full towards his Maister: albeit his Mistresse went about to tempt him & procure reuenge vppon him, for not fulfilling her pleasure. But the Lord preferred his innocency that he foūd farre more grace & fauour both with God & man. Gen 39. Iob both iust and innocent before GOD, though Sathan desired God that he might di∣uersly touch him with vexation & aduersity, yet did he neuer departe from his innocencie,
but walked vprightly, glorified God and bele∣ued in his Sauiour. Iob. 1. & 2. The xxi. Plant. Good counsell. GOod counsell is a rare & excellent ver∣tue, priuately, necessary, & publikly be∣neficial proceeding of good desire to do wel▪ to establish that which is present, to preuent that which is to come, and to prouide for the safetie of sincere good meaning, that no sini∣ster meanes of euill, molest, circumuent or endomage the same. This good coūsel ought he to seeke that wanteth it in due time. And this good counsell ought he that hath it, to giue it in due time. For as Solomon saith, Words spoken in due time are like apples of golde in a siluer dishe. And that worthye Salust admonished his friendes first to aske counsell, before they begunne any thing, and when they had taken counsell, to dispatche their purpose quickely. He that will doe any thing well therefore, let him also consider, that as in delay to seek counsel bringeth dā∣ger, and in rashe taking counsell bringeth repentaunce: so to worke by good counsell in due time bringeth expected comfort & com∣moditie from time to time. Let vs craue this
good counsell of the holy Ghost the comfor∣ter, that in all thoughtes, words and workes we may glorifie God, and edifie our selues, and our christian brethren also. My sonne, doe nothing without coū∣sell, and thou shalte not repent thee after the deede. Eccle. 32. Giue eare vnto counsell, and receaue discipline, that thou maiest be wise in the last dayes. Prou. 9. Euen as water is in the deepe, so is counsel in the heart of man: But who so is wise, shall drawe out the same. Prou. 20. The wise man doeth all thinges with counsel: But he that is foolishe, discoue∣reth his follie. Prou. 13. The heart of man with oyntment and sundry sweete odours is made glad: so is the soule comforted with the good coun∣sels of a friende. Prou. 27. A sweet word multiplieth friends, & mi∣tigateth enimies, & a gracious tung, aboū∣deth in a good man. Haue thou as many freends as thou cāst get, & but one coūsel∣our of a thousand. Eccle. 6. Let not the good counsell of the aged escape thy hearing, for they haue learned of their fathers', because of them also, hou shalte learne vnderstanding and in
time of neede shalte thou giue answeare. Eccle. 8. Through counsels are the determina∣tions of men established, & with discreete gouernement are warres to bee taken in hande. Prou. 20. There is no wisedome, there is no vn∣derstanding, there is no counsell against the Lorde. Prou. cap. 21. Our Lorde and Sauiour Christ Iesus that most pure fountayne of cōfortable good coun∣sel, when by preaching and teaching the will of his heauenly father, hee was sent to distri∣bute the free saluation of mankinde, in the end of one sermon made by him vpon the Mount: hee pronounced this counsell to our euerlasting comfort: viz. Euery one which heareth my wordes and doth the same, shall be com∣pared vnto a wise man, that buildeth his house vppon a rocke. Mat. 7. Iacob hearkened vnto the counsels of hid mother, working all thinges accordingly. And it came to passe that the Lorde prospered him greatly therein. Gen. 27. Ruben hearing the euil determinations of his other brethren agaynst Ioseph resisting the same, gaue counsell rather that he should
be solde, whereby it fell out, that his life was saued, and he afterward became a comfortable helper of his brethren. Gen. 37. Iethro gaue good counsel vnto Moyses, for the welfare of the people of Israel, worthie of imitation. Exod. 18. Through the good counsell of Abigail that godly vertuous womā, Dauid was withdrawne from shedding of Nabals blood: which if he had done, would greatly haue procured gods wrath towards Dauid for the same. 1. Reg. 25. Abner gaue good coūsel to Asael whē he folo∣wed him, saying: Do not thou folow me, least I cause thee to fall vnto the earth. Which thing to heare bicause Asael contemned, he was therefore slaine by him immediately. 2. Reg. 2. The elders gaue good counsell vnto Robo∣am, but he to his owne harme gaue eare to the counsell of the yonger in authoritie about him. 3 Reg. 12. Reade the good counsell of Eliseus vnto Naa∣man, and the good euent thereof. 4 Reg. 5. Of Ioiada vnto Ioas the King, and the euent ther∣of. 4. Reg. 12. 2. Par. 24. of Nehemias in buil∣ding the Temple. Nehem. z. of Tobias in captiuitie. Tob. 1. of Iudith to the people. Iu∣dith. 8. of Ionas to the Nineuites. Ionas. 2. 3. of Mattathias to his sonnes. 1. Machabes. 2.
of Iudas Machabaeus. 1. Macha. 3. 4. and 9. Item 2. Mac. 8. & 15. and of the Apostles. Act. 2. 4. 10. 13. 14. 16. 18. 19. 20 & 26. The. xxii. Plant. Discipline. DIscipline is a necessarie and needefull vertue, most aptly to be applied of trac∣tabilitie in learning, godlinesse, goodnesse or vertue, to beare in minde that we heare, to cō∣firme in maners what we conceiue in minde, and to vse brotherly correction or admonition with seueritie, according to the defect there∣from, as Gregorius in his Morals sayth, that in this discipline ought to be admixed lenitie with seueritie, and that there should be made a moderation thereof. Furthermore S. Au∣gustine writing de Moribus Ecclesiae, distin∣guisheth Discipline in two partes. The first loue, and the second feare, as who should say, loue in teaching, telling and admonishing the learner: and feare in learning, following and practising that which is taught. After this sort (saith he) where Discipline is, there is the Ladie of true Religion, and of true godlinesse, which neither so blameth that she burreth, nor
so chastiseth that shee woundeth: But finally beeing angrie, shee correcteth mennes ma∣ners, and being zealously mooued shee pre∣serueth them to perfection. Thus as Gre∣gorius Nazianzen sayth: The wordes of the nurses are milke, if they be good, or poyson if they be ill. In Regist. cap. 7. A wise man by hearing becommeth wiser, and hee that hath vnderstanding, shall possesse the seate of authoritie. &c. Prou. 5. Hast thou children? bring them vp in nurture, and from their childhoode make them to stande in awe: Hast thou daugh∣ters? keepe their bodies in awe, and shewe not a pleasant countenance towards them. Ecclesiasticus. 7. My sonne despise not thou the chaste∣ning of the Lord, neither forsake him whē thou art reprehended. For whomsoeuer the Lorde loueth, him doth he chasten, as the father which taketh pleasure in his childe. Pro. 3. Who so reiecteth discipline, dispiseth his owne soule: but hee that hearkeneth to good admonishment, enioyeth his owne hearts case. Prou. 15.
For whoso despiseth wisedome and dis∣cipline is vnhappy: and vaine is their hope, yea their labours are without fruite, and their woorkes are vnprofitable. Sap. 3. A man that is wise and well nurtured, will not murmure when he is admonished to amend his fault &c. Eccle. 10. cap. I beseeche thee my good brother, that vnto all those vnder thy iurisdiction, from the greatest to the least, thou wouldest de∣clare both the sweete comfort of the hea∣uenly kingdome, and the bitter paines of hell. And that thou beeing carefull for their welfare, wouldest be as a watchman ouer them. Bicause for euery one which are vnder thy authoritie thou shalt render ac∣countes vnto God. Admonish them there∣fore, and perswade them too beware of pride, slaunder, drunkennesse, fornication, wrath, periurie, and couetousnesse. Augu∣stinus ad comitem. Our heauenly schoolmaster Christ Iesus. euen as yet a childe, sitting amongst the doctors in the Temple disputed with them, profited in wisdome discretion and grace, before God and men. Luc. 2. Being also the light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glorie of his people Israel,
taught first his Disciples the true doctrine of saluation vnto al men, which whoso beleued should inherite euerlasting life. Mat. 10. This discipline was taught by the sayd Apo∣stles by preaching of the Gospel, as namely S. Thomas at Parthia, S. Mathew in Aethiopia, S. Bartholomew in India, S. Andrew in Scy∣thia, S. Iohn Baptist in Asia, S. Peter in Gala∣tia, S. Philip in Scythia, S. Iames the brother of Christ at Ierusalem, Saint Iohn the diuine in Pathmos, S. Iames the elder brother of Iohn at Ierusalem, S. Simeon the sonne of Cleopha, there also, and S. Paule at Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, Galatia, and Thessalonia, with Bar∣nabas at Antioch, teaching and instructing the faythfull, as also reprouing the seduced and erronious Disciples, inducing them by all tra∣ctabilitie and good order of discipline to bee re∣conciled and established vnto the perfect path of rightuousnesse. Act. 15. This discipline (as the holy Prophet Moyses in Israel, Ionas in Niniuee, Elias and Elizeus in Israel, Daniel at Babylon, Nathan at Ieru∣salem, and diuerse other by the operation of the holy Ghost, taught and perswaded the kings and nations of the earth, euery one in their degree to learne their duties: So likewise haue the an∣cient fathers of the Church, as Ioseph of Ara∣mathia
in England, S. Ignatius at Antioche. Policarpus at Rome, Irenaeus at Lions, Ori∣gen at Alexandria, Tertullian in Affrica, Cy∣prian at Carthage, S. Hierom in Bethleem, S. Augustine at Hipponesa, S. Ambrose at Mi∣laine, S. Basil at Caesarea in Cappadocia, S. Gregorie Naziāzen, & S. Epiphan. at Cypres. and others by their diuine giftes in preaching, teaching, detecting, disputing, correcting and cō∣futing haue wonderfully profited the Church of God vnto all posteritie, cōfirming this discipline of the Gospel, albeit some of them more purer than other some expressing the same. The. xxiii. Plant. Virginitie. VIrginitie is that vertue which the aun∣cient called pure and vndefiled conti∣nencie of bodie and minde, which is a conti∣nual meditation of the mind, and a continuall exercitation of the bodie in the vncorruptible, chast estate of life, refrayning carnal desire, & carnall dealing of the feminine sexe with the masculine, euen from the first infancy vnto the last cōtinued state of continencie, as God shal giue the gift thereof aboue worldly considera∣tion. Thus saith Augustine, writing de bono virginali. It is more blessed in the flesh to
imitate the life of Angels, than by the flesh to encrease the nūber of mortal men. And S. Hierom in his sermō de Assump. saith: Of good right was the Angel sent vnto the vir∣gin: bicause vnto Angels, virginitie is euer∣more knowne. And truly (saith he) to liue in the fleshe as beside the fleshe, is not an earthly life, but a heauenly life. For to be an Angel is a state of felicitie, but to be a virgin is the state of surpassing vertue. But S. Ambrose more highly aduauncing virginitie, saith, that virginitie farre surmounteth the state of hu∣mane nature, whereby men are likened vnto Angels. Yet greater is the victorie of virgins thā of Angels, bicause Angels liue out of the flesh, but virgins do triumph in the flesh. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Mat. 5. For Virginitie is the treasure whose pre∣cious price is inexpressible. Gen. 24. Touching virgins I haue no commaun∣dement of the Lord, but yet I do admonish them. &c. 1. Cor. 7. Let the vnmaried woman and the virgin study for those things which perteine vnto the Lord, that she may be holy in bodie and soule. eodem.
No mā could say the song, but those same xliiii which were redeemed from the earth These are they which were not defiled in the flesh. Apoc. 14. For they are virgins and followe the lambe wheresoeuer he goeth. cap. eodem. These are redeemed from amongst men as the first fruites vnto God and the lamb, & there is no deceit found in their mouth. For they are without spotte before the throne of God. eodem. Whoso hauing power of his owne will, hath determined in his heart to keepe his virgine pure, doeth well: also he which ioy∣neth his virgin in matrimonie doth well, but he that marieth not his virgine doeth better. 1. Cor. 7. Remember therfore in this life to pre∣pare thee thy lampe of true godlinesse, and the oile of sincere vetrue feruently lumina∣ting thy bodie and soule, that with the fiue wise virgins thou mayest enter with the bridegrome Christ Iesus, into the celestiall ioyes of life euerlasting. Mat. 25. Marie the blessed virgine and mother of Iesus Christ,Examples. Maria inter∣et. Stella Maris. by the power of the holy Ghost, though she conceiued and brought forth the sa∣uiour
of the worlde in the flesh, yet seemed shee to be still a virgin vndefiled. When she saying, How may this be, for I know no man? her sister Elizabeth being full of the holy Ghost es∣pecially commended the holy virgin, saying: Blessed art thou amongest women, &c. Luke. 1. The same Elizabeth by the diuine prouidēce one of the daughters of Aaron,Elizabeth interpret. Plenitudo dei a long time li∣ued vndefiled in the flesh, walking in all the pre∣cepts & testimonies of the Lord vnreprouable, to the great admiration of Zacharias her hus∣band, who was de by the Angel, that his wife Elizabeth should euen in her aged yeares mi∣raculously also beare a childe, which shoulde be great in the Lordes sight. Luk. 1. The virgins and women children, which had not knowen carnall copulation amongest the Medianites, were spared by the captains of Is∣rael, and by the commaundement of Moyses had their liues saued, when all the malekinde were slaine with the sworde. Num. 31. The daughter of the woman of Canaan be∣ing sore vexed with an euill spirite, was at the instant prayer of her mother helped by Christ. Math. 15. Philip the Euangelist had foure daughters virgins which prophecied. Acts. 21.
Euphemia, Dorothea, Tecla, and Erasma, virgins of sincere, godly, and vertuous conuer∣sation, for the testimonie of Christ, had rather suffer martyrdome, then forsaking him to liue in blindnesse vnder Seruastus the tyrant. Pet. de natal. lib. 3. cap. 29. Anno dom. 65. Vrsula of Englande, with the 11000. virgins passing towardes Rome by Basilea, with Pan∣taleon the Bishop of Basilea, (homewards by the way returning from the people called the Hunnes) suffered martyrdome for the testimo∣nie of Christ at Colen in Belgia. Pol. Virg. in Ang. 3. Anno. 460. The xxiii. Plant. Sobrieetie. SObritie, as Augustine sayth (writing vn∣to the holy virgins) is the armour or shield of the minde and senses, of all the members, & of the whole bodie it selfe, the fortresse of Cha∣stitie and shamefastnesse, the neighbor of Mo∣destie, handmayd of amitie & peace, the neare alied vnto honestie, & the verie true shunner of all vice & sinne. Yea he addeth yet further and sayeth, This vertue Sobrietie, is the obseruer of true iudgement, the wisedome of insepara∣ble memorie and remembrance, the Closet of
secretes, the couering of priuities, the prompt atchieuer of learning and doctrine, the disci∣pline of good artes and sciences, togither re∣puted as Ladie and mistresse ouer humaine wittes, and the handmaide of enterprises, which is euer desirous of good name, ordey∣ning thinges wholesome and profitable, and a singular helpe to vertue, disposing al things with reason and alwayes coueting to keepe companie with honest persons. Thus much out of S. Augustine, touching the definition of this excellent vertue Sobrietie. Being prepared with the loynes of your minde girded, see that you hope soberly, and perfectly for that grace which is brought vntoo vs, and frame not your selues to liue after your former inordinate lustes. 1. Pet. 2. The grace of God hath appeared vnto vs, that wee denying and forsaking all vn∣godlinesse and worldly concupiscences, should liue soberly, iustly, and godly in this present worlde. 2. Tit. Beware that your heartes be not gree∣ned with surfetting and drunkennesse, and with cares of this life, & that the latter day sodenly steale not vppon you: for it shall
come vnlooked for, as a snare vnto all the worlde. Luke. 21. Sobrietie, especially in women, carieth alwayes a lowly countenance towarde the earth, remembring that she came from the earth: But drunkennesse hauing lost all modestie, lifteth vp her loftie lookes on high. August. ad sacr. virgines. Sobrietie with great trembling and si∣lence vttereth that worde which cannot be reprehended: But drunkennesse both she∣weth vnshamefast speach & countenance▪ ibidem. Sobrietie is the mother of all vertues: But drunkennesse is the fountaine of all vices. Origen. hom. 57. Our Lord and sauiour Christ Iesus as a sin∣gular example of sobrietie whose action is our instruction, gaue commaundement vnto his A∣postles into what house soeuer they enired, that they should eate and drinke such as they found, as who say they shoulde bee content euen with meane fare, and not seeke after any curious or daintie fare. Luke. 10. Daniel had determined in his mind before, that he would not be defiled with the meate of Pharaos table, by means wherof God gaue him
and his sociates knowledge & wisdome. Dan. 3. Eleazarus, although he was stricken in age, had rather die a cruell death than hee woulde eate swines fleshe which was against the lawe. 2. Mac. 2. The seuen brethren with their mother also being compelled of the king to eate swines flesh, contrarie to the law, chose rather to suffer most cruel torments. 2. Mac. 7. Saint Iohn Baptist was of such sober life, that his vsual meate was only locustes and wild honie. Math 3. Math 11. The Lord commended the sobrietie of those Rachabites, bycause they woulde drinke no wine, as their father commanded them. Ier. 35. The xxv. Plant, Chastitie. CHastitie is a special vertue which ought to perteine vnto euerie degree of humane kinde, reteyning the puritie as well of the minde being called the inward man, voyde of wicked or vngodly cogitations, consent, mo∣tion, or any maner of purpose against the will of God, as also reteyning cleannesse of bodily gesture, in the outward man, voyd of wicked
and vngodly speach, word & deed in al things contrary to Gods holy wil. And although god commaundeth that this vertue should bee had in due honor, & obserued in al ages & degrees of men and women, yet it ought with special care to be regarded in the state of wedlocke, bicause when God hath lincked in mutuall bōds of loue, & placed in two bodies one soule, there ought to be no violation of this vertue, nor no breach of this knot. For in this chasti∣tie & mutual loue consisteth wonderful felicity and manifold comfort eche of other. Contrari∣wise, if either chastitie be without loue, or loue without chastitie, euery felicitie turneth into infelicitie, & euery comfort into a corsey. For Chastitie (as S. Bernard saith without loue, is a lampe without oyle. Take away the oyle & the lampe cannot burne: so take away loue, & chastitie pleaseth not. Ber. in epist. ad Senon. O howe faire is a chast generation with vertue: for the memorie thereof is euerla∣sting, bicause it is knowne before God, and also before men. When she is present they folow her steps, and when she withdraweth herself, they desire her, & for euer crowned doth she triumph, with conquest of reward ouer the multitude of those defiled. Sap. 4.
Blessed are the cleane and pure of heart, for they shall see God. Mat. 5. The light of the bodie is the eye, if ther∣fore thy eye be simple, all thy whole bodie shall be light. Mat. 6. For he that is stedfast of minde, maketh none necessitie, but hath power of his own will, and hath decreed this in his heart, namely to keepe his virginitie. 1. Cor. 7. Know you not that your bodies are the members of Christ. Shall you then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. Know you not that your body is the temple of the holy ghost dwelling in you. 1. Cor. 6. Separate not your selues one frō another, except it be through both your cōsents for a time, continuing in fasting & praier, least Satā tēpt you for your incōtinency. 1. Cor. 7. Let the vnmaried mā care for those things, which pertein to the pleasing of God. ibid. Let the vnmaried womā seeke that which perteines vnto the Lorde, that she may bee holy both in body and soule. Ibid. Our Sauiour Iesus Christ the moste pre∣cious, pure, and vndefiled patterne of Cha∣stitie, as hee liued heere on earth moste
chastely, so hath he left vs this lesson as exam∣ple worthie of imitation, namely that there is no treasure comparable to the gift of chastitie. Ecclesiasticus 26. So long as our parents Adam and Eue were in Paradise, they were in state of virginitie, but being once cast out by the displeasure of God, it came then to passe, that Adam knewe Eue car∣nally. Gen. 4. Ioseph although he was a bond seruant, and a yong man of elegant personage, without wife, being earnestly prouoked therevnto by his mi∣stresse, woulde not giue his consent to defile his maisters bed, and had rather displease his mi∣stresse, and be shut in close prison, than be would lose his chastitie. Gen. 39. Sara had such care and continencie of her bodie touching chaste life before shee maried Tobia, that in her prayer she confessed, say∣ing, Thou knowest Lorde that I neuer desired companie of man, but haue kept my soule pure and vndefiled from al carnall lustes. Tob. 3. Iudith after shee had buried her first hus∣band neuer knew any man, but kept her selfe a chaste widow▪ keeping the fastes and feastes of the Sabboth in the house of Israel, with deuout fasting and prayer. Iud. 8. After that Phinees and other captaines had
subdued the Madianites, Moyses commanded that all the wicked women should be slaine, and that the virgins only should be saued. Num. 31. Marie the blessed virgin and mother of Christ, continued in the estate of chastitie by diuine prouidence. Luke 1. Susanna a singular example for chast maried women. Dan. 13. The xxvi. Plant, Repentance. REpentance is a vertue profitable, both to the bodie and the soule, & highly plea∣sing God. But it is vnderstoode to bee a cer∣tain remorse of conscience inwardly, and ear∣nestly sorrowing for any thing, spokē, done, or thought beyonde the bounds of Gods lawes, and mannes, either priuately or publiquely, wherein detesting and hating such kinde of dealing, we protest with minde and mouth, to forsake from henceforth al former folly, looce∣nesse of life, and licencious lustes, & in taking a reuenge by heartie repentance, we professe and practise better wayes and dealings to∣wards God and man, in punishing the appe∣tites of the fleshe with the abstinence of the
spirite, and sacrifice of sorrowes vnto amend∣ment and newnesse of life. Thus as S. Au∣gustine sayth, who so shall truely repent, and be loosed of the bandes of sinne, to bee vnited in the bodie of Christ, and shal liue well after their repentance, as he should haue done be∣fore his repentance, after his reconcilement whensoeuer he dieth, he goeth vnto God, hee goeth to the good rest, he shal not be frustrate of the inheritance promised in the kingdome of God, nor separated from the societie of Gods people. Aug. de poeneten. cap. 5. Thus sayeth the Lorde, if I shall shut vp the heauens, so that there fall no raine, and should commaund the Locusts to deuoure the earth, & should send a pestilence vnto my people in my wrath: yet if my people which call vppon my name, do make their praiers vnto me, do seeke my face, & repent them of their sinnes, I wil heare them from out of the heauens. Parali. 7. Be not slow to turne vnto the Lord, and deferre not of from day to day, for sodenly shal his wrath come, and in time of his ven∣geance shall he destroy thee. Eccle. 5. Repent, for the kingdome of heauen is at hand. Mat. 3. and 4.
Lay away from you according to your olde conuersation, the olde man which is corrupted, by reason of the desire of sinne, and be renned in the spirite of your mind, and put on the newe man which is created like vnto god, in righteousnesse and holi∣nesse of truth. Ephe. 4. Turne vnto the Lorde, and forsake the sinnes, pray before the face of the Lord, and leaue of to offend. Turne againe vnto the Lorde, and turne away from thy vnrighte∣ousnesse, and more and more hate thy wic∣kednesse, and knowledge the righteousnes and iudgement of God, &c. Eccle. 17. There shall be more ioy in heauen ouer one sinner that truely repenteth, than ouer 99. iust which need no repentance. Luk. 15. Christ Iesus the righteous sauiour of al man kind, hath promised vs that he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Luk. 5. affirming that at what time soeuer a sinner re∣penteth him of his sinnes, from the bottome of his heart, that hee woulde put away all his sinnes. &c. Ezec. 1. When the people of Israel heard, that the Lorde was grieued at the murmuringes in the desert, they mourned therefore, and woulde
haue done more in the morning than the Lorde commaunded them. Num. 14. They at another time sayde vnto the Lorde, we haue sinned, render thou vnto vs whatsoe∣uer thou wilt, and they cast away their Idolles from them, so that, He sorowed vpon their miseries. Iud. 10. Dauid quickely repented him, when Na∣than reprehended him of his fault. 2. Reg. 12. Achab the most wicked king of Israel, coue∣red his flesh with hairecloth, and slept in sacke∣cloth, and walked bareheaded before the Lord, and his punishment for the faultes was dispen∣ced with and forgiuen. 3. Reg 21. Manasses being bound in chaines, and caried into Babilon, verie much repented him before the Lord, and the Lord restored him againe vn∣to his kingdome of Ierusalem. 2. Par. 33. Esdras the prophet weeping for the sinnes of Israel, and making intercession for them vnto the Lord, it was answered him, thus. If there be repentance in Israel, I will then enter a league with the Lord, &c. 1. Esdr. 10. Iob although he was a man simple and right, fearing God, yet I will do (sayth he) repentance in sackcloth and ashes. Iob. 42. The Nineuites beleeued the Lorde at the preaching of Ionas, and they preached fasting,
clothing themselues with sackecloth and ashes, from the least to the most, and they were deli∣uered. Ionas. 2. The xxvii. Plant, Simplicitie. SImplicitie is a singular vertue, which pro∣perly and plainly speaketh and doth those things which are vnfeined, vncorrupt, with∣out simulatiō, adulation, collusion, hypocrisie, doublenesse of heare, or sinister externall dea∣ling in doctrine and doings of life & maners. Although this vertue hath somtimes her im∣perfection, when in the simple mind, without wisdome & knowledge, she (as ignorant) doth, speaketh, & thinketh not alwaies those things that are profitable for her, neither for others. As the other simplicity ioined with wisdom & true knowledg, worketh euermore that which neither can nor may redound to the iniurie or deceite of herselfe, neither to the iniurie or de∣ceceyt of any others, so as she neither will de∣teiue others, nor be deceiued her selfe in anie thing, but keeping the race of integritie, and method of perfection. It is taken in moste places of the Scripture for the true and per∣fect
affection of the minde, and in nature for the true and vnfeigned godlinesse, which is both pleasing vnto God, and profitable vnto man. Thus, as S. Hierom sayth, super Oseā Prudence without simplicitie, is but meere malice, and simplicitie without reason or wis∣dome is but meere foolishnesse. Let not your vnderstanding be corrupted from simplicitie in Christ, that is, from the true knowledgement and faith in Christ, or from true godlinesse. 2. Cor. 11. Be you wise as serpents, and innocent as doues. Mat 10. Bee as the simple children of God, and vnreproouable amongest the euil and wic∣ked generation. Phil. 2. The simple shal possesse and dwell in the land. Prou. 2. He that walketh simply walketh surely. cap. 10. The iust which walketh in his simplicitie, shal leaue a blessed posteritie of children af∣ter him. eodem. Thou shalt be simple if thou intangle not thy selfe vnto the world, but wring thy selfe out of the wretched familiaritie therof. For in wringing thy selfe frō the world art thou
simple, but in entangling thy selfe to the world, thou art duble. Aug. super Iohn. ho. 2. The simplicitie of the iust shal direct thē in the right way. Pro. 11. He that giueth, let him giue in simplici∣tie, that is to say, in true and simple zeale to do well towardes all men, not seeking any curiositie, or vsing captiousnesse, Rom. 12. Our Lord & sauiour Iesus Christ, the sole & singular patern of godly simplicitie, came simply into this world, borne in a simple barne or stable, simply in nature was obedient to his parents, simply taught, and simply liued according to his teaching, in whose mouth there was no guide, in whose heart no deceyte, neither in any externall doings, any harme. Mat. Mar. Luke. Iohn. His beloued Apostles, Peter, Andrew, and others, of simple fishermen, poore, vnlerned, base and abiect in worldly wisedome, did he traine, teach and instruct with the fulnesse of the holy Ghost, as well by his life and doctrine, making them perfect followers of him, as also worthie examples for his chosen seruants in this world: whose testimonies are left vs for our worthy ex∣amples of imitation. Mat. Mar. Luke. Iohn. Iob is commended vnto vs to haue liued al∣wayes iust and simple in the sight of the Lorde,
iust by warinesse of wisedome, and simple by in∣nocencie of meekenesse: simple, bicause he neuer desired to hurt any, but rather to profite al men: iust, bicause he would not suffer himselfe to bee deceyued by any. Iob. 1. Beda de templo So∣lemonis. lib. 1. All the Patriarkes and Prophets, were men of simple life and conuersation in the sight of God. S. Hierome writing de Sapientia Serpen∣tina & simplicitate Columbina, hath these wordes. Vse simplicitie of a Doue, that thou do not deceiue or iniurie any man: and haue wis∣dome of a serpent, that thou bee not supplanted in other mens snares, for otherwise in respect of offence, it differeth smally, but thou shalt either deceiue, or be deceiued. Hier. ad. Rust. Mona. The .xxviii. Plant, Sinceritie. SInceritie is to be vnderstoode, for truth, the verie bright beames of that shining Sunne, which reuealeth the puritie of God, and his worde, and discouereth the falshood of the Diuell and his workes. By which touch∣stone golde is tried from drosse: By which
fanne wheate is sifted from the chaffe, and by which searce of sinceritie, the sweete sauorie Cinamon of saluation is separate from the bruised barke of bitter bale, by the operation of the holy Ghost, which is therfore called the spirite of truth and sinceritie, bycause hee is true and sincere, that is, agreeable vnto the will of God, and the authour which first ex∣pressed the true doctrine of God, enclining the hearts of men to assent and consent vnto the same true doctrine, to worship the true god thereby, to honour and obey the superiour powers therby, to professe with the heart, and confesse with the tongue all one, in al worldly dealings towards all men. That the name of the true and euerliuing God may in truth bee glorified: That the true and sincere Church in truth may be amplified, and increased: That the true consolations of Christ may in our consciences truly be multiplied, eternally to our saluation, triumphing with Christ ouer Satan, sinne and hell, to rest with him in the sincere seate of celestiall glorie. In spirite and truth do the true worship∣pers worship the father. Iohn. 4. Thy worde is the truth, sanctifie them in the truth. Iohn. 17.
God will that all men shoulde bee sa∣ued, and come to the knowledge of the trueth, that is, of the true doctrine of the true God, and of the mediatour his sonne Iesus Christ. 1. Tim. 2. The spirite of truth shall bring you into all truth. Iohn. 16. The truth is great and stronger than al things. 1. Esd. 4 We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. 2. Cor. 13. If you remaine in the truth of my word, you are my disciples rightly, and my truth shall deliuer you. Iohn. 8. Laying aside all leasings, let euery one of you speake the trueth vnto his neigh∣bour. Ephe. 4. The Lorde abhorreth lying lippes, but who so speaketh trueth shall bee safe for euer. Pro. 10. Lorde who shall ascende into thy hill, or who shall rest in thy holy place, euen hee whose handes are innocent from harme, whose heart is cleane, which hath not takē his soule in vaine, nor hath not sworne to deceiue his neighbour. &c. Psal. 23. This is our glorie onely, and in this wee are glad as to witnes, we take our cōscience
that we are exercised in the simplicitie and sinceritie of God, in this world, and not in carnall wisedome, but in the grace of God &c. 2. Cor. 1. Iesus Christ our Sauiour, is that shining sonne of sinceritie, which rightly calleth himselfe the sonne of righteousnesse. Sapien. the light of the world. Iohn. 1. the way, the truth, and the life, Iohn. 14. all whose wayes, as Dauid sayth, are mercie and truth. Psal. 25. His Apostles, Prophets, Patriarks, Martyrs and Confessors, haue preached this truth, pra∣ctised the same in life and conuersation, & suf∣fered persecution for the testimonie thereof. Iacob had this sinceritie with him, when he said, let vs make an altar vnto the lord, bicause he hath heard me in the day of my trouble, and hath bene a companion of my iourney. Gen. 35 Daniel had this sinceritie of truth with him, when all the wise men of Babylon were by Na∣buchodonoser commanded to bee slaine, then he being inspired with the spirit of truth, exhor∣ted his sociates to seeke for mercie of the Lord, who reuealing a vision vnto Daniel in the night, by this aduertisement of Daniel, the king spared to execute his determined iudgement vpon the sayd wise men. Dan. 2.
When all the Disciples of Christ were alto∣gether of one minde in praying, the holy Ghost wonderfully discended vpō them, taught them, comforted them, & directed them in the truth. Act. 1. 2. This spirit of sinceritie had the same Daniel in disprouing those false Gods Bel and the Dra∣gon, and in worshipping the true and euerli∣uing God, mauger the malice of the malignant enemies of the truth. Dan. 14. The .xxix. Plant, Iustice. IVstice is one of the soure moste excellent vertues called cardinall vertues, whereout flowe, as from out of foure pure fountaines al the other springs of vertues, albeit these foure called Cardinall vertues, namely, Iustice, Prudence, Temperance, and Fortitude, are so tearmed of the Latin Erymologie Cardo, which is in English the hindge of a doore: for as the hindge doth catie the force of the doore opening to and fro, and beares the stresse of the same against all other strength: so do these foure vertues euery one in his propertie, cary, support, and beare certaine other vertues, as
it were imposed vpon them, or rather depen∣ding vpon their force and effect. As namely, Cicero terming this Iustice the first Cardi∣nal vertue, sayth, lib. 1. Offici. That she is a great brightnesse and excellencie, whereof good men are so called, whose first office is to hurt no man, except he bee first prouoked by iniurie. Againe, to vse things common for common, and thirdly priuate thinges as his owne. But more truely and amply in his 2. Rhetor. he sayth, Iustice is an excellent qua∣litie of the minde, to the profite of all men ap∣plyable, rendring euery one their due title and right: and her partes are these, Religion, Pietie, Gratitude, Chalenge of right and Equitie, Obseruation, & Truth in al things before God and man acceptable. Cicero. lib. 2 Rhetoricorum. Blessed are they that hunger and thrist after righteousnesse, for they shall be satis∣fied. Mat. 5. The path of the righteous shineth, as the light that is brighter and brighter vnto the perfect day. &c. Pro. 4. There ariseth light in darkenesse to those that are iust and vpright of heart. Be ioyful you iust in the Lorde, and with continuall
memorie acknowledge his holines. Psa. 96. The iust man shal flourish as the Palme tree, and as the Ceder of Libanus shall hee be multiplied in his seede. Psal. 91. For righteousnesse striue & grone thou euen vntill death, and God shall ouercome and vanquish thine enemies for thee. Eccl. 4. Iustice is that vertue which claimeth not any thing properly perteining vnto others, which giueth vnto euery one that which is his, which neglecteth her owne cōmoditie, equally to profite others, and according to his will the first point of iustice perteyneth vnto God, the second to our Prince and countrey, the third to our parent. & the iiii. towards all men. Ambr. in Officiis. The iustice of the king is the peace of his people, the defence of his Countrey, the easie yoke of the people, the fortresse of the nation, the salue of sorrowes, the ioy of men, the bright clearnesse of the aire, the calmenes of the sea, the plentifulnes of the lād, the solace of the poore, the patrimonie of childrē: and vnto the king himselfe this instice is the verie hope of blessednesse to come. Cypr. de 12. Abusionibus. Almightie God the iustest udge ouer heauē
and earth, which in his iustice created al things to his glorie, & vnto whose iudgement al things are subiect, both in heauen aboue, & earth by∣low, hath left vs a notable testimonie of his iu∣stice mēcioned in the storie of the naughtie ser∣uāt which would not forgiue the C. pēce. Mat. 8 Abraham desiring to separate himself from Lot his nephew, gaue him choise to take which part he would, and so might the distribution bee well delt, that the elder might deuide, and the yonger choose. Gen. 13. Assuerus executed iustice duely vpon wic∣ked Aman, when he caused him to bee hanged vpon the same gallowes that he caused to be set vp for that good Mardocheus, most innocent. Ester. 7. 8. The men that accused Daniel for an offen∣der, were iustly put into the denne of the Lions, at the king Darius his commaundement, and they were scarce come downe to the bottome of the denne, but the Lions tooke the men, and altogether deuoured them euen to the verie bones. Dan. 6. & 14. Much like true iustice was shewed vpon the two false Iudges, for accusing that godly and chast Susanna. Dan. 13. Antiochus also died an horrible death, being for his crueltie iustly rewarded therewith
of the Lorde. 2. Mac. 9. Dauid would not receyue the altar of Aren∣na, the Iebusite, vnlesse he had first rendred vn∣to him a iust reward therefore. 2. Reg. 14. When Tobias heard the Kid bleat, which was brought him, he willed them to looke that it was not stolen, bycause he sayd they ought not to eat of any stolen thing, or of any stray. Tob. 2. The xxx. Plant, Prudence. PRudence or wisedome, is the knowledge directiue, both howe to choose & atchieue those things that are good, and how to eschue those things that are euil, sayth S. Aug. li. 1. de lib arbit. This vertue Wisedome (as Aristotle lib. 1. Rhetor. defineth) is that ver∣tue of the minde, wherby we may prouide for those good graces, tending to felicitie in this life, and for euer: and also whereby wee may preuent those euils tending to destruction in this life and for euer. And Macrobius, hee sayth, wisdome is a vertue directing al things deuised in our minde, and externally enterpri∣sed, according to the rule of reason, neither doth shee any thing but that which is right,
and worthie of praise: and vnto her do these o∣ther vertues also properly apperteyne: viz. Vnderstanding, Circumspection, prouidence, Docilitie, and warinesse. But Tho. Aquinas concludeth, that shee is the true and perfect meanes whereby we are reconciled to God, whereby wee iudge and prescribe all things tending to good vse and ende in mans life, on∣ly agreeable to God & good men. Ex be. Th. All wisedome commeth from the Lord God, and with him hath it bene alwayes, & is with him from all worldes. Eccle. 1. The roote of wisedome is to feare the Lorde, and her braunches are long life. eod. The children of wisedome are the con∣gregation of the iust, and their generation is delighted in obedience and loue. Eccle. 3. Wisdome is better than strength, and a wise man excelleth him that is strong. God loueth no man but him which hath his dwelling with wisedome, for this is more beautifull than the Sunne, and being com∣pared aboue all the course of the starres, is found more auncient than them al, for vn∣to the light of the day aprocheth the dark∣some night: but malice shal not ouercome wisedome. Sap. 7.
A wise heart, and one that hath vnder∣standing, will abstaine from sinnes: and in the workes of righteousnesse shall he haue prosperous successe. Eccle. 6. If any of you lack wisdome, let him aske it of God, which giueth to all men plenti∣fully, and casteth no man in the teeth. But let him aske in fayth, nothing doubting, Iames. 1. Possesse wisedome, bicause she is better than gold, and embrace vnderstanding, bi∣cause she is more precious thā siluer. Pro. 16. Christ Iesus, the liuely fountaine of pure and perfect wisedome, euen in his childehoode, hearing and questioning with those Doctours in the Temple, was for his singular wisedome and wise answers, greatly marueiled at of those doctors. Luke. 2. Paule the Apostle of Christ, was wonderful∣ly illuminated with the spirit of wisedome and heauenly vnderstanding, as appeareth. Actes. 16. 19. 20. 22. 23. 25. Abraham wisely separated himselfe from Loth, least the sheepeheards should bee at dis∣corde amongst themselues. Gen. 13. He distributed wisely vnto his children their portions in his life time, least after his death
they shoulde bee at variance amongest them∣selues. Gen. 25. Ioseph wisely admonished Pharao of his dreame, and gaue him good counsell in manie things, Gen. 41. He wisely counselled his bre∣thren. Gen. 44. For other notable examples of the wisdome of God, wōderfully appearing in his elect. Looke and reade. Iethro. Exod. 18. Moses. Num. 13. Iosua. 21. & 8. Phinees and others. Iosue. 22. Dauid. 1. Reg. 17. 18. 21. 25. Solomon. 1. Reg, 3. Ezechias 4. Reg. 18. and. 2. Paral. 32. Zo∣robabel. 1. Esd. 3. Tob. 4. Iudit. 8. & 11. Ester. 4. and Daniel. 1. The .xxxi. Plant, Temperance. TEmperance, the thirde vertue cardinall, is the chiefe moderator and gouernour of the motions of the inwarde man, and also of the externall members of the outwarde man, to refraine not onely from wicked and peruerse desires, but also from the concupis∣cence of the eyes, immoderate vse of the tongue, vicious enormities of the bodie, and euery other the members therof, keeping the
happy and golden meane in all things, abhor∣ring excesse, riot and intemperance of meate, drinke, cloth, and such like: whose partes are bashfulnesse, Honestie, Chastitie, Shamefast∣nesse, Continencie, Humilitie, Courtesie or Clemencie, Modestie, good order, Frugality, and moderation: As Thomas of Aquina that excellent learned doctor doth define them, pro∣perly apperteyning vnto temperance: whose properties at large I haue placed in the next page in steade of testimonies, bycause the knowledge of them is singular, and the ef∣fect of them no lesse worthie to be imitated, as well of high as low estate, rich as poore, and of the meanest person, as of the better per∣sonage. The testimomies of the partes of Temperance. Bashfulnesse is that part of Temperance which blushing at the indecent speech of the tongue, or fearing that which is inde∣cent, refraineth her affections therefrom. Honestie is that part, wherby any person embracing moderation, and discipline, doeth exercise the same in obseruing per∣son, place, and time. Chastitie deliteth her selfe in that inte∣gritie
and vnspotted part of Temperance, that as she herselfe keepeth her boundes, so will she by her examples mooue others to obserue the lawe of God and of nature. Continencie refrayneth the motion of the will stirred vp by the assault of the pas∣sion, that although a man suffer immode∣rate lustes, yet his will is not subdued or vanquished by euill. Humilitie refraineth the motion of vaine hope, and wilfull boldnesse. Curtesie or Clemencie, refrayneth de∣sire of reuenge in anger or iniurie offered or done. Modestie brideleth the motions of the minde within, and also the deedes of the outwarde man. Good order consisteth in knowing what to do, and what not to doo, and herein to continue firmely. Frugalitie, in keeping a meane touching expences, giftes or beneficencie, that shee may do that which sufficeth, and not to o∣uerdo beyond measure. Moderation in so vsing the same benefits, which God and nature hath giuen vs, that they may profite vs in vse of them, and o∣thers in bestowing them.
Our sauiour Christ Iesus so tempered af∣fections of the bodie in himselfe, that he refray∣ned from foode in the desert of Iudaea. 40. dayes and fortie nightes, as a meete example of tem∣perance, for those which either fast with a de∣filed minde, or altogither despise temperance in diet. Mat. 4. Luke. 4. S. Iohn Baptist refrayned from delicate fare, and onely contented himselfe with locustes and wilde home in the desert. Math. 3. Our Sauiour Christ bearing furthermore witnesse of himselfe, sayd: Iohn Baptist came neither eating bread, nor drinking wine and you say he hath a diuell. Luke. 7. Helias beeing by the Angel refreshed with barley bread & water, walked with the strength of that bread and water, fortie dayes, and fortie nightes, vnto the mount Oreb. 3. Reg. 19. &c. The beginning of mans life was onely con∣tented with breade, water, and apparell, and a conuenient shade to couer his nakednesse. Eccle. 29. When Dauid had desired water out of the well of Bethleem, to be brought him (tempering his affections with rare moderation) hee woulde not drinke, thereof afterwardes, bicause he had before too much greedily desired the same. 2. Reg. 23.
Read of the temperance and moderation of punishment which GOD had towardes the wicked King Achab, bycause hee repented in sackecloth, tempering his ire (for killing of Na∣both) afterwardes sorowing for the same. 3. Reg. 21. The .xxxii. Plant, Fortitude FOrtitude the fourth and last cardinall ver∣tue (as it were quadrangle wise, planted euerie one in his seuerall place enuironing this Vineyarde) hath his definition as de∣riued of the Latine woorde Fortis, which is, strong, and the proper Etymologie of this word Fortitude, is as much to say, as strēgth, force and mightie courage of the minde, in withstanding euill, in defending good, and in baliantly aduēturing against the troublesome threatnings of aduerse fortune, with firme trust and confidence in God, which in re∣spect of godly life and true vertue in this life, vtterly abhorreth and striueth to vanquishe all wicked pleasures, vice, honours, riches, enuie and ignominie, death and destruction,
to sauegard and fortifie her self with such hea∣uenly vertues, that she may liue for euer. And vnto this fortitude doth Cicero ascribe these vertues properly apperteyning, namely faith or Confidence, Pacience, mightie Courage, Magnificencie, Constancie, & perseuerance. But this is onely allowable with God and man, especially in cryall of a right and iust cause, in defending the truth, and depelling or depressing the vnrighteous, vniust, and vntrue quarels of the wicked, peruerse, and malig∣nant members of Satan. My sonne when thou commest vnto the seruice of God, stand fast in righteousnesse and feare, & prepare thy soule vnto temp∣tations. Ecclesiasticus. 2. The name of the Lord is a strong defence, vnto this fleeth the righteous, and shall be saued. Prou. 18. Bicause thou, oh Lorde, art become strength vnto the poore, a defence for the needie in tribulation, a hope in their mise∣rie, and a shade from the heate. Esay. 25. The Lord is my fortitude, and my hope. Exod. 15. The eyes of the Lord do beholde all the whole earth, and do giue strength and cou∣rage
vnto those which beleeue in him with a perfect heart. Paral. 16. In the feare of the Lord is confidence of Fortitude. Prou. 14. The way of the Lorde is the fortitude of the simple. Prou. 10. The fortitude of yong men is their re∣ioysing in the Lord. Prou. 20. The vngodly fleeth when no man pur∣sueth him: but the iust person as a Lyon trusting in the Lorde, shall bee safe from feare. Prou. 28. Be not afrayed (sayth the Lorde) bicause I haue redeemed thee, and called thee after my name, thou art mine. When thou shalt passe by the waters, I will be with thee, whē thou walkst in the fire, thou shalt not burn, and the flame shall not be seene in thee, bi∣cause I am thy Lorde God, thy holy one of Israel, thy Sauiour, &c. Esay. 43. If God bee with vs, who shall be agaynst vs. Rom. 8. Our Sauiour Christ Iesus, that fort inuinci∣ble of perfect fortitude, both withstood the con∣flicts of Satan against him. Matth. and of the Iewes, Scribes and Pharisees, which by all meanes came to ensnare him. Mat. 16. 19. 21.
Mar. 12. Luke. 20. and also with heauenly cou∣rage of the spirite of truth in him, vtterly van∣quished and ouercame them for our woorthie example. Saint Stephen the protomartyr, otherwise called the first witnesse, constantly dying in con∣fession of Christ and the truth, by grace and fortitude in him, wrought manie maruelles, resisting the Iewes in their wicked doctrine, suf∣fered grieuous death of beeing stoned for the truth. Actes 6. Moyses boldely and constantly stood before Pharao, rebuking him, bicause he would not let go the people of Israel. Exod. 4. He also said to Iosue which should suceede him: Be of good comfort, and take good courage vnto thee, for thou shalt bring in this people vn∣der thy correction. Deut. 31. Iosua himselfe with valiant courage (in the seruice of God enioyned him) so constantly be∣haued himselfe, that he sayd vnto those princes about him, go your wayes, and set your feet vpon the neckes of those fiue kings that withstand the will of the most highest. Iosua. 10. For other notable examples of fortitude in defence of the righteous and iust quarell of God and his truth, looke and reade of Phinees. Numb. 31. Caleb. Iosua. 14. Ahud iudge
of Israel. Iudicum. 3. Gedeon. Iudicum. 6. Sampson. Iudicum. 14. Dauid. 1. Regum. 17. Eleazarus. 2. Machab. 6. The seuen brethren. 2. Macha. 7. Saint Paule. Actes 11. and others. The foure Arbours of a∣miable amenitie within this Vineyarde. The first Arbour, Zeale to Godlinesse. VVHo so being desirous to view & sur∣uey this Vineyard of Vertue, hath tisfied his bodily eyes with the beautifull rāches of euery Plant, hath satisfied his lon∣ing mind with the tast of the heauenly fruite ereof, and delighteth in the sweet digestion ereof, vnto eternall saluation: Let him here uch safe to sit down vnder my beames, and rowd him vnder the boughes of my beati∣de, who being termed Zeale to godlines, do omise such happy interteinment, & perform th blessednes, yt they shal not repēt thē which me to me: nay the lōger they tary with me,
the more shall they labour in loue with me and neuer be wearie of their well doing, when they thinke they haue done, they sha newe begin againe: So that the more ofte they see, the more often they desire, the oftn they desire, the oftner they shall be an hugred, the more they hunger, the more the shall seeke to satisfie, and the more that the satisfie them, the more they will come to For the more they come to me, the better th fare. Wherefore whatsoeuer thou art, whi after long looking, hast liked, and in lyking hast longed for the effectuall digestion of fruite of this Vineyarde. Disdaine not he in this place to rest after repast, and perswa thy selfe to be with Abraham, in the valley Mambrey,That is in the light of the Gospel. sitting in the doore of the tent the verie heate of the day: and that by repsing thy delectation in this vertuous life, by his grace will appeare vnto thee, as than appeared vnto Abraham. Gen. 18. perswade thy selfe, whiles thus thou re thy selfe with me, (that as Iacob rested hi self in Aram after the Sunne was set) so sh thou not gather stones, but feathers of dow to lay vnder thy heade, if thou sleepest in place: and as hee sawe in his dreame a ladd reaching to the heauens, so shalt thou
thy selfe to be in heauen, euen whilest thou yet dwellest vpon earth. Gen. 28. Be also surely perswaded in thy selfe, that resting with this Seale to godlinesse, thou art not sleeping with Samuel in the temple of the Lord, but waking nd the readier for the Lorde, when hee shall all thee to what ende and purpose he will. . Reg. 3. To be short, thou shalt not seeme to exercised in a Vineyarde of vanitie, but of such vertue, that Dauids house of Ceder trees was not comparable to it. Solomons gorge∣us dwelling places of pleasure, nor yet the winged Chariot of Elias were more de∣ectable for thy soules health in his life, and the life to come eternall. The second Arbour, Societie of good men. VVHilest thou art yet plucking a clu∣ster of grapes from this plant, here there taking thy pleasure in another place, replenish thy longing minde with delight∣me and pleasant fruite, digesting the same full: Come hither yet one steppe further vn∣ me, which am called the second Arbor, and est thee nowe in the Societie of good men,
For be sure, thou hast neither plowed in stony ground, walked amongest weedes, beaten the busie waues, gathered Caterpillers for good fruit, eaten sowre grapes, nor tasted dregs & wine lees, in stead of comfortable Muscadell : But thou hast bestowed thy labour in the land which bringeth foorth good fruite, thou hast with the Bee borhe away honie out of sweete and fragrant flowers: thou hast sayled in the portes of safetie, brought home sounde fruite, tasted of the wine of gladnes, and satisfied thy mind with cordial comfort in the companie of men, not of bruite beasts, and not of men, but of good men, not onely of good men, but of Angels, and not onely of Angels, but of the Almightie, whose ministers they are for thy welfare & saluation, to accompanie thee vnto the resting place of eternal ioy & blessednesse. And as Laban had verte smal store of worldly substance before Iacob came vnto him, and by his companying with him was made riche, Gen. 30. So thou which shalt imitate the ver∣tuous examples of these good and godly men, dayly accōpanying, that is to say, meditating and practising their vertues in life & conuersa∣tion, thou shalt be rich in the grace & fauor of God for euer. Yea in often vsing the counsels of these, thou shalt with Tobias hee sure to
haue alwayes as guestes with thee such men as feare God. Tob. 24. Thou shalt thus con∣uersant, as Dauid sayeth, bee holy with those that are holy, and innocent with those that are innocent, Psal. 17. Yea thou shalt by compa∣nie and conference with these good neighbors dwelling in the middest of the vngodly, as S. Isydore saith, lib. 2. soliloq. glorifie God, edifie thy neighbor, & damnifie thine enimie. To conclude, whilest thou as Peter did, re∣mainest. Mat. 26 firme in conformitie of mind and maners with these Apostles, thou art in the right way, and art established in safetie, but beware thou hast no societie with the chief priests, as Pope, tyrant, hypocrite, infidel, nor irreligious persons which denie the Lorde of hostes the giuer of saluation only. Thus with Paule shalt thou passe the stormie rage of this worlde, and all those vnder thy charge safely vnto the port of ioyes and blessednesse perpe∣tuall. Actes. 27. The third Arbour, Obseruation of the Sabaoth. AFter thou hast laboured thus in the Lordes Vineyarde with continual com∣panie, counsell, and comforte of the elect:
it shall behoue thee to call to minde, what our Sauiour by the mouth of his seruant Moyses commanded shoulde be establised for a pecu∣liar law amongst the children of God, name∣ly, That thou shalt keepe holy the Sabboth day. Which keeping holy of the Sabaoth, for asmuch as he himself first obserued for our ex∣ample, when after his sixe dayes workes hee rested the seuenth day and hallowed it, we must therefore so construe this rest, and so ac∣complish the same in our life & conuersation, that in resting from labour, we giue no liberty to idlenesse, vaine cogitations, vaine speeche, nor vaine deedes, so resting as though we ne∣uer ceased to turmoyle, both bodie in vnquiet∣nesse, and soule in desolation. For what profi∣teth this Sabothes rest vnto the bodie, with pampering her selfe in carnall pleasures put∣ting on gorgeous apparell, wallowing in all kinde of wicked sensualitie, caring not for the affliction of the poore conscience, which star∣ueth for the foode of saluation, dieth naked in her sinnes, and sinneth in her nakednesse of all vertue, goodnesse, grace and godlinesse? For as the diuine prouidence of the creator of all creatures, ordeyned them a time of being: So hath he determined an ende for the same: and as the Sabboth is the resting day after wor∣king
dayes: so is it a figure of the eternal rest, either in ioyes perpetuall for those that liue wel here, or in paines perpetual for those that liue wickedly heere. Wherefore who so will rightly prouide for the rest of ioyes eternal, let him with the children of Israel in the vi. daies of this life time, gather Manna in the desert of this worlde. Exod. 16. Let them so fructifie in good examples of godly vertue, that they may be readily prepared themselues, and pre∣pare others also to that blessed rest But let vs take heed of gathering wood, that is to say, of binding one sinne to another in this transitory Sabaoth, for as the man that so did gather wood was stoned to death. Deut. 5. Num. 15. so will God bee auenged of those which mis∣pend the Sabaoth day, according as it shall seeme good vnto him. Wherefore, let vs with the Apostles especially bestow the Sabaoth as most fit and conuenient in hearing & lear∣ning the word, wil, and law of God. Act. 13. And while we liue in the wildernesse of this world, let vs so frame our liues therafter, that wee may at al times seeke the glorie of God, our soules health, and the common comfort and commoditie of our brethren, that we may rest with the Lorde of the Sabaoth in his ce∣lestial kingdome.
The fourth and last Arbour, Immortalitie. NOwe that wee haue thus laboured in the Lords Vineyard, and rested in due obser∣uation of this appointed Sabaoth: let vs lastly contemplate the ende of our labour, & reward of our dutiful performed paines in this Vine∣yard of the Lord. For whether we labour or no, yet we liue, as wee liue we die, as we die we rest till the iudgement day, and as we shal then be iudged, so shall we receiue the iust de∣serued reward, either for painfull true trauell, the triumphant crowne of immortality, either else for slouthful & dissembling negligence, the troublesome tormentes of neuer dying death. For so hath the Lord of the Vineyarde deter∣mined with all flesh from the first creation of the world. That we shal (as S. Paule saith, 2. Cor. 5.) be al openly manifested before the tri∣bunal seat of Christ, there to receiue euery man his owne workes that he hath done in his bo∣die, whether it be good or euil. Wherefore as it is said, Eccle 15. God from the beginning hath created man, & left him in the power of his determination: he hath also enioyned him to walke in his commandementes, and keepe
his precepts, if thou wilt keepe his comman∣dements, they shall preserue thee, &c. Againe he sayth, The eyes of the Lord are ouer thē that feare him, and he shal acknowledge e∣uery worke that man doth. Yea he hath pro∣mised that the soules of the righteous are al∣readie in the hands of God, after their rest in the graue, and no torment of death shal touch them. Sapi. 3. But as for the vngodly they shal be cast into vtter darknesse, where shalbe wee∣ping and gnashing of teeth. Mat 22. and shall become the foode of fire vnquenchable. Esay 9. Wherefore whiles we liue in this mortalitie of the flesh, let vs so labour in al vertuous and godly conuersation, that we may find rest vnto our soules for euer in the Lord. To this ende, let vs run the race of mortalitie, that we may receiue the reward layde vp in store for vs, by the Lord and giuer of life, euen the incorrup∣tible crowne of immortalitie: that as true la∣bourers we may bee able to stande before the face of our workemaister, Lorde, and ouerseer Christ Iesus, & receiue euery one according to his dayes labour. Mat. 20 That so still as profitable seruants we may be found working when our maister shall come. Mar. 13. That hauing on our wedding garment, wee may watchfully wayte for the cōming of the bride∣grome▪
Mat▪ 22. And so finally with the fiue wise virgins attendant with lamps furnished with oyle, we may be interteined with Christ Iesus, the sonne of the eternal & euerliuing God that immaculate lambe, almightie Mes∣sias, the first and the last, Apoc. 22. when hee shal enter into the new and heauenly Ierusa∣lem to giue freely to those that chirst, the wa∣ter of life, and liuely fruite of his Vine in the kingdome of his father. To whom, with the father and the holy ghost, three persons and one God of incomprehensible and eternall Maiestie, be all honour, glory, power, domini∣on and prayse, for euer and euer worlde with∣out ende. Amen. ¶A Meditation for true fru∣ctifying in the Church of God, the true Vineyard of Vertue, and for the prosperous preseruation of the same. ALmightie, true, and euerliuing God, which as the heauenly husbandman com∣parest thy kingdome vnto a certaine man which planted a vineyard,Mat. 20. went forth early to hire labourers, & made couenant with thē. &c.
For as much as from the first day of the worldes creation, thou hast by thy diuine pro∣uidence, preordinated, created, and established thee a chosen Church, thy peculier people, as the true planted Vineyarde: and by thy word and holy Gospel, hast hired thy Patriakes, Prophetes and Apostles, as the first true la∣bourers therein, by couenant of eternall salua∣tion: And from time to time also, hast so cal∣led and sent the Nations of the earth into thy Church and Vineyarde, when they stood idle, without knowledge of thee, and of their sal∣uation: So we in England, amongst others, first called,Mat. 20. sent in, and working with them at thy gracious good pleasure, haue yet after∣wardes with others beene founde idle without at the thirde houre: And againe once more lastly called and sent in at the sixth houre, by thy inspeakeable prouidence, mercie and grace, nowe still continually labouring in the same thy true Church and Vineyarde of thy Gospel and holy lawes, to the great admira∣tion, and woorthie imitation of those which at the eleuenth houre, by thee are to be called, hired and sent in, do with all humilitie and heartie affection, duely and dutifully acknow∣ledge thy louing mercies and gracious good∣nesse most abundantly thus bestowed vppon
vs: And therefore most iustly are bounden by all good meanes to become thankefull vnto thee for the same. Wherefore thou▪ oh most gracious God, thou louing Lord, and heauen∣ly husbandman, our onely stay, supporter, and comforter, graft vs in thee, strength vs with thy helpe, and make vs fruitfull branches of thee the most flourishing vine in all heauenly felicitie. Looke downe we beseech thee from the throne of thy grace, and with thy gladsom countenance and louing fauour, beholde the state of thy chosen holy Church amongest vs. visite this thy Vineyarde with thy continuall benediction, which thou hast eftsoones trans∣posed out of Egypt. Thou hast long since cast out the Gentiles from amongst vs,Psal. 79. and hast hitherto, and stil dost establish the same. Thou plantest the rootes of thy vines, & they spread farre and neare. The shadow of them hath co∣uered the hilles, and the braunches haue spred ouer the Ceders of the Lord. Vouchsafe (oh God) we humbly beseech thee, to heare our prayers, and graunt our petitions, that wee make vnto thee in the name of thy beloued sonne our Lorde Iesus Christ, Continue still thy louing kindenesse vnto vs. Blesse and pre∣serue our most deare soueraine Ladie and gra∣cious Queene Elizabeth, with long life, and
increase of heauenly felicitie vpon earth. Pro∣sper and preserue all her most honourable Councellers, Nobles, Bishops, pastors, tea∣chers, and preachers, with all and euery other member of thy true Church, and Vineyarde in these our Countreyes. Chase away, van∣quish and ouercome all our enemies. Beate backe, and abandon the malice of the Romish Bore from the borders of thy vineyarde, and all other enmyties of Satan and his ser∣uants utterly expell, amoue from vs, and van∣quish for vs, we beseech thee, for the glorie of thy holy names sake, and for thy sonnes sake our Lord Iesus Christ. Also as christian cha∣ritie bindeth vs, wee pray thee of thy great mercies, to illuminate, helpe, and assist the weake labours of suche as in forraine Coun∣treys are willing, but want help and comfort to be called into thy Vineyarde. Make them fruitfull plantes of thy grace, replenish them with thy spirite of truth, and blesse them with thy blessings also: that we with them and they with vs, so manie as thou wilt call to saluati∣on in this earthly Vineyard, may be gratious operation of thy holy Ghost, be made perfect laborers in thy sight, able to endure not only yt very heat of the day,Mat. 20. but also euē to the last mi∣nute of daylight: so shal thy seruāts set forth thy
wonderfull workes vnto the heathen: so shall thy Vineyarde flourish in the Nations vpon earth. And so shal thy chosen Church and con∣gregation, increasing, fructifying, and trium∣phing vnder thee her chiefe pastor, guide, and gouernour (receyuing with all thy elect thy promised couenant of eternal saluation) render all due honour, glorie and praise vnto thee, now hence∣forth, and for euer, world without ende Amen. As the braunch can beare no fruite of himselfe except hee abide in the vine: so neyther can you bring foorth fruite (sayth our sauiour Christ) except you abide in me. Iohn. 15. ❧Imprinted in London by Thomas Dawson, dwelling at the three Cranes in the Vinetree.
