21087.7 23070360 26188
A True Relation of a most worthy and notable Fight, per∣formed the nineteenth day of Iune now last past, by two small Shippes of the Citie of London: the Vineyard of a hundred and twentie Tunnes; and the Vnicorne of a hundred and fourtie Tunnes, against Sixe great Gallies of Tunes, hauing in them a thousand and eight hundred men, of the Ile of Way-yorcke in the Straights: Our Shippes hauing in all Mariners. Merchants, and Passengers▪ fifty sixe men. Written by H. R Imprinted at London for I. White, and are to be sold by, T. Langley.
To my esteemed good Friend Mr. GYLBERT RO∣BARTES, all well wishes of true loue and contiuall happinesse. YOur remote liuing from this famous Citie, old acquantance, and many lo∣uing friends, cannot choose but increase a longing desire to heare such Newes as may beguile some time with contem∣plating on them; but the vncertaintie of report for home-bred occasions are such, as makes me silent; yet to giue you some cause of admiration, and a good liking of men worthy, and most skilfull in their profession, I haue made bold to commende vnto you, the hardy and most dangerous Aduenture of two worthy Shippes of London, and their Companies in their last Voy∣age for the Straights, made this passed Sommer, against Six great Gallies of the Turkes: wherein they shewed true vo∣lour, and gallant resolution, gayning fame to them-selues, been a terrour to the enemie, and giuen a most worthy example for all of their coates: A pattorne worth recor∣ding for others to follow, a comfort to Owners, and Marchantes, that commit their Shippes and goods to such mens gouernment, and a ioy to all those that heare their deserued comendations; to the further view wherof I leaue you, & pray God neuer to giue worse successe then they haue had, nor worseminds, then they haue shewed to be in them, but euer encrease, for our Countries honour the number of such, and keepe you and all others your good friends, for euer-more vnder his holy protection. London this 2. of Februarie 1616. Your louing friend euer yours, Hen. Robarts
A True Relation of a most worthy Fight made the 23. of Iune 1615 by two Shippes of London, the Vineyard, and the Vnicorne: neere the Ile of May-yorcke with∣in the Straights, hauing but 56. Men and Boyes aboard, against sixe Gallies of the Turkes, being of Tunes, in Bar∣bery, and had in them of Soul∣diers, Saylors, & Slaues, 1800. men. LOuing Country-men, that we should giue honour to them that doth truly deserue it, is no more then Christian charitie doth ensite vs vnto; and the holy Scriptures in many ex∣amples doth prooue vnto vs: as Dauid that kingly Prophet and man of God, was mette and entertained of the people with dauncing and sing∣ing his worthy Victories, obtayned against the ene∣mies of GOD, and his King. Iephat that worthy Captaine, and sundry others which I omit, were ho∣noured
for their Victories with triumphes by the peo∣ple, as holy Writ doth testefie. The Romans so honoured their Nation, and held honoure in such heigh esteeme, that were his byrth neuer so meane, or reputation so bace; yet if hee deser∣ued any honour in their Warres, they duely gaue it him, with all the honours they could deuise. The Greatians, and sundry other nations had the like, so that thereby they gaue such encouragement to all such as followed them in their long Warres, that euery man enforced both Courage and strength in hope of Fame. Whole volumes are filled with the Honors of these nationes, as wee which now liue, by true recordes can testefie, the sundry Famous victoryes by them at∣chiued, and their excellent admired prowes. These were the times of true loue and honour. This made the Coward hardy, and the faint-hearted Swaine, to aduance themselues, in hope to gaine, vnto their poste∣rities euerlasting fame. Oh that our Nation would im∣mitate these true tipes of honour, to norish such as ad∣uenture their liues and estates, for welfare of their Country: then there is no doubt, but in time of trou∣bles, when valour should be showne, wee should finde many worthy persons, vnder simple habites, that would purchase to their country honor, & fame to themselues. But our Countries charity is too too cold, to giue Vir∣tue her due in such people, the more it is to be pittyed, that such men as merit either by valour, or other indu∣storous meanes, should not be▪ fostred and well re∣warded. But such is the hardnesse of heart▪ in most, now a dayes, that Let a man aduenture their liues and libertie, in neuer so hardie an actions for saueguard doth of Shippe and good, when they looke for chear∣full
countenāce at their returne, and some reward for their paines, they hardly get either good word, or good deed, (nay scarcely) their wages which God knoweth was neuer so hardly gotten, but with some Braules, and discontent: these doings, is often the cause of much losse to owners and Marchants, where if they nourished the true Labouring by eling with some small reward, (yea) but sometimes with a good word, it would giue encouragement to men, rather to lose their liues, then part with that is committed to their charge, in my sleight manner. Iudg you that read and know what you read, how many Ships and men of our Nation, hath been taken by these Pyrats, those homecides that lurke about the South Cape, Barbery, & the Straights, to surprise such as trade in honest Merchants affaires, the Owners and Merchants to their cost, can best tell: of which no doubt, some haue been cowardly surprised, and others ouer-matched; whereby the Companies fal∣ling into their hands, are imprisoned, and often times made slaues to those Heathen nations that tryumph ouer them, to the vtter ruine of them & their for euer. These are things to be pittyed, & truly of all Christi∣ans to be lamented: and I could wish that such men that aduenture to the seaes, may with true compassion consi∣der of such as doe deserue well; so shall they be sure to haue their seruice truly performed, and their Goods in better securitie then often times they haue. But leauing that to God, who guideth mens hearts, let mee recoune vnto you a most worthy and valiant exployt performed not long since by two small Ships of the Citie of Lon∣don, aganist sixe Gallyes of Tunes in Barbery, neere vnto the Ile of May-yorcke within the Straights; to the great commendations of the Maisters and Com∣pany of them, as you shall further vnderstand.
IN the beginning of this last Sommer, a Voyage by sundry Merchaunts of London was pretended to certaine Ports within the Straights of Ieboral∣tarre; who for the Voyage had appoynted two small Shippes, the one called the Vineyard, of the burthen of a hundred and twenty Tunnes, or there-abouts, whose Maister for the voyage, was Maister Richard Harrice of Lee in Essex; a very honest and religious man, and as valiant and full of courage, as otherwise of good gouernment: The other, the Vnicorne of Lon∣don, of the burthen of a hundred and fourtie Tunnes, or there-aboutes; whose Maister for the Voyage, was Maister Gardner of Wapping neere London; a man endowed with honestie, religion, and vallour. These two good Ships, being victualed for the vi∣age, and manned both Ships with fiftie sixe men and boyes, Merchantes, and Passengers, in all, haue∣ing taken in their Lading, and all sitting for their vse in the Voyage, after their solemne farewell taken of the Owners and Aduenturers, as the Merchantes ac∣custome to doe, set Sayle from London, and ariued at Lee, where they made some small stay exspecting a faire Winde to proceede, whose hopes it pleased God to further, and on the twentie three day of May now last past, to send them their wished desires; which they neglected not, but taking oportunitie, set Sayle the same twentie three of May▪ And was so fauored of him that ruleth by his Power both Winds, and Seas, that they were euer in the way of the Wind, vntill they came to the South Cape, where they had sight of three tall Shippes, men of Warre, which were of Algeers, in Barbarie▪ full of Ordinance and men.
These Ships gaue vs chace, which did in some small manner dismay vs; yet putting our trust in God, whose pleasure is to lay our feares and care vpon him, wee resolued, if they were Friends, to bid them welcome; if Enemies, to defend our selues. These Shippes wyning vpon vs, one of them came vp and hayled vs, bidding vs amayne: To whom ou Maister sayd; Doe you your worst, wee feare you not. Then demaunded they of whence we were? Our Mai∣ster Harrice, M. of the Vineyard answered, of Lon∣don, and bound for Turkey; and asked of whence they were? Of Argeor, sayd they. While they had this shorr parlie with vs, they tooke good notice of our Shippes, and saw the redinesse wee were in to defende our selues: and imagining by our Maisters rough answere, that we cared little for them, they made no longer stay, but sprong their looffe, and bore roome againe into the Sea. Their departure so sodainly, gaue vs some com∣fort, although wee feared them not: yet considering we come for Trafficke and not for Warres, wee rather desired Peace, (if it pleased God) then Broyles; from which at that time, it pleased him to deliuer vs: Vnto whom for his preseruation, we acknowledged such hear∣ty thankes and prayses, as became vs. This Danger (by Gods permission) being ouer∣past, as Winde serued for vs, we put into the Straights. keeping our course for Leagehorne, which was the first Port of our discharge. When comming neere vnto May-yorcke, an Iland in the Sea, wee had sight of sixe great Gallpes men of Warre, all of Tunes, and one other Port vnder▪ the Turke. These companions came with vs, applying
their best strength of Oares and Sayles, to come to vs, wee seeing the speed they made, began to coniec∣ture wee should haue more to doe with them, then wee willingly would: wherevpon our Maister M. Harrice, caused the Vineyards Boate to bee hoysted out, the Vnicorne beeing farre from vs, and the Seas beéing calme and no Winde stirring, so wee cowed our Shippe to the Vnicorne, and furlde our maine Sayle, prouiding our selues as well as we could: which done, we went to prayer, humbly intreating his deuine ayde, that neuer leaueth his people, to helpe vs, and to bee our comfort in this distresse. By this tyme, the Gallyes were all in fayre sight, so that wee might well desery their numbers of men. Then fiue of them left to row, and the sixt Gally came towards vs; and hayling our Shippes after the man∣ner of the Sea, asked of whence we were? Our Mai∣ster answered, of London, and bound for Turkey. Then cryed the Turkes, All friends, all friendes. Then did they enquire what Men of Warre wee had met withall, or seene without the Straights, or lately? Whom wee simply tolde of the three Shippes wee spoke with: so away they went from vs, making speed to their fiue conforts, that stayed for them. The sodaine and friendly parting with this Galley, gaue vs hope wee should haue no further trouble with them, nor his fellowes; yet durst not trust them, but made ready to defend our selues, as sodainely as wee could, getting as neere vnto the Vnicorne our consort, as wee might, that beeing neere, wee might fight with more aduantage to our selues, and doe our enemies the more harme, if it should so happen.
This time the Gallyes helde counsayle togeather what they should doe: At length, hauing concluded our finall ouerthrow as it▪ seemed, they all came vpon vs with all the violent force they could: and comming vp first with the Vnicorne, they powred into her their small Shotte, as Hayle in comparison. They lying so close aboard, the Vineyard made their Shotte so hotte vpon them, that foure of them came aboarde her, and left the Vnicorne but two. In this conflict, wee poore men were not idle, but so applyed our Ordinaunce, which wee laded with Crosse-barres, Case-Shoote, and Round Byllets, as greatly annoyed them. In the first encounter, wee had our Boatson slaine and one other man, and three hurt▪ And the Vnicorne two men slaine, and two hurt. The Gallyes lying still by vs, maintayned the fight very hotly, and plyed their Shotte vpon vs, that our turne Sides, and battered Stearne can yet witnesse it: besides our Sayles so shotte, that fourty poundes cannot make good that harme onely. Deadly and full of resolution on both parties two full bowers by the Glasse, continued this fight; in which all our Companies, were faine to prooue Gun∣ners, not onely the Maister and his Mates, but all the rest: Amongst which, I may not forget the paynes and industry of one of Maister Harrices Mates, M. Wotton; whose skill and readinesse was such, in ap∣plying the most part of our Ordinance in our quarter, which lay to doe the Enemie most spoyle, that hee did them great harme, and made them haue small hope of
our conquest, which they expected. Blessed be the all powerfull God, who after two howers of very dangerous fight, one shotte from the Vineyard did them such spoyle, as with a great and most dreadfull shrieke they fell all from vs, and went their wayes. And in good time for them; for I thinke if they had stayed longer, they had some of them sunke by our sides; as should seeme by their sodaine bringing foure of them vpon the Careere to stop their leakes. Thus by the mercie and power of our God, were wee freed from this great and dangerous perill where∣in wee had like to haue falled, past hope of man, onely his Mercy that giueth victorie at his will, preserued vs: To whose blessed name, all prayse and honour be rendred, who not onely set vs free from our Foes, but at that instant, sent vs a fayre leading gale of Winde: so wee cut our Mayne sayle, and kept our course for Leaghorne, which was the first Port of our discharge; giuing GOD most humble thankes for our deliue∣rance. While wee made stay at Leaghorne, the Duke of Florences Gallyes, who are most tymes abroade in seruice, came into the Roade: in one of them was a Iew, who spoke with the Captaine of the Admirall Gally, and was with them when they set their mayned & hurt men a shore. This Captaine reported to the Iew beeing of his acquaintance, that there▪ were in these sixe Gallies one thousand eight hundred men of all sorts: and in the fight with vs, had slaine a hundred and fiftie, and three hundred more hurt and mayned very dangerously. GOD haue the prayse for our happy deliuery, and make vs mindfull of his great mercy shewed vnto his
poore seruants, that while wee haue any beeing in this world, wee may with all due prayses, acknowledge his mercy towards vs. Thus haue you heard (to the glory of God, and the deserued commendations, of those valerous and vn∣daunced sprights) The most resolute and worthy Con∣quest of the sixe Gallyes; who beeing not a handfull in regard of their multitudes, which were neere Tenn for one, and so well appoynted with Men and Munition, that they thought themselues sufficient, to encounter greater forces. But we haue euer heard and knowne, that victorie consisteth not in strength of Horse or Man, though they ve neuer so mightie: but in the all Powerfull hand of God, who in the middest of greatest daun∣gers, comforteth them, that with faythfull heartes call vpon him. And most truely, by those worthy men Maister Harrice, and Maister Gardner, and there companies it appeareth, who doubtlesse are gratious men in the presence of God; such is their gouernment, their zeale to God and his true Religion: such doth God in all di∣stresses comfort, for so is his promise, that neuer fayleth his seruants: It is his holy hand, that hath done this for them against all expectation of men. For which his blessed name be euer praysed. And I wish most heartily, that such Owners and Merchantes, which haue such faythfull people to deale for them, would not shut their Purses from rewarde, but open their handes with Bounty vnto them, that others may be encouraged to doe them the like seruice: If such men would vse this charitie, no doubt but their
bounty and good countenances to men aduenturing for them would make their seruice to be better perfor∣med, And this Kingdome be more better replenished with able and sufficient men to fight in their defence, if occasion should bee. You haue heard the true discourse of this dangerous voyage, their happie deliuerance, and dilygent cares in performing the same; Who making foure Ports, viz. Maliga▪ Leagehorne, Naples, and Zant, as by Chartie-Partie they were bound, taking their Lading at Zant, was by the mercy of God, with Winds so fauored, that in good saffetie the Shippe and goodes ariued the twelf day of December, in the Roade of Limehouse in the Riuer of Thames. To the eternall glory of God, the ioyce of our hearts, and comfort of all our friendes, where we were by those worthy, Marchants our Owners of the Vin∣yarde Master Freeman, and Master Dunkcombe, with their Partners, leuingly welcomed, as well as by our aduentures and Mrchnts, which were these: Master Freeman, Master Fishborne, and Master Barly∣marke▪ God haue the honour, and let all our praiers vs, that neuer English men, haue worse successe in their affayres, then we haue had. GOD of his mercy graunt vs all true, louing, and faithfull hearts, that God may haue his true ond, and our King▪ and Country faythfull seruice: to whose deuine, and all Powerfull name be all true prayses ed for er, nd euer, Amen. FINIS.
