22019 21500727 24666
Ane Shorte and generall Confession of the ONE CHRISTIANE FAITH AND RELIGION, ACCORDING to Godis word and actis of our Parliamentis, Subscriued be the Kingis Maiestie and his housholde, with sindrie vtheris, To the glorie of God and good example of all men, At Edinburgh the Twentie eyght day of Ianuarie, The yere of God. Ane Thousand, Fyue Hundreth, Fourescore yeres. And the fourtene yere of his Maiesteis Regne. WE all and euerie one of vs vnderwritten protest, that after long and dew examination of our owne Consciencis, in maters of trewe and fals Religion, are now throughly resolued in the trueth, by the worde and spirit of God. And therefore we beleue with our heartis, confesse with our mouthes, Subscryue with our hands, and constantly affirme before God and the whole worlde. That this onely is the true Christian Faith and Religion, pleasing God, and bringing Saluation to man, quhilk is now by the mercy of God reueled to the world, by the preaching of the blessed Euangell. And is receaued, beleued, and defended by many and sindrie notable Kirkis and Realmes, but cheifly by the Scotland, The Kings Maiestie and thre Estates of this Realme, As Gods eternall trueth, and onely ground of luation, as more particularly is expressed in the confession of our Faith, stablished and publictly confirmed by tis of Parliamentis, and now of a long time hath bene opinly professed by the Kings Maiestie, & whole body Realme, both in burgh and land. To the quhilk confession and forme of Religion, we willingly aggree in our cis in all pointis, as vnto Gods vndouted trueth and veritie, grounded onely vpon his written worde. And we abhorre and detest al contrarie Religion and doctrine, But cheifly all kynde of Papistrie in generall and lare headis, euen as they are now damned and confuted. by the worde of God and kirk of Scotland, but inspe∣ detest and refuse the vsurped authoritie of that Romaine Antichrist vpon the scriptures of God. vpon the Kirk, magistrate & conscience of men. All his tyrrannous Lawes made vpon indifferent things, against our Chris∣ libertie. His erroneous doctrine against the sufficiencie of the written worde, the perfection of the Law, the office , and his blessed Euangell. His corrupted doctrine concerning originall sinne, our naturall inabilitie and re∣ to Gods law. Our iustification by Faith only. Our inperfect sanctification and obedience to the law, the nature, and vse of the holie Sacraments. His fyue bastard Sacraments, with all his rytis, ceremoneis, and fals added to the ministration of the trew Sacraments without the word of God. His cruell Iudgement against departing without the Sacrament, his absolute necessitie of Baptisme, his blasphemous opinion of transsub∣tion, or reall presence of Christis body in the elements, and receauing of the same by the wicked, or bodeis of men. ensationis with solemnet othes, Periureis, and degrees of mariage forbidden in the worde, his crueltie against oent deuorced, His diuilishe Messe. his blasphemous Preistheid, his prophane sacrifice for the sinnes of the dead ick. His Canonization of men, calling vpon Angels, or Sanctis departed, worshipping of Imagrie, relicks, & of Kirks, Altars, Dayis, Vowes to creatures. His Purgatorie, prayers for the deid. praying or speking language, with his processiones and blasphemous letanie, and multitude of Aduocats or Mediatouris. His , Articulare confession, his despered and vncertaine repentance, his generall and  faith, his for their synnes, his Iustification by workes, Opus Operarum, workes of supererogation, meritis , peregrinationis and stationis, his holy watter, Baptissing of Bellis, Coniuring of spiritis, Crossing, Sauing , Hallowing of godis good Creatures, with the superstitious opinion ioyned therewith, his war∣ onarchie, & wicked hierarchie, his thre solemned vowes, with al his shawellingis of sindrie sores. His rroneous die decreis maid at Trent, with al the subscryuers and approuers of that cruel and blood{is} band, coniured aga∣ Kirk of God. And finally we deteste all his vaine allegoreis, Ritis, signes, and traditonis broght in the kirk , or against the word of God and doctrine of this trewe reformed Kirk. To the quhilk we ioyne our selues wil∣ doctrine, Faith, Religion, Discipline & vse of the holie Sacraments, as lyuelie members of the same in Christ , promising and swearing by the great Name of the Lord our God, that we shall continie in the obedience of ine and discipline of this Kirk, and shall defend the fame according to our vocation and power, all the dayes ues, vnder the panes contened in the law, and danger both of body, & soule, in the day of Gods feareful Iudge And seing that manie are Fyrred vp by Satan, and that Romane Antichrist, to promes, sweare, subscryue, & vse the holie Sacraments in the Kirk deceatfully against their owne conscience, minding hereby, First vnder enal Cloke of Religion, to corrupt and subuers sectetely Gods trew Religion with in the Kirk, and afterward me may serue, to become open enemies and persecuters of the same, vnder vaine hope of the Popes dispensati∣ against the word of God, to his greater confusion, & their dowble condēnation in the day of the Lord Iesus, efore willing to take away all suspition of hypocrisie, and of sic dowble dealing with God and his Kirk, protest all hearts for Witnes, that our myndis & heartis do fully aggree with this our confession, pro∣ So that we are not ued for any worldly respect, but are perswaded onely in our con∣ prented in our hearts by the  Spirite, as we sha day when the secretes  disclosed. And because we purceaue, that the quher Religion and kirk doeth depend vpon the sauetie and good behaiour of the Kingis Maiestie, Instrument of Godis mer graunted to this Countrey, for the maintning of his Kirk, and of Iustice amongs vs. We protest and omes with our heartis, vnder the same othe, hand writ, and we sal defend his persone and authoriti  our geir, bodeis, and lyues, in the defence of Christis Euangel, of our Countrey, ministration of Iustice  unishment of Iniquitie against al enems within this Realme as we desyre our God to be a strong a  cifull defender to vs, in the day of our dath, and cumming of Iesus Christ. To whome with the Fat  the holie Spirite, be all honour and glrie eternally Amen. ☞The Kingis Maiesteis charge to all Commissioners and Ministers within this Realme. ing, that we and our Houshold haue subscriued and geuen this publict confession of our fith, to the good exem∣ of our Subiectis. We command and charge all Commissioners and Ministers, to raue the same confes∣ion of theire parochinars, and procead against the refusers, according to our Lawes and order of the Kirk, de∣ theire names and lawful processe to the Ministers of our house, with all haste and diligence, vnder the payne of to be taken from theire stipend, that we with the adwise of our Counsel my take ordour with sic proud con∣ of God and our lawes. Subscryued with our hand. At Holyrudhous, (1580.) the 2 day of march, the 14 regne. ☞Imprented at Edinburgh be Robert Lekprewike.
