22143 99846361 11323
A Detection and Querimonie of the daily enormities and abuses cōmitted in physick, Concernyng the thre parts ther∣of: that is, The Physitions part, The part of the Surgeons, and the arte of Poticaries. Dedicated vnto the Two most famous vniuersities Oxford and Cambridge. Nowe lately set foorth by Iohn Securis physition. Non ferit haec medica praestantes arte Securis, Nec medici officio qui bene functus erit. Non ferit insignes chirurgos, nec myropolas, Ars, quibus & pietas, sunt bene iuncta simul. 1566.
CORDATISSIMIS, IM pendio{que} venerandis vtrius{que} Acade miae, Oxoniinimirum & Cantabrigiae Archigr mateis, Rectoribus, Decanis, Praesidibus, Docta ribus & Magistris: Iohannes Securts Medicus Academiae quondam Oxonienus alumnus, salutem in Christo Iesu. IAmpridem in animo me cum constitueram (viri longè clarissimi) genio nescio quo, nisi forte op∣timo (quatum certè mihi persuadeo) instigāte permotus, de abusu ac cor∣ruptela artis nostrae Hippocraticae, commentariolum quendam in lucem edere. Hoc tamen negotii eous{que}, di∣stuli ac ferè semper detrectaui, quo∣us{que}, nec humanitas, nec literarū de∣cus, nedum ipsa musarum maiestas,
nec impostorum medicantium versu∣tia, & praestigiae, amplius me tacere, ea{que} silentio praeterire quae aduersus pestilētissimum hoc hominum genus adduci possunt, permitterent. Tāta siquidem vbi{que} gentium sed in hoc po∣tissimum regno viget prestigiatorū, agyrtarum, incātatorū, veneficarū, veteratorum, at{que} adeo carnificū me dicorum turba: qui quotidie huic sese arti vi & violētia intrudūt ac insi∣nuāt, adeo{que} sua, (prôh nefas) in mul∣torum necem ac perniciem experi∣menta faciunt: vt mirandum mul∣tis modis sit, quin potius impensé do∣lendum, tātam id{que} impunè fieri Re∣ginae subditorum stragem, tanta cō∣mitti piacula, tācrassos, ac foedos in sancta ac christiana republica (laxa∣tis
velut hahenis effrenatae licentiae) errores persistere, nedum reperiri. Verùm quum pensiculatiùs rem totā introspicio, quum id quod res est me∣cum perpendo, ac arctissimè mēte re∣uoluo: Non hoc vti{que} vsquendeo no∣uum esse, nec recens natū comperio. Quinimo à multis iam retro seculis, (si diuino Hippocrati credimus) con∣tigit hanc celeber rimā medicinae ar∣tem, malè tractatam fuisse, ac foedis malè feriatorum hominū technis ac delyramentis, etiā Hippocratis aeuo, etiānum Galeni aliorum{que} veterum medicorum fuisse aetate corruptam, conspurcatam, at{que} pollutā Nam vt Galeni verba ex primo lib. Therap▪ methodi iam subticeā: Hippocratem lōgè Galeno vestutiorem in medium
proferam in libello cui lex titulus estita loquentem. Medicina (inquit) omnium artium praeclarissima est. Verùm propter ignorantiam eorum qui eam exercent, & ob vulgi rudi∣tatem quod tales iudicat & habet: eò iā res deuênit, vt omnium artium longe vilissima censeatur. At vero hoc peccatū ob hāc potissimū causam mihi cōmitti videtur: Soli nā{que} medi∣cinae nulla poena in rebus publices sta tuta est praeter{que} ignominiae. Verū baecipsa non afficit ne{que} contingit eos qui ex composito personam ipsius in∣duerunt. Simillimi enim huiusmodi medici sunt personis quae in tragoe∣dijs introducuntur. Quemadmodum enim illi figurā quidem & habitum ac persona eorum quos referunt, ha∣bent:
illi ipsi autem verè non sunt: Sic & medici fama quidem & nomme multi, re autem & opere valde pau∣ci. Idem Hippocrates in lib. de decen∣ti ornatu, sic ait: Raptores medici sunt qui fora frequentant, ruditate ac inscitia sua imponentes, & in cir∣culis ciuitatum versantes. Cognoue∣rit autem quis ex vestitu & alijs li∣neamentis. Quamuis enim fuerint splendidè ornati, multó magis fugi∣endi sunt, & à conspicientibus o∣dio habendi. Haec ille. His ita{que} iam perspicuè satis super{que} constat, a∣pud veteres etiam primaeuae aetatis viros, fuisse in arte medica errones multos ac impostores. Vtcun{que} sit, hoc constāter adseuerare non dubito, nō tot olim medicastros, non tot vt ita
nominem Theriacarios, nō tam mul∣tos fucatos, personatos, at{que} phalera∣tos, id{que} vtrius{que} sexus medicos fuis∣se, q̄ nūc nostra aetate oppidatim, im∣mo vicatim sunt, & videntur. Istuc proculdubio admirari nun{que} desino, quod leges cùm diuinae tùm Cesareae in omnes si offenderint caeterarum artium homines animaduertant, in solos autem medicinae spurios gnatos, imo gnathones, & sycophantas non animaduertunt. Faxit precor Deus Opt. Max, ali∣quando, vtigrauissimo ac sapientissi mo augustissimi Senatusconsulti de∣creto: sacrosancto Episcoporum pa∣trocinio ac consilio, at{que} vestro pari∣ter (consultissimi Academiarū pro∣ceres) pio vnanimi{que} suffragio, semel
velut postliminio reuocetur sincera, vera & germana rerum medicina∣lium administratio, verus vsus, & sic demū vera cū solida doctrina me thodus. In rebus quidē multis, praeci pue{que} quae ad religionē spectāt, refor matio iāpridē facta est. Cur nō per∣inde in medicamētarijs facta sit▪ Sed ita res habentur humanae, vt quum nihil mali (hoc est nullus morbus) nos vrgeat, de malo profligando tan quám nimium securi non cogitamus. Pleri{que} ferè omnes dum sani degimus sanitatem non moramur nec magni pendimus. At vbi primum sanitas euanuerit, tum demum velut Phry∣ges, serò sapere inchoamus, ac quid tum sanitas, & quam preciosus in to∣ta vita thesaurus fuerit, cum nostro
saepe periculo igaui ac socordes per∣cipimus. Caeterum, vt nunc tandem colophonem his dictis imponam, hoc opusculum quod iam vernacula lin∣gua perstrinxi, vobis (clarissimi iux∣tà ac reuerēdiss. Doctores ac Magi∣stri) tanquā strenuissimis ac optimis in hac causa futuris patronis, offerre nominatim, nuncupare{que} constitui. Munusculum sanè fateor indignum tantis viris, nihilosecius tamen, quā¦do pio beneuolo{que} profectum sit ani∣mo, benigno itidē animo, obnixè vos precor, suscipere ne grauemini. Obsecro nunc tandem Deum patrem Seruatoris nostri Iesu Christi▪ vt semper in virtute verbi sui vos re∣gat, protegat ac tueatur, vestra om∣nia dirigat opera, omnes actus, ver∣ba,
negotia, literas ac studia: vestrā vtram{que} deni{que} Academiam promo∣ueat magis magis{que} in omne decus▪ virtutem & dignitatem prouebat: ad honorem, laudem & gloriam sa∣crosancti nominis sui in sempiter∣num. Amen. Idem vobis suprà memo∣ratus, & nunc & olim de uotissimus, Iohannes Se∣curis Medicus.
This booke shalbe diuided in▪ to three principall partes. ¶ The fyrst parte shall intreate of the manyfolde erroures and a∣buse of false and vnlearned phi∣sitions. ¶ The seconde intreateth of the ignorance, presumption, and quid pro quo, of vniust Apothecaries. ¶ The thirde part shall discusse of the rashenes and lewde temeri∣tie of a great many Surgeons.
¶ The first part intreateth of dyuers and sundrie errours and abuses of the vnlearned and wycked sorte of Physitions. THAT excellente man & great clerk Aristoteles, who for his incompa∣rable doctrine is of all learned men named the prince of philosophers hath this saying in the .vii. boke of his Ethikes: Non oportet tantum verum dicere, sed etiam causam falsi assignare, that is: A man may not onely tell the truth, but he must al∣so shewe and declare the cause of falshod and errour. As who shold say: The truthe can neuer so well appere, as when it is compared to his contrary, which is errour, lye, and falshode. Quia opposita semper
iuxta se posita, magis elucescunt: Contrary thinges set one against an other, are always a great deale better knowen. The philosophers of ancient time as it appereth playnly in Aristotle and Galen, ye and in the holy doc∣tours of the churche. In many of their works, had in a maner more adoo to confute the false errours, sophistrie & cauillations that were then vsed & imagined as true doc∣trin, thē they had to write the very truth it selfe. The great mercy of God had neuer bē so wel knowen if the fal & transgression of mā had not ben. And as S. Paul saith in ye. v. chap. to ye Romans: Vbiexu∣berauit peccatū, ibi magis exubera∣uit gratia, Where syn hath exceded there grace hath the more exceded. And Christ in S. Luke ye vii. cha. said of Mary Magdaleu: Many
syns ar forgeuē her, because she lo∣ued much. Nowe therfore, before I speake of ye abuses & enormities of phisike, I wil shew and declare first, what is the part office and cō¦dition of a good Phisition. Thus doyng I wyl first alledge Hippo∣cratis Iusiurandum, that is, the oth that Hipocrates wold yt euery phi∣sition shuld take before he practise any phisike. I wil not recite ye hole chapter, but ye chiefest parte first in latin, then in english. Caeterū quod ad aegros attinet sanandos, dietā ip∣sis cōstituā pro facultate, & iuditio meo cōmodam, omne{que} detrimentū et iniuriā ab eis prohibebo. Ne{que} ve¦ro vllius preces apud me adeo vali∣dae fuerint, vt cuipiā venenū sū pro∣pinaturus, ne{que} etiā ad hanc rē cōsi∣liū dabo. Similiter autē ne{que} musieri talum vulnae subdititiū ad corrum∣pendum
cōceptum vel foetū dabo▪ Porro praeterea, sancte vitam & ar∣tem meā conseruabo. Nec vero cal∣culo laborantes secabo, sed viris chi¦rurgiae operarijs, eius rei faciendaelo∣cū dabo. In quascun{que} autē domos ingrediar, ob vtilitatem aegrotantiū intrabo, ab omni{que} iniuria volūtaria inferenda, & corruptione cū alia, tū praesertim operum venereorū absti∣nebo, siue muliebria, siue virilia, libe rorumue hominū aut seruorum cor pora mihi cōtigerint curāda. Quae∣cū{que} vero inter curandū videro aut audiuero, imo etiā ad medicandum non adhibitus in cōmuni hominum vita cognouero, ea siquidem efferre non contulerit, tacebo, & tanquā ar cana apud me continebo. The en∣glishe is this: And as concernyng the curyng of the sycke, I will or∣deyn and deuise for them as good
a diete as shall lye in my power & iudgement. And I will take hede yt thei fal in no domage nor hurte. Nor yet any mans praiers shall so much preuail with me, that I geue poyson to any man, neither will I counsaile any man so to do. Like∣wise I will geue no maner of me∣dicine to any woman with chylde to destroy her childe. Moreouer I will vse my life and science godly. I will not cut those that haue the stone, but I will cōmit that thyng onely to the Surgions. In what house so euer I shall come in, my cōmyng shalbe for the pacients cō∣moditie and profite. And I wil re∣fraine willingly from doyng any hurt or wronge, & from falshode, & chiefly frō venereous actes, what kynd of bodies soeuer it shal chāce me to haue in cure: whether it be
of mē or womē, of fre or bond ser∣uants. And whatsoeuer I shal see or heare among my cures (yea al∣though I be not sought nor called to any) whatsoeuer I shall know amōg the people, if it be not lauful to be vttered, I shal kepe close, and kepe it as a secrete vnto my selfe: Again▪ the same Hippocrates saith in the boké or chapter called Lex. (To eschue tediousnes I wil leue the latin) who soeuer saith, he wyl truly get him the knowlege of phi¦sike, he must satisfie his mynd, and as it were be accompanied with these guides, with nature, science, a place mete & cōuenient for study & lerning, an institution frō child∣hod, a labor & peinful diligēce with a long tune. Itē in his boke de me dico, he saieth: The phisition must be of a good coloure, and comely countenaunce, and of a good dis∣position
of the body: he muste al∣so be had in estimation among the common people, by comely appa∣rell, and by swete sauours (so that he be not suspected of to much ex∣cesse) for by suche meanes the pa∣cientes are wont to be delited. In lyke maner the Physition muste see and studye, that he bee of a modest and sobre mynde, and not onely as concernynge modest talke, but also in other things con∣cerning his behauiour, he must be wel disposed: for there is nothyng yt getteth a man better estimation and authoritie then to bee endued with an honest lyfe and good ma∣ners. Hys countenaunce must be lyke one that is geuen to studye and sadde, and yet not ouer much, for so he should be taken to be stub¦born & scornful, & like one yt disdai∣neth
other mens company: but on the contrary, he that hath always a laughing contenance, & is geuen to too much iesture and mirthe: is taken for a lewde person. And ther¦fore this must nedes be eschewed. Also he must be iust and beare him selfe vpright in all his busynes and affayres. &c. In his booke De decenti ornatu he saith: a Phisicion beinge a Phi∣losopher is equall in a maner vnto god. Item it is decent that the phi∣sicion be gentyll and curteis, for rudenesse and churlishnes are gret¦ly misliked, as wel of the whole as of the sicke. He must often visit his paciēt and be diligent. He may not declare all thinges to his pacient, but some things he must kepe close from him, and must conforte him with a liuely & mery countenance.
And sometimes to withdraw him from his fonde desiers, he muste rebuke him, in resisting with sharp words: and somtimes againe he must intreate & conforte him, with a dexteritie and gentle perswasion. And yet notwithstanding he may not alwaies tell him of his present state, nor what shall becom of him. Thus much I haue brought out of Hipocrates to testifye & declare the office and condition of a Phisi∣cion. Now som thing will I bring out of Galen, who in his boke inti∣tuled quod optimus medicus idem e et Philosophus, declareth plain∣ly by the very title of ye boke it self, what learning a Phisicion ought to haue. He saith also in his boke de Antidotis, That a Phisicion if it be possible oughte to haue the know∣ledge of al herbes, if not, at the least
he ought to knowe those whiche be commonly vsed. Agayne in the commentaries vpon the fyrst boke of Hippocrates de morbis vulgari∣bus: The Phisicion saith he ought in any wise to haue a respect to pro fit and helpe his pacientes, and if he can not, then at the leaste wise that he hurt them not. Item vpon the vi. boke de mor∣bis vulgaribus he saith: Albeit that the phisicion be gentle and curteis, sober & also mery, yet neuertheles he ought not to minishe his graui∣tie, for vnlesse the paciente haue in reuerence & estimation his phisiciō as a god, he shall neuer folow and obey his counsell, it wil be therfore very decent that ye phisicion do not so abase hym selfe & flatter, that he bringe him selfe in a contempte: Nor agayne, as it were an other a
Eallianactes, shewe him selfe hog∣gish and rude. And that shal he ea∣sely bring to passe, if in his counte∣naunce and talke and al his honest behauior, he retayne the grauitie of a phisicion, and so do perswade his pacient to followe and kepe those things that he appoynteth and or∣dayneth for him. But now lest I should be to te∣diouse in alledging many authors: I will come to those of our tyme, and namely I wil bring that man of high learning & famous memo∣rie master doctor Siluius, who som¦times was ye publike reader of phi¦sicke in the vniuersitie of Paris, ha¦uing daily at his Lecture litle lack of a M. auditors (or as they call thē, scholars) of the which I being one, may plainly testify it to be tru The same Siluius saith in his boke
De ordine legendi libros Galeni e Hippocratis, that a good Phisicion must haue al these properties. Fyrst, he must be naturally bent and geuen to onely trueth, all the dayes of his life, he must be circum spect, discrete, and of a good preg∣nant witte and memorie. Secondly, he must haue a sounde and, healthye bodie, & must be able to abide great payne in studying. Thirdly, he must be endued with great richesse, or at leaste he muste haue sufficient to liue by. Fourthly, he must haue and get his learning of the best learned mē of his time, who diligentlye, euen from his childhode must instructe him with these sciences: grammer, Logick, musicke, Astronomie, and chiefely (as Plato counsayleth) A∣rithmetick and geometrie, and also
Philosophie. Nowe to come to my chiefe In¦tent & purpose, & (as they are wont to say) to the principal: These thin∣ges aboue rehearsed, well wayed & considered: what hope may there be conceaued? what foundation & stay may be had? yea what securi∣tie & sauegard is there in these sort of fellowes: which now a days al∣most in al places so rashly, so fond∣ly and so wickedly do abuse the no¦ble art & science of Phisicke. Where is their great and manifold know∣lege of the tounges, of the liberall sciences, of Philosophie, of anato∣mie, of the simples, of the compoūd medicines, and of the temperatures or cōplerions? wher haue they stu∣died? of whō haue thei learned their science? (if I may call it a science) what authors haue they sene or red. Many
standed without logike and natu∣rall philosophie. For Aristotle saith Vbi desinit Physicus, ibi incipit me dicus, A man must first peruse na∣turall Philosophie, before he entre into phisycke. I doo not denye but to haue some bokes of phisike in englyshe specially of the Simples, well and cunnyngly set foorthe for Surge∣ons, Apothecaries, yea and for so∣ber and wyse men, that delyte to reade in suche thynges, and know not the Latine tongue, is not vn∣mete nor hurtefull. Althoughe I woulde not wyshe, nor it is not decente, that eyther Surgion or Apothecarie, or any other manne, beyng no physition should practise or vse any inward medicine with∣out the learned and approued phy∣sitions counsayle. For as the two
Prouerbes sayeth: Falcem ne mit∣t in messem alienam, Etne sutor vltrā crepidam, Let no man medle with an other mannes corne, but with his owne. Lette the shoema∣ker meddle with his shoes. But to the pourpose, doo you thynke to haue in youre Englyshe Bookes, all the perfecte knowe∣ledge that is required in Physicke? Yea, haue you the tenthe parte onely? We coulde neuer haue it yet in Greke and Latine perfectly (not wythstandynge we haue it no we better then euer we hadde afore) howe thenne shoulde you haue it: If Englyshe Bookes could make men cunnyng Physi∣tions, then pouchemakers, thre∣shers plonghmē & coblers mought be Physitions as well as the best,
yf they can reade. Then wer it a great foly for vs to bestow so much labor and stu∣dy all our lyfe tyme in the scholes and vniuersities, to breake oure braynes in readynge so many au∣thours, to be at the lectures of so many learned menne, yea and the greatest follye of all were, to pro∣cede in any degree in the Vniuer∣sities with our great coste & char∣ges, when a syr John lacke latin a pedler, a weauer, and oftenty∣mes a presumptuous womā, shall take vppon them (yea and are per∣mytted) to mynyster Medicine to all menne, in euery place, and at all tymes. O tempora, O mores, O Deum immortalem, To what purpose haue the vniuersities ben¦erected & founded in tymes paste? To what purpose haue they so
many goodly priuileges graunted vnto them of al princes successiue∣ly from all ages? what doth it pre∣uaile for vs that be lerned to pro∣cede (as I saide) in any degree of maister, of bacheler, or doctor, and so to be allowed and haue autho∣ritie to vse our sciēce? when euery man, woman, and chyld that lyst, may practise and vse phisike (id{que} impune) aswell as we? and so, ma∣ny tymes not only hinder and de∣fraud vs of our laufull stipende & gaynes: but (which is worst of all and to much to be lamented) shall put many in hasarde of their lyfe, yea & be the destruction of many. Is this tolerable? will the magi∣strates alwayes wynke at this? shall there neuer be no reforma∣tion for suche abuses? God of his great mercy graūt that ones they
may be refourmed. For if they be not, verily it wyll greately discou∣rage men of learnyng hereafter to apply them selues to the studye of Physyke, whereby the healpe; suc∣cour and sauegard of many a sick man, woman, and chylde shall be hyndred and secluded: yea and ma∣ny shall fall in danger, and be sicke which otherwyse mought be pre∣serued from al sicknes by the right ministerie of physike. For physyke is appoynted not onely to expelle sicknes, but also to preserue the bo∣dy in healthe. But nowe to the thirde parte I aunswere: you say that you heale many tymes by the gyfte of Na∣ture: I praye you telle me what you meane by nature. Perhappes you vnderstande by Nature; a na∣turall inclynation or dysposition,
geuen by the influence of starres and planettes, (as I doo not de∣nye but that we may be the better moued and inclined to any arte by theyr influence) yet is it not a mere gyfte, but onely a disposition, and as it were a dexteritie and natu∣rall towardnesse to heale som kind of disease: whych thyng notwith∣stādyng is oftentymes done more by chaunce, then by any certayne Methode or Reason. For verilye haue you neuer so good a wytte, disposition and inclination to any arte: yet if you applye not that arte and exercise your self in it earnest∣ly, and continually, and specially in this science of physike (whiche can neuer be well vsed without greate study, & the knowledge of diuers other sciences, as I haue saide a∣fore) your doyngs shalbe but rashe
vayne, and of small effecte. For as the philosopher saith: Scientiae no∣bis, non innascūtur, sed acquirūtur, The sciences ar not infused in vs at our byrth, but are gotten after∣ward: And science is thus defined in Logicke: Science is an habite, (that is) a ready, prompt and bent disposition to do any thynge, con∣firmed and gotten by long study, exercise and vse. Therfore the na∣turall inclination by the influence of the starres can profite but little, vnlesse you applye your selfe with greate diligence and study to that kynd of science or art that you in∣tende to practise and folowe. But yf you vnderstande (by Na∣ture) God: I say plainly, that god doth not geue the gyfte of healing to any wicked people, but only by a speciall priuiledge to those onely
that be of a moste pure, sobre, and holy lyfe, as we reade of the apo∣stles, and some of the Prophetes. And as sainct Paule saythe in the first epistle, the .xii. chap. to the Co∣rinth. To some is geuen the gyfte of healyng by the holy ghost. So that to hele by this maner of mea∣nes, is not commonly to vse her∣bes, rootes, or any other drouges bought at the poticaries shop, or to take any money or other rewarde for the healynge. For this kynde of healyng is the mere gift of god workynge in those (to whome it pleaseth God to geue it) withoute any laboure or studye. We heare of none nowe a dayes that hathe thys gyfte of nature (I meane of God) sauynge onely the kynges of Englande, and the Frenche kynges, whyche as the Excellente doctour
should be better and more honestly truely and iustely vsed and mini∣stred then it is nowe in these dais. And because that I would that euery man should see and knowe, what articles they be that I dely∣uered, I haue thought it good to take a copie of them (which not∣withstanding I haue somwhat al¦tered) and rehearse theym here in order. Seuen Articles concerning the mi∣nistration and vse of Phisike. The fyrst. It were very mete, expedient & necessary that no phisition shoulde practise phisicke in any dioces, vn∣les he were fyrste allowed by some vniuersitie: or at the leaste hauing sufficient learninge in the saide sci∣ence, he were allowed and licensed by the byshop or his chaunceloure in that dioces wherin he dwelleth.
The second. It were good and necessarye that no Surgion shoulde practyse his surgery, vnles he coulde reade and write, and had knowledge and ex∣perience in the simples belonginge to his art. And that he presume not to let bloud or vndertake any hard cure, without the physitions coun∣sell, if he may conueniently haue it. The thyrd That no Poticarie should mini∣ster of his owne heade, or ordeyne any purgation or other compositi∣on of Phisicke for any man: or that he shoulde prepare and make any purgation or notable confection, withoute the Phisitions aduyse and counsell, vnles that the Phi∣sition hadde fyrst sene and vewed the Ingredientes, wherof the com¦positions are made, and speciallye the purgations.
The fourthe. It is not decent nor profitable for the common weale, that any igno∣rant lewde or ill suspected person, be he man or woman, shoulde be suffered to make, sell or minister medecines to any bodie, but that suche kind of persons (beyng duely examined and conuyeted by the learned Phisitions of the dioces) should haue condigne punishment appoynted them by the Byshop or his chauncelour. The fyfthe That no Phisition do take vpon him the name of anye degree of Schole, as bachelour, maister of Arte, or doctor: or cause and permit any writer or printer so to terme him, vnles he can approue it to be so in dede by any vniuersitie.
The syxte. That no midwife should disdayne to come aske counsell of the Phisi∣tion, as often as any woman be∣yng in laboure of childe, is in dan∣ger. It were good also that the midwiues wer first sworne to the byshoppe, before they take vppon them their office. The seuenth. It were also good and expediente that (as the vse of London is, graū¦ted by an acte of Parliament) that the Phisitions in euery other dio∣ces one or two, or more, shold haue licence of the byshop, to searche and vewe the poticaries shoppe once a yere at the leaste, and see whether their stuffe and medecines be good and lawfull or not. These Articles aboue rehear∣sed I thought good here to allege, (although
gora, the roote of Gentian: for Hęmatites, A methystus: for Semper∣uiuum minus, the herb called thrist or greate Stonecrope, they haue taken litle Stonecrope in making their Populeum, To the purpose, where as the acte presupposeth a speculation or practise, they practise at a venture a thynge whiche they knowe not, whether it be colde or hotte, drye, or moyste. Item, where as the Act geueth them licence to mynister drynkes for the stone, strangurie, & agues: They knowe not the stone in the back, from the stone in the blader: neither whether the stone may be wasted and brokē by drinkes and powders, or had out by incision. Moreouer thei know no differēce betwene a colyke and a stone: for
they name them bothe one, where as they be two sundry diseases. They know not what Stranguria is, nor how many maner of ways it may be engendred in the bodye. They can scant discerne a tertian ague from a quotidian. As for the mixt and complicate agues, they know not what to make of them They call them newe diseases, be∣cause they can geue them no other name. Nowe in good faithe, yf these ioly felowes had but that know∣ledge onely, which the said act pre∣supposeth theym to haue: it were not so great a danger, if they some tymes were permytted to geue some medicines for the foresayde dyseases. But I praye you, howe manye of theym haue that litle knowledge? which knowlege
is but lyttle in dede in comparison of many other sciences, whiche be not onely profitable, but also ne∣cessary to attayne the noble science of phisike. If the other actes which hath ben made for the reformation of Physike, be well scanned & con∣ferred togither one with an other, it shal plainly appere, that the afore named act, shal not make so great∣ly for theyr purpose, who by igno∣rance and rashnesse do vse to prac∣tise phisike at theyr pleasure. Verily I muche meruaile at one thynge that many which be of the higher sort, reputing them selues to be of no small grauitie & wisedom will sometymes geue credite to su∣che lewde persons, counterfayting the phisitions. In dede I suppose that they be partly deceiued by the vain persuasions & faire flattering
speche of suche fellowes. Their cō∣munication is so faire, swete, gen∣till, plesant and amiable: and their promise and waranting so earnest and great, that they will go nye to deceaue the wisest man that is, yf he haue not the more grace, and be very ware of them. And the bet∣ter to allure the symple people vn∣to them: They wil say to him whō they do take in hand: Syr, I will nonne of your money no we vntil you be whole: I will haue money only of you for the medicins, whi∣che I must occupy for your disese. They wyll lyghtly warrant euery manne to heale hym, of what dis∣case soeuer he hath: And for all dis∣eases they haue cōmonly but two or three sortes of medicines, and yet moste commonly they be pur∣gations or vomites.
They purge so muche and so of∣ten, that they purge many tymes as wel the sowle out of the body, as the money out of the purse. Moreouer, these fellowes will al∣so (to haue the more credite geuen vnto them) name them selues af∣ter som great lerned mans name. Somtunes they fain them selues to be of some straunge countrey, and wyll counterfayte their lan∣guage (As I know one in Salis∣bury) and loke to be called by som name of dignitie or worshyp: as Maister, gentylman, domine, doc∣tour, and al to deceaue the people. O I would wyshe, that euery man woulde take hede, and I be∣seche God that euery man may be ware of suche false Physytions, whyche maye be lykened to wol∣ues or foxes, clothed outwardlye
with lambes skyns, but inward∣ly are full of subtiltie and deceite. Many perishe through the yere at their nands, wherby the good sci∣ence of physike is brought into an obloquie and reproche. Many learned doctours of oure time haue in their works inueyed greatly agaynst these abuses, and haue wished som punishmēt to be establyshed by the Maiestrates, vnto such as wickedly and with∣out all reason mysuse and practise this science. Here I coulde also somewhat touch some of the lerned sort, whi∣che although they bere themselues neuer so stoute, and appere to mē to do all things wel: yet neuerthe∣lesse, they halt somtimes on bothe sides: They se & know many abu∣ses in ye poticaries shops, and yet
they winke at the matter, and are loth to displease the poticarie, who perchance is their frende. But the prouerbe saithe: Amicus Socrates, amicus Plato, Amica tamen magis veritas, The truthe ought to take place in all thynges, and aboue all thynges. There be also many phisitions, that thynketh them selues so pro∣foūdly lerned, that they beleue that no man is able to match with thē in lerning, they be so arrogant and scornful, that although the pacient hymself be content to haue the coū sayle of two or three other phisiti∣ons, to consult and conferre togi∣ther of hys disease: yet they wyll not wyllyngely graunte to it, but rather disdayne to conferre with any other, the whyche perchance are sommetymes a greatte deale
better learned then they are. They remember not what Hippocrates their maister saith, in his booke de preceptionibus, who being in La∣tin translated saith thus: Nec vero indecore se illegeret medicus, quiin rei praesentis augustia circa aegrum aliquem, et imperitia tenebras of∣fundēte, alios quo{que} accersere iusse∣rit, quo ex cōmuni consideratione, res circa aegrum inquirantur ac cog∣noscantur, & illi cooperatores fiant ad auxilli ferendi facultate. The en∣glishe is thus: That phisition shall not do amisse, nor behaue himselfe vncomly, which beyng as perplex in the busines about his paciente, and doubtfull for want of perfecte knowledge: do cause other phisiti∣ons to be called, that by common deliberation, and conferringe one with an other, ye pacientes affaires
may be dewly examined and kno∣wē, so that they may be as coadiu∣tors (yt is to say, helpers one to an other) to prouide for some remedy. Some there be also (leste I wene that other men should learne their cunning) that wil rather scrible thē write a recept, and will make such dashes and strange abbreuiations in theyr billes, that theyr writinge semeth rather to be arabicke, or like the writinges of the Cabalistes, then Latin. I feare me that they that write so, are ashamed of their owne occupation, and feare leaste that if they shoulde write playne, their errours and faultes shoulde be espied. He that is a playne man will deale▪ playnelye, will speake playnely, and write playnely. Some ther be also that be so stiffe necked & heady in theyr opinions,
that they will be of no man gain∣sayde in no wyse, no and if you bringe them neuer so good a rea∣son, although you alledge them ne∣uer so many authorities. But I say, Plus vident duo ocu∣li{que} vnus. All the wit of the worlde lyeth not in one mans heade. Ther¦fore to conferre together vppon a matter, it doeth oftentimes greate good, and no man (be he neuer so well learned) ought to refuse it, as often as time, place, or any other oc¦casion shall serue. Item, some phisitions ther be, that be so greedy and of so an vnsacia∣ble desier, that they care and passe not in what daunger they caste them selues in, what shame & da∣mage they sustain, so that thei may haue many cures, wher somtimes
one would suffice thē well enough and be more perchaunce then they can well bring to passe. They be so couetous that they wold haue all, and do al them selfe, and they haue enuy many tymes at other honest men hauing cures, when they haue none. Thys doinge verelye they bringe them selues in greate con∣tempte, and dothe as it were abate and blemishe the honorable science of phisicke, which requireth rather to be sought earnestly with greate sute, with humilitie, reuerence and prayinge, then to be offered, and as it were obiected vndiscretely to e∣uery man, and in euery place, lyke a blinde harpers songe or a Ped∣lars packe. The common prouerbe saith, that offered seruice stynketh. And I haue harde oftentymes saye, that phisicke vnles it be ear∣nestly
sought and well payde for, it will neuer prosper nor woorke well with the pacientes, I meane not by this but that the Phisition muste be alwayes liberall and mer¦cifull to the poore, on whom his li∣uing dependeth not but on the rich Nowe to conclude and finish this fyrst part, I will leaue to intreate any more of phisitions, (except as occasion shall serue) and nowe in the next parte followinge I will speake of poticaries, & touche som∣what their abuse and negligence. Whosoeuer wil read anye more of the tokens and qualities of folishe and blynd phisitions: Let him rede a litle boke of mine, printed about a dosē yeres past, which is intituled: A gret Galley lately com into Eng¦land òut of Terranoua, laden with phisitions, poticaries & surgiōs. &c. made in forme of a dialoge.
The Seconde parte intrea∣teth of the ignoraunce and presumption of certayne Poti∣caries. IT is not vnkno∣wen to many mē, and speciallye to those that be truly and exactly lerned in phisick, that ther hath bene, is now, yea and shall be (if some good order be not taken) great abuses among poticaries, in handling, keping, chosing and dres∣sing their drouges and medecines. In so much, that it is suspected of most part of men (and I pray god it be not so in dede) that amonge all other mechanicke artes or occu∣pations, the greatest & most crafty
deceate that is, is or may be in po∣ticaries. Howbeit, I am not igno∣raunt, but that within these fewe yeres, some poticaries, by the helpe and counsell of good Phisitions, haue gotten and prouided for bet∣ter stuffe & simples to make their compositions, then they wer wont to haue afore. And I beleue verely, that if euery poticarie would endeuour himself to bye no stuffe, but that should be pure and good: there woulde be a great meany, that would geue bet∣ter credite to phisitions and Poti∣caries, and haue a better hope in them, then they haue now a daies, and all because they mistrust and suspecte so muche the Poticaries stuffe and confections. In dede, as couetousnes is the roote of all euyll, so many poticaries there be,
that more for lucre sake and gredi∣nes of worldly goodes, do prepare their medicines, then for any care that they haue, to deale truly with the poore pacientes and sely soules that be in payne. The phisition ma∣ny tymes shall ordeyne his coun∣sell, and appoynt certayne mede∣cines for his pacient: which mede∣cines he knoweth certainly shal do him good, beynge taken and vsed accordinge to his counsell, yet the same medecines beyng taken and bought at the poticaries, and made many tymes of noughty stuffe, or not well prepared, shal not only do litle or no good at all, but shall also somtimes put the sicke body in ha∣sarde of his lyfe, whereby shall no small trouble and shame redounde vnto the phisition, and yet was he not the occasion thereof, nor in any
fault at all. Some perchance wil alledge agaynst the physition, that he maye bee in the faulte, for as muche as he ought to haue seene the stuffe fyrste, whereof the com∣positions are made, and ought al∣so to haue ben at the makyng and preparyng of the medicines whi∣che he ordeyneth. In dede it ought to be so, if all thynges went well, and specially if the poticary be suspected to haue somwhat a large cōscience, or that he be of a slender learnynge and negligente, and passeth not what he doothe, so that he may receyue money. But you must vnderstād that the physition can not alwais be present at the makyng or dely∣uerynge of suche medicines as he hath appointed. For somtymes he hath mo pacientes to loke to then
one, & perchance he may be twen∣tie or forty myles from the potica∣tie, when he sendeth his bylle to hym, and therefore can not be pre∣sent. Many other occasions there bee, that letteth the presence of the phisition at the makynge and dely∣ueryng of medicines. But yf the apothecarie be an ho∣nest man, of a good conscience and learned: Or that he hathe suche a one vnder hym to serue the shoppe that is of lyke qualities: It is not then so greatly necessary for the phi sytion to be present, so often as he ordeyneth his counsayle for anye paciente. For euen as a good tree wyll alwayes brynge foorth good fruite: So wyll a good poticarye make and delyuer nothynge at a∣nye tyme, but that that is lawe∣full and good. But this question
(yf a man moughte be so bolde) I woulde fayne aske, howe manye good apoticaries bee there in En∣gland? howe many doo theyr due∣ties as they oughte to doo? Howe many are learned: howe many are faithfull? and howe many are wil∣lyng and desyrous that the physiti∣ons shoulde see theyr drouges, and see the makynge of their compost∣tions? Many ther be, that disdayn that the Physitions should be pre∣sente at the makyng of theyr me∣dicins, and who more then the ig∣norant, couetous & cōtentious sort of poticaries. The ignorāt thynkes (folowyng their barbarous Nico∣lans) that their knowlege (whiche is mere ignorance) farre excellethe and surmounteth the knowledge of all Physitions. The couetous ar aferd, lest yf the physitiōs shuld
be present they should find a great deale of theyr stuffe to be sophisti∣cate, corrupt and nought. There be also an other sorte of Poticaties, which be so arrogant and scornfull (by reason that they de growen in greate richesse God knoweth how) that they disdayn the Physition, and haue hym in no estimation, where as in the an¦cient tyme, the poticaries (as Ga∣lene and other wytnesseth) were but as seruauntes and ministers vnto the Physition. Galen in the commentaries vpon the .vi. boke of Hippocrates, de morbis vulgari∣bus saythe thus: The ministers of the phisition, are gatherers of her∣bes, oyntemente makers, cookes, playster makers, clyster geuers, scarifiers, letters out of bloud. &c. but yf we (meanyng of physitiōs
after yt we haue lerned these thin∣ges, do also somtimes the like▪ we doo no otherwise then euen as a maister or gouerner of a shyppe, whyche hauynge knoweledge in rowyng, do rowe when he lyste, and get vp to the top of the mast, and dothe all other thynges belon¦gyng to the mariners arte and of∣fice. Thus muche Galene. I neede not to alledge here the xxxviii. chapter of Ecclesiasticus, where euery manne is exhorted to honour the physition: how much more then should the poticarie ho∣nour and reuerence hym, whiche hath chiefly his uyng by meanes of the physition. I speake not this bycause I or any physition should seke worldly honor, or vain glory▪ For aboue all thynges: Soli Deo fit honor & gloria. yet not with∣standyng,
accordynge to Saincte Pauls doctrine, we ought to geue honour, to whome honour belon∣geth. I remembre that whenne I was yet in a maner but a boye in age, studying beyonde the sea, after a yeare or two that I had studied in physicke: I woulde somtymes (for to haue the better knowledge in symples) resorte to some potica∣ties shoppe or other. But I should no rather come into the shop (spe∣cially of learned and honeste men) but that immediately, The potica∣tie woulde welcōme and receyue me with all curtessye and humani∣tie▪ and ryse from his seate to geue me roume, and so woulde enter∣tayn me with all gentylnes that he mought. This dyd they to me be∣ing then but a scholer▪ what would thei do think you to the maisters &
doctours of phisike? What maketh many poticaries now a days to set so litle by the phisitiōs: This is one chief cause: They play the phisitions them selues, they geue and minister medicins of their own deuise (god wote a mad deuise) indifferentely vnto all mē: yea and the more igno¦rant they are, the more bolder they be. For who is so bold as blind bay ard? Many of thē wil not sticke to loke in waters, & be not ashamed e∣uen in the phisitions presence, to or∣deyn this or that medicine for any kind of disease: If any phisition do gently admonysh thē of their fault & specially of geuyng of medicines after their owne brayne: They wyl say, that they may as▪ well prescribe medicines, as Physitions somty∣mes doo vse to make them. They may playe (saye they) as well the
Physitions, as the physitions play the poticaries, as though a physi∣tion and a poticary were all one. In dede a physition may be a po∣ticarie, and haue a poticaries shop within hymself in his owne hous or maye be a Surgeon, and heale woūdes or sores, or let bloud him selfe: Sed none diuerso. A Poti∣catie or Surgeon beyng onely of that arte may not be a physition, vnlesse he abuse and falsely exer∣cise against all reason and consci∣ence, (as many do nowe a days) the science of physike. To proue that a physition may make or cause to bee made in hys owne house, any kynd of medici∣nes: it may partely appere by the authoritie of Galene afore alled∣ged, and also by dyuers other fa∣mous authors of our tyme, and
specially by Manardus and Siluius. Manardus in the prologe prefixed to the annotations vpon Mesue, hath these wordes: In times paste saithe he, the phisitions themselues prepared the medicines at theyr own houses, and so kept them rea∣dy made, the whiche as often as nede required, accordinge to their discretion and the necessitie of the sicke, they vsed. But sins these fiue hundred yeres or there about, this kind of busines hath bene commit∣ted, or rather deriued from the phi∣sitions (not withoute as I beleue the danger of the pacientes) vnto certayne, which are called spicers, or Poticaries. &c. Iacobus Siluius in his boke de me∣dicamentorum simplicium delectu, in the beginninge, wheras he spea∣keth of the dewty of a Poticarie:
declareth, that as well Galen as o∣ther phisitions did oftentimes pre∣pare the medecines them selues. It is lawfull then for the phisition (if he lyste) to prepare the medecines for his paciente him selfe: but not lawfull for the poticarie, to vse or practise phisicke for any man, of his owne heade. I wold wish that the poticarie, as he is desirous of gayne, so he wold prouide for all things necessary for his shop, and chiefly and fyrst of al, for the chiefe guide & Instrument, that shold rule al the rost, I meane the boke of Bernardus Dessennius Cronenburgins, de compositione medicamētorum: The perfectest in my opinion, & most excellent booke I beleue, that euer was made for poticaries, Howbeit, because that some phisitions vseth the compo∣sitions
of other authors: I would wish also, that ye poticarie mought not be without the dispensatories of Valerius Cordus, of Euchsius, or Nicolaus Mirepsus, or the .ii. bokes of Siluius, contening the chosinge, kepinge, and making of medicines commonlye used: or Examen tam simplicium q compositorum, An∣tonij Musae: and not to followe still their blinde Nicolaus Praepositus, which is full of errours. It were mete and conuenient also, that the Poticaries had diuers fearces to searce their powders in, for some powders would be seaed verye fynely, as they that be diureticke powders, and most parte of Elec∣tuaries: some more grossye, as the most part of laxatiues, except aga∣ricke and colocinthis.
a pound of suger, to an ounce of powder. And to say my fancie and opinion: it were good that the phi∣sition should determine & appointe in his byll, howe muche suger he wold haue to be put with the pow¦der. For somtimes it layneth that he ordeineth a purgation in losen∣gis: somtimes he vseth some bitter powder, or very hote powder, that requireth of suger more or lesse: but cōmōly bitter or very hot pouders require more suger: and pleasant & temperat pouders require lesse: but many poticaries are very liberall, which spare for no suger, whē they make losengis, because they haue more respecte to their profite, then to the pacientes healthe. Agayne they loue to make all thynges pleasaunt and swete, so that swete money maye come in. And it is
mooste commonlye seene, that the moste parte of sicke folke abhorre swete things. Wherfore, they shold know of the phisition (vnles he de∣termine it him selfe in his bill) how much suger he will haue to the ma king of the medecines. Nowe at the laste to conclude, because that poticaries shall know partely what theyr dewtie is, I will here recite what Siluius saith in the place afore alleged, of the po∣ticaries duety. And thus I haue translated his preface into english. Althoughe that the Potica∣rie be endewed with many thyn∣ges, commonlye agreynge with the Phisition: as with natural dis∣cretion, a perfect knowledge of the medicines, a gret diligēce in al such things as belong to his office, & an honest behauiour: yet neuerthelesse
many thinges are in a maner pecu¦liarely appropriated vnto him, the which somtimes were also proper and belonging vnto the phisitions, at what time they them selues pre∣pared the medicines, as it appereth that Galen should haue done it, in manye places by his writinges. Nowe suche thinges as be proper to the poticaries are these: The cho singe of medecines gotten by dis∣cretion and longe experience, after∣ward the maner to kepe them, and to knowe the time when they are in their power and force, or when they are destitute from all vertue and corrupte. Also, howe and in what maner eche of them ought to be vsed, eyther by it selfe alone, or els to sethe it, or to bruse or breake it with other, or to prepare it after an other sort and maner. It is also
conuenient and necessary for a po∣ticarie to knowe his grammer, be∣cause he may the better vnderstand the compositions of the aunciente writers, and also the dayly writin∣ges (which commonly they call re∣ceptes or billes) of the Phisitions. In the whiche writinges, if per∣happes they haue writē any thing more or lesse then nede is, or more vnplesaunt then the poticarie con∣iectureth in him selfe, to be mete & conuenient for the pacient: he then may gently tel and warne the phi∣sition of it. Moreouer we would that the po∣ticarie knewe perfectly the art and science to choose the medicines, to prepare them, and to compoūd thē together. We would also haue him to be contented with a meane ap∣parell, to be mery and pleasaunt in
cōmunication after an honest sort, diligēt in the pacientes busines, to be no couetous, no lasciuious, no dronkerd nor contentious person: all which thinges are euen in lyke maner to be obserued of the phisi∣tion as of the poticarie, as Hippo∣crates testifieth in his boke called the office or duety of a phisition. And if the poticarie be indewed with such perfections of spirite, of the bodie & also of fortune: he will neuer geue any medecine (specially being of any gret operation) to any man, vnles he be of the counsell of some cunning phisition, nay nether will he geue any thing, be it of ne∣uer so litle effect, knowing not the vertue of it. For oftētimes certayn remedies, although they seme but weake, yet neuerthelesse throughe quantitie, qualitie and space of time
beyng vnholesome, or the occasion many times of great diseases, and taketh away the righte and trewe way of curation: In so much that vnder such remedies, the bodie be∣inge in cure, will sone afterwarde beare greater & stronger remedies, but not conuenient to the purpose. Moreouer he shal not commit any crime or fault, either for loue or fa∣uoure, or for hatred or feare: nor he may not be seduced by money or led by ignorance. Neither shal he geue at any time any poyson, or thinges procuring abortion, any thing that is to olde or out of vse, thinges al∣tered and sophisticate, or any quid pro quo. But he shall aske coun∣sell, (as often as nede shal require) of a well learned Phisition, what simple or compounde medycyne is to be substytuted and taken,
for lacke one of the other. Nee shall not augment nor fortifie the quantitie of any strong medicine, to the intent that by a greater eua¦cuation ensuyng, men should sup∣pose him to haue better poticaries stuffe then any other. Oh I wolde the Apothecaries of these days woulde frame them selues to this rule, and the Phy∣sitions lykewise on their syde, phi∣sycke shoulde not then be so lyttell regarded and set by, as it is now adayes: yea by opprobrious wor∣des and tantes despised of a great many. Nowe I beseche the Al∣myghtye and lyuynge God, that ones he woulde make the Phy∣sitions and Apothecaries to be of that desyre and mynde, that eche of theym woulde rather wysshe to bee in dede, then to seeme or to
be called a ryght, good, and honest physition, a right good and honest Apothecarie. And yf they do neglecte that goodlye gyfte and grace, I praye God that ones some punyshment maye be appointed by the kynges lawes and statutes for them, whi∣che will enterprise to practise a sci∣ence (so healthy to mannes body, when it is well mynistred, and a∣gayne so hurtefull and daunge∣tous, when it is ignorantlye and rashely handled) before they know it. Thus muche Syluius. And here I wil make an ende of Apothecaries, now to the Sur∣geons.
and some there bee that can scante let a man bloud (which is a hand∣some and pretie feate, and yet not so harde a thyng to be doone) nor well apply a ventose called other∣wyse a cupping glasse, vnlesse they put the man to peyne and trouble. There be some that esteeme them∣selues so wel exercised and perfect in the arte, that they thynke that no cure can come amisse to them: They wyll enterprise and take in hande all maner of cures, be they neuer so hard or incurable: for they haue feare of nothyng, but rashely go to worke in all thynges. They wyll cutte, they wyll launce, they wyll canterise (whyche they calle searyng with a hot burning yron) they wyll sawe of a legge or an arme of the bodye, they wyll vse corrosiues that shall pearce euen
vnto the hard bones, and they wil make an issue almoste for euery trifle, and for euery disease, with∣out consyderynge the circumstan∣ces of the whole matter, not wey∣eng the strengthe, the age, and the complexion of the bodye, besydes many other things that are great∣ly to be consydered in suche cases. And possible it is many times that the paciente hathe nede of some in∣warde medicine, whiche the surgi∣on can nor may wel geue without the Physitions counsayle And in dede it were very mete and necessarie, that the Surgion should vndertake no hard or dan∣gerous cure, without the phisitiōs aduyse. Howbeit as I see nowe a dayes, the most part of them do al thynges, followynge onely theyr owne fantasies.
They sticke not to geue Electua∣ries, syropes, and other medicines them selues, yea and purgations al so: which thinge me semeth is very vncomely. It is not reason that he that shoulde be but as a minister vnto the phisition (as I alleged be∣fore out of Galen, when I intrea∣ted of Poticaries) shoulde vse the parte of a maister and philosopher, and ordeyne suche thinges as he knoweth nothing the nature of. It is not vnknowen, that many pore pacientes perisheth vnder suche rashe and lewde surgions. But to saye the trueth, the fault is not so muche in them, as in those that geue credite vnto them. For as the world goeth nowe a daies, if a phisition or surgion hath a faixe tonge, & hath also som what a com∣ly bodie, and can speake (I wil not
saye flatter) indifferently on euery mans side, gratifying eche man ac∣cordinge to his qualitie, desire and minde: euery man vnles he be very wise & circumspect, wil lightly geue eare and credite vnto him, & accōpt him for a discret and conning mā. Suche a one shall lacke nothing, he shall be welcome, he shall haue much curtesie and pleasure shewed him, finally he shal haue his whole hartes desire, (yt is money enough) For such felowes by their subtyltie and fayre tongue, will allure more people vnto them, & get themselues more treasure in one quarter of a yere, then shal an honest and good phisition in the space of thre yeres, and all by their fleringe face & flat∣tering wordes. I would to god that al men wold beware of such felowes, & remēber
the prouerbe that saith: Dulci sub melle saepe venena atent. Vnder swete meats is many times a poy son hidde. And as Virgill saithe: Hinc procul o pueri fugite, later an∣guis in herba, Take hede and flee farre hence O childrē, for the snake lieth priuily hid vnder the grasse. It is written in the auncient au∣thors of Phisicke, that in the olde time, the phisitions were wonte to exercise surgerie themselues. Howe beit it hath bene nowe of a longe time, that the Surgions do onely exercise this part of phisicke for ma¦ny considerations, and chiefely for this occasion, as Hippocrates saith Vita breuis, are vero longa The life of man is shorte in comparison of the science of Phisicke whiche is longe. Therfore because the Phi∣sitions can not well geue theym
selues to studie diuers other scien∣ces: whiche be necessary to phisicke and make medecines, and vse also surgerie, and go & visit their paci∣entes: It hath bene thought good that other men called Surgions (and yet hauing sufficiente know∣lege) should haue the office and mi∣nisterie to vse and applie outward medecines, and not to enterprise and vse all medecines for all disea∣ses both outward and inward, as some doeth, for in so doyng they go beyond their bondes. Surgerie although it be a ma∣nuell arte, yet it hath his specula∣tion, whiche can not be had with∣out readynge of diuers authors, and specially Hippocrates, Galen, Aetius, Paulus Aegineta, and of the latter writers, Tagaultius, Holle∣rius, Bologuinus and others. As
for Iohannes de Vigo, whom the Surgions of our daies doo now most follow, I wold not that they should so greatly trust him, because that he is not to be folowed & read without great discretion & Iudge∣ment, for the obscuritie & doubtes, yea and errours that be in him. He bringeth in manye thinges in his boke, which belongeth rather to the phisition to knowe & practise, then to the Surgion: as Electuaries, potions, purgations & many other inward medicines. If the Surgiō haue knowledge in Phisicke, I meane that he know the compleri∣ons, the nature of simples, and the effect & operation of compositions: he may vse them, els not. For if he do, he shal do as the blind man sho teth at the hare, he shal worke at al aduentures, and many times with
the danger of his pacient. I much maruell, why the surgion should disdayne to come aske coun¦sell of the Phisition, when he hath any hard or doubtfull cure, it can be no hindrance to him, and to saye the trueth, it is no great profite to the phisitian, vnles it be for some riche man. The good phisition will vse the poore as the poore: and the riche partly for his money as well as for his loue and frendship. For the phisition must haue his liuyng by some kinde of persons. And not onely the phisition, but also the po∣ticarie and Surgion should deale charitably with the poore, & vse eue¦ry man accordyng to hys capacity. But this I haue spoken, Velut o∣biter, as by the way: Nowe to the purpose. Manye perchaunce wyll saye
plye any thinge to the swellinge, without considering whether the body must be let bloud or not? whe¦ther the swellinge or phlegmon be yet in fluxu, that is a breding: or in statu, that is in the worst case that it can be: or in the declination? whe¦ther or when he ought to vse reper∣cussiues, resolutions, or both toge∣ther? The generall rule of Phisicke saithe, that in the beginning of all inflamations, we should vse reper∣cussiues, that is medecines to repel and driue backe the fluxion of hu∣mours: But I put the case that the swelling be in the Emunctories, or that one hath the pestilence: The surgion perhappes folowinge the generall rule, will laye a plaster to repell the said inflamation or swel∣linge. Doth he well thinke you? he doth so well that cyther he putteth
the pacient in great ieopardy, or els he killeth him quite. Wherfore the surgion must thinke that a great many things must be considred mo them one, as often as he vndertaketh any cure of weight And muste thinke it no shame nor reproche, to counsell with a Phisi∣tion in such matters. For verely I saye (to conclude in fewe wordes) that no man, be he surgion or poti∣carie, shall neuer worke well with∣out a true methode and learninge. For loke what thinge so euer he taketh in hande, what cure so euer he hath: he beyng destitute of lear∣ninge, shall neuer bringe it well to passe, without the ayde, helpe and counsell of the learned Phisition: for if he chaunce to do any notable cure, it shall be peraduenture more by happe hasard, then by procure∣ment
and diligence. Here I coulde bring in many other abuses of sur∣gerie: as howe some pretende and exercise phisicke (to their shame, de∣ceauynge the people) vnder the cloke of Surgerie: some dryue of and linger out the time, to haue the more money. Some be so presump tuous, that wil warrant euery pa∣cient: when oftentymes many by their negligence (and for lacke of a good diet, or some other good me∣decines whiche shoulde be appoin∣ted by the phisition) dye vpon their hands. Some whē they haue done al that they can, & see that their pa∣cient begin to go to wrack, thē im∣mediatly with all spede, they will run to ye phisition wt their pacientes water, and then to aske counsayle when it is to late: and all because they wylle shake of the burdeyne
from theyr owne shoulders, to cast it vpon the Physitions necke, and to put all the faulte in hym, if any thyng chance otherwise then well: that so they may be cleane dischar∣ged and vnburdened from all ma∣ner of blame and reproche. Some frome towne to towne, frome market to markette, to vtter their tromperie (theyr ware I woulde haue sayde) and to shew their cun∣nyng among the homely and sim∣ple people of the countrey. But all these wily and deceatful fashions are not yet throughly kno¦wen, nor can neuer well be, vntyll suche tyme as a reformation bee made by some law or statute, whi∣che I pray God to graunt shortely, to his glory, & the Queenes maie∣sties honor, & the profite of we her subiectes & common weale. Amen.
To bothe the Vniversities, Oxforde and Cambridge, a Peroration. THus much I had (right worshipful) to say, And to declare most playnly to you all: The great abuse committed euery day In this our art, whiche phisike men do call. The chiefest poyntes I haue in generall But onely toucht in this my lytell booke: He may know all the matter in speciall, Who so to it more narrowly wyll looke. I meruayle muche and sore lament to see, That such abuse hath ben suffred so long: And is nowe yet, (it wyll none other be.) You and we haue (me thinkes) great wrong: Therfore ye should no more the tyme prolong, But seke some meanes the learned to defend, With priuileges, that to you doo belong. And thus doyng, you shall no man offend. I euer had, and haue yet at this houre, A great despre, bothe in my hart and mynde: That euery good physition to his power Do all thynges well: so worshyp shall he fynd. But nowe there are physitions so vnkynde, To God and man, that they passe not a straw. Whiche of bothe endes go before or behynde, They are so void of truthe and feare of lawe. This sort wyl now inueye with force & might, Straight agaynst me, and this poore sely boke,
(Wherfore I pray, defend me and the right) They wyll lay wayt for me, and always looke What time the may destroy me with their hoke I meane theyr toung so venemous and sharpe: But by gods grace & your helpe I shall broke That wel enough: and not come in their trappe. Mollibus haec non est, sed duris dura Securis, Dura secat, damnum mollia nulla ferunt. FINIS. LONDINI, In aedibus Thomae Marshi. 1566.
