22977 99852924 18279
A DECLARATION OF SVCH GREIVOVS accidents as commonly follow the biting of mad Dogges, together with the cure thereof, BY THOMAS SPACKMAN Doctor of Physick. mad dog LONDON Printed for Iohn Bill 1613.
TO THE RIGHT VVORSHIPFVLL Sr ROBERT VVROTH Knight, health and happines. SIR, HAuing collected out of many learned Authors, sundry speciall notes and obserua∣tions, shewing what strang and cruell accidents, doe vsually or ve∣ry often, follow the bitings of madde dogges, and knowing that among vs sometimes (though not so frequently as in hotter countries) this mischeife hap∣pens to the great danger both of man &
beast: I am bould to present them (han∣dled and disposed as they be) to the ge∣nerall view, (I hope) for plicke good, and to your particular selfe in respect of your worth and neighbourhoode. Our language (for ought J know) hath ne∣uer yet said so much of this subiect. Therefore if any by this shall take oc∣casion to search further, or speake more for a greater generall good, J shalbe glad to be a whetstone to such an edge. Jn the meane time, seing this familiar animal, the Dog, is the seruant of poore men, the delight of great men, and a companion of most men: to preuent in∣conueniences that may fall, Pecori, pe∣coris{que} magistro, both to this kinde cattell, and their louing keepers, as also to prepare (if need require) a conue∣nient remedie for so disastrous a mishap,
J haue thought good, thus (as J can) to forewarne their negligence that thinke slightly of such a wound, and to re∣forme their ignorance, that may be (when time is) to seeke for needfull help, and make bould to direct these my simple labours, first and cheefely to your curteous acceptation, not as thankes for any benefites receiued, (for J am a stranger to you) nor as meanes to insi∣nuate for future fauours (though it now be my hap to be your poore welwishing neighbour) but both for the popular and well deserued speeches the whole country doth aforde you, and also for that J know your place and pleasure is, to keepe many Hounds for Hare and Deare, and Spaniels for land and wa∣ter. Accept therefore worthie SIR, this worthles) though perhaps not alto∣gether
fruitles) labour, as it is inten∣ded, a slender token of the good affecti∣on and respect J beare to the iust re∣port of your reputation. And so with my best wishes of health and happines to you, I rest. Your worships in all good will, THO. SPACKMAN.
OF THE MADDE DOGGE: together with the Cure of those most dangerous wounds and fearefull accidents, hapning to man and beast through their bitings. OF poysons incident to the outward parts of man or beast, there is none that in the end induceth or procureth more cruell accidents, and fearefull affections, then the byting of a mad dogge, though in some more or lesse then in other, partly by reason of the complexion and constitution of the body that is bitten, and partly by the manner of the byting. As for example, if a cholericke body of large vaines repleate with hot humors, be bitten through the skinne by a mad dogge, that with his byting ca∣steth forth store of that virulent some or matter con∣teined in his mouth, being sharpe and hot, he will become mad commonly in the space of one month after he is bitten, and some time sooner, as within a weeke, especially if it be in the heate of sommer, and copled with other bad causes, as an apt disposition of the body, thereto &c. If timely preuention be not
vsed. And the worser constitution of body a man is of, the more dangerous is the byting: but if the bit∣ten body bee of a cold complexion, such as are the phlegmatike or melancholike, or the biting but slight, or the venemous matter proceeding from the dogge, but small in quantity, or not very maligne & pearcing, then is it longer before the bitten body be tainted with madnes. And by this reason it hath come to passe, that some after the biting haue felt no hurt (more then a little ache and smarting of the wound) till a quarter of a yeere after. Some not in a yeere or two, or three, or 7. yea (as Galen repor∣teth, some not till 16. yeeres after, or as Guanerius, not till 18. yeeres after, which he verifieth by a story of one that so many yeeres after he was bitten, fell mad and died so within three daies after. For such is the condition of this poison, that when it hath lyen lurking in the body long before it be perceiued, it breaketh out, when it beginneth to stir, with much more violence, and maketh a quicker dispatch, then otherwise. Which if we duly consider, it is no wise∣dome for any man, be he neuer so lightly hurt, or feele as little present paine as may be thereby, to be secure and careles in seeking present remedy vpon such a chaunce. For by often experience it hath been seene, that not only the biting is of force to cause madnes, but euen the fome or slauer of a mad dogs mouth, if it touch any bare part of the body, and be not speedily wipt or washt away with salt water, or the ine of a boy, or such like, especially if any skin be broken where the slauer abideth, or the body bit∣ten be tender, thin skinned, weake or repleat with
bad humours; such being the subtill and pearcing nature thereof, that it speedily passeth through the poores of the skin, and then by little and little ma∣keth it selfe way into the small vaines, arteries and sinowes, & so in processe of time assaileth the heart, and disturbeth the braine. Now then if so great hurt may proceed from dogges, why doe we make them so familiar compa∣nions with vs, and vse them with so great delight, se∣ing we may endanger our selues thereby sooner and sorer then we imagine? Surely the reason is, because the dogge is so necessarie a beast as men cannot well tell how to want. For the Mastife dogge is a most trustie seruant in a country house, a Butchers one hand, and by his admirable hardines maketh many great men in loue with him, for the delight and pa∣stime he giueth them in combating with the terrible Bull and merciles Beare. Yea some of them be so full of audacitie, that they will aduenture on the Lyon the King of beastes. But therein I commend them not, because it sauoureth of a rebellions nature, then which nothing can be more odious in a com∣mon wealth. Beside the Mastife, we haue other dogs of plea∣sure, as the land and water Spannels, the one neces∣sarie for such as delight in hawking after the par∣tridge and fesant, the other for water sowles: the gentlemanly Greyhound for coursing Bucke, Stag, Otter or Hare: the Talbot or Buckhound, more re∣garded of noble personages: the hounds of ordinary Gentlemen and Yeomen, for Hare, Fox, & Badger. Besides these, we haue dogs, as of lesser spirit and
courage, so lesse seemely and necessarie, and yet wel liked of many, as the Shepheards curre, which hee would not change for the best hound the King hath, & sondry other countrie curs, which some keep only to be as watchmen in the night, to lugge a Hog and eate vp their superfluous crusts and parings. And lastly, wee must not forget the fine Lady dog that fares of the best, lodgeth warme and soft, and is trickt vp with siluer bels, carefully kept from flees, washt and combed with great curiositie, and hath more of this worldly pleasure then many a substan∣tiall and honest house-keeper. Heare we see such vse and acceptation of all these sorts of dogs, as we cannot well spare any of them, who beside, make themselues the better to be liked, because they carry so true and hearty loue toward such as they serue, as no brute creatures may be compared with them. As I remember a story of which Saint Augustine is reported to be the Au∣thor, wherein is showne an admirable loue of a dog to his Master. The storie is thus: A certaine Priest that had a louing dogge, on a time trauailing by the way, was met by a theefe that bereft him both of his mony and life, casting his dead body into anod cor∣ner out of the way, and so departed. The dog would not leaue his Masters body though dead, but lay by it howling and crying day and night, till by this do∣ing the dead body was sound, which being laid open∣ly to be viewed, the dog still gaue his attendance thereon. At length, among other beholders there∣of, came the theefe that robbed and murthered him, making showe of as great sorrow as any other: but
the dog hauing spied him, ran at him, and would neuer leaue assayling and barking at him, till the rest of the beholders by noting the dogs demeanour and his former attendance on the dead body, be∣came suspitious of him that he so fiercely assailed: whereupon causing him to bee throughly exami∣ned, he confessed the fact, and was dealt withall ac∣cording to his desert. Scaliger also, Exercit. 202. maketh mention of a certaine hunts∣man that by extremitie of cold, was found dead on the top of a snowie mountaine, by whose dead bo∣die lay a great dog, keeping it in such sort, as he would suffer no man, neither the dead mans frends nor any other, not so much as such as the dog be∣fore did know and was acquainted withall, to touch or come neere it. But hauing no need to seeke so farre for ancient and forreine stories, Thomas Lupton in his notes of memorable things, maketh report of no lesse loue in a dog than this, that serued an Inkeeper of Ware, a through-faire village in the way to and from Lon∣don. This dog loued his Master so exceedingly, that after he was dead, he sought him vp and down certaine daies, with so great sorrow and mourning, as nothing could comfort him, neither would he eat or drinke at all. At length, not finding him whom he so carefully sought for, he laid himselfe downe in the hot coales in the chimney, from whence being pluckt diuers times, he notwithstan∣ding would doe so still, till he had burnt himselfe to death. Though many wiues loue their husbands dearely, yet I thinke very few of them would ad∣uenture
to make demonstration of their loue by such a conclusion. As by these examples, the exceeding loue of dogs toward such as they serue, is noted for one spe∣ciall cause of the regard that is made of them, so are they besides this, much esteemed for their ingenu∣ous and wittie capacitie in learning many pretty and strange things. But as for these and such like causes we loue and like them, so if we would consider well the great hurts they often do, and may procure both to man and beast by their madnesse, which no creature is thought so subiect vnto as they, we should rather prouidently haue an eye to them and beware of them, then so familiarly entertaine them as we doe: especially, if we did bethinke our selues that this fa∣miliaritie betwixt vs and them, maketh vs the lesse circumspect in preuenting the hurt which in a mo∣ment we may catch by them. For some Writers affirme, that there is no meanes to helpe or cure ei∣ther man or beast, that by the byting of a mad dog are become mad. Lib. 5. cap. 3. And Paulus Aegineta saith, he ne∣ner knew aboue one or two cured of this kinde of madnesse, and those not immediately bitten of a dog, but bitten of such persons as were fallen mad by the byting of a mad dog. Now if any desire to know into what kind of passions such doe fall as are bitten of these creatures, and not holpen before they be growen mad, let them marke these stories following. One Baldus of Trident, Doctor of both lawes, and a very famous man in his profession, had a litle
fine Lady dog, that he did take much delight in, and would often play with him. This dogge on a time (as Mathiolus reporteth) snapt his Master by the lip, yet so lightly as he made none account of the hurt, neither had the least suspition that might bee of the dogs madnesse. But hereupon, about some foure moneths after, this famous Lawyer be∣came so lawlesse, so vnruly, so outragious, and so far beside humane sense and behauiour, that notwith∣standing all the meanes which were vsed for helpe, he died in that madnesse very miserably. This may bee an admonition to all such fine La∣dies and Gentlewomen as take pleasure in playing with their beloued chamber-dogs, to haue a re∣gardfull eye to their chaps. Andraeas Baccius Elpidianus a learned Physition, writeth thus of a Patient of his that was bitten by a mad dog, although with so smal hurt and offence, as he regarded it not, hauing the wound healed vp within the space of three daies. But about a month being past, finding himselfe more sad and sorrowful than he was wont to be, together with a loathing of himselfe, and wondring how it should so come to passe, he sent for me (saith Baccius) inquiring the reason and cause thereof, and I finding him weake spirited and lompish, aduised him to be carefull of his diet, to feed vpon comfortable meates and easie of digestion, and to drinke wine for the better strengthning of his spirits, more plentifully than he had vsed to doe. To which he answered, that hee could neither cat nor drinke, whereupon I offering him drinke, and noting his impotencie in receiuing
it, opened his mouth, but found no cause there, of his weaknesse or refusall. Then after long bethin∣king my selfe what might be the cause thereof, I as∣ked him whether at any time he had been bitten by any dog. To which he answered, yes, but yet with∣out any great hurt, as he thought. Wherupon, af∣ter some words of comfort, I acquainted his wife and other of his friends priuately, what danger hee was in, wishing them to boat him ouer the riuer Ti∣ber, by which he dwelt, and sodenly to throw him in, and sowse him well in the water, which they did, himselfe being very willing thereto. But this pra∣ctise profiting nothing, I made tryall of other meanes vsed in such cases, but all in vaine. For the same day toward night, hee began to rage, and though tormented with intollerable thirst, and a troublesome feuer, yet could he not be forced to drinke any kinde of drinke or water, (which is a common accident in this disease.) Then was hee strongly bound to a post, yet so great was his furie and madnesse, that he had almost broken the cords, with a desire to runne vpon the by-standers, crying away, away; and sometime howling like a dog, ga∣ping wide, tormented with thirst, and as it were holding his mouth open for drinke, but when it was cast into his mouth with a spout, hee would tremble and quake for feare, continuing in this manner most cruelly vexed with insufferable thirst and hellish heat and burning, vntill the second day from the beginning of his madnesse, was neere en∣ded, and then hee yeelded vp the ghost in wonder∣full torture, and no lesse terrour and astonishment
to the beholders, being the 36 day after his biting. Iulianus Palmarius also writeth, that hee knew a man of the country bitten with a mad dogge, who in like maner became mad, & so furious, that he was bound with cordes for restraint of his fury, and the hurt he was like to doe vnto others. Yet sometime this man found intermission of his fits, in such sort as he then would speake and talke sensiblie, and would yeld to reason. And on a time, in such a kinde of in∣termission and sensiblenesse, making account hee should die very shortlie, he desired such as were a∣bout him, that he might take his leaue of his chil∣dren: which being permitted, he embraced and kis∣sed them very louingly, and very shortly after, hee yeelded vp the ghost. But about 7 dayes after, these his children became as mad as their father, and be∣ing vexed with the like tortures, died within few daies very pitifully tormented. Hieronymus Cardanus in like maner sheweth that one Alexander Brasca, a nobleman of Venice, Lib. 2. Conten. Medico. Tract. 5. ha∣uing a dogge fallen mad that he exceedingly loued, which for his madnesse was taken to be hanged, this man in a foolish kindnesse, would needs kisse his be∣loued dogge before his execution. But such was the sequel of this kissing, as himselfe became mad al∣so in very short space after, and died very mise∣rablie. Matthaeus de Gradibus saith, Cons. 82. that one Iohn Coque∣ran, by the only putting of his hand into a mad dogs mouth, became mad himselfe thereby. And P. An∣draeas Matthiolus testifieth, that he saw two men ve∣xed with this kinde of madnesse, by the only sprink∣ling
of a mad dogges slauer vpon them, without be∣ing bitten at all. Baptista Codronchus a late writer, Iab. 1. de Hy∣drophob. cap. 5. saith he knew a certaine rich man of Saint Peters castle in the dition of Bononia, who seeing a little dogge of his that hee dearely loued, enraged so with madnesse, as he ran vp and downe gaping and foaming at the mouth, he supposing that some bone had stucke in his mouth or throat, would needs trie with his hand, the pluck∣ing out therof, but was for his kindnesse so bitten by this his darling, that thereupon he became cruelly tortured with the feare of water and conuulsions, and the seuenth day after in great miserie and tor∣ment, tooke his leaue of this world. He was twice or thrice cast into the water and enforced to drinke it, but without any reliefe at all. Heereby we may see, not onely the cruelty of this kinde of poyson, but also learne to take heed of it in time. But though the foame or slauer of a mad dogge be by all mens consent, of a most virulent nature, yet Petrus Salius Diuersus a very learned and intelligent Physitian, cannot be perswaded, that by only touching of the skinne of ones bodie, it can be of force to procure madnesse, except the skin bee broken in that part which the foame toucheth. Yet surely I for my part doe verily beleeue, that if it be suffred to lie long vp∣on the sound skin, it will worke such an effect in the end, in some sooner, in some later, according to the constitution and disposition of the partie bitten, and the poysonous degree of such filthy slauer. Philostratus an ancient writer, Hist. 6. lib. 18. in vita Apollo∣nij Tyanei. hath a storie of a young man, that being bitten with a mad dog, was
within a little while after so altred from all humane manners and conditions, that he became altoge∣ther dog-like in his behauiour. For he would barke, and sit on the ground like a dogge, and when he of∣fred to go, it was still vpon all foure, vsing his hands as his feet, as apes doe, continuing in this wretched estate the space of thirty dayes together, Iulian Pal∣marius before named, affirmeth that hee had seene horses, oxen, sheepe, and other cattel become mad vpon the eating of such straw or hay, as mad swine had tumbled in. Yet this is a mischiefe that few people hitherto haue greatly made account of; which slight regard of a thing so full of perill, hath beene one speciall cause, that hath moued mee to publish the danger thereof, in such maner as by the beholding of other mens harmes, the readers heereof may heerafter be∣come more circumspect and warie, and when occa∣sion serueth seeke remedy with speed. This kind of madnesse is called in greeke , or , in latine Rabies, or Furor, of the Greeke verbe . 1. Rabie percellor, insanio. The greeke word  doth also signifie furorem, furie, but that is such a maner of fury as belongeth to rea∣sonable creatures, rather thē bruit beasts. And Rabi∣es taken rather for doggish-madnes, then furor, hath this propertie attributed to it, that although the sicke therof be extreamly tormented with thirst and heat, yet doe they so wonderfully abhorre and feare the sight, yea (as some haue obserued) the very noise or speech of water and other drinke, as they will in no wise taste thereof, but tremble and quake
when they looke on it, and therefore by all meanes auoid it. Some in stead of rabies, call it hydrophobia that is to say water-feare. But this seemeth rather a consequent to rabies, and to come vpon the stage in the very last act of this tragedie. My purpose was not in a matter of such a subiect, as may be shut vp in so smal a roome as this, to stand curiously vpon any bookish method for the hand∣ling heere of; but rather as compendiouslie without multiplicitie of words, as I could, to set abroach the knowledge thereof in our vulgar language, in man∣ner of a caueat or watch-word, to al such as haue vse and dealing with dogges: though notwithstanding I thinke it not amisse, heere to shew some definition or description of this infirmitie, for the plaine expla∣nation of it: although very few haue vouchsaued so much in the treatie hereof: & therfore for auoiding of tediousnes I will produce only one, which in my conceit doth more significantly expresse the nature of this infirmitie, then any other that I haue read, which is thus out of Baptista Codronchus. Rabies, Lib. 1. de hy∣droph. Cap. 1. That is to say, Doggish madnesse, is an affect beside nature, ingendred or bred in a liuing creature, of some certaine peculiar poyson, and communicated or imparted to man with a vehemēt detestation of all liquid things, but especially of water. Heereby we may see the originall of this procee∣deth from such kind of poyson, as by the peculiar propertie thereof, induceth a greater loathing of li∣quid things, then any other manner of poyson is knowen to doe.
Petrus Salius saith he hath knowen some of these mad people, that would eat bread and flesh, but e∣specially sugar, in great quantitie, while they were tortured with their madfits, but if the sugar were dissolued in wine, broth, or water, they would in no wise taste thereof. And many of them will howle and barke like dogs. Though this manner of mad∣nes be accounted so peculiar and proper to dogges as no creatures are found so often afflicted therwith as dogges, and such as haue beene bitten with dogs, cōmunicating the poyson thereof one to another by contagion: yet Palmarius saith, hee saw twentie woolues at one time enraged with this kind of mad∣nesse, that ranne forth of a wood together, byting and murthering great numbers of all sorts of cattell. But what are woolues indeed, other then a kinde of wilde dogges? Howbeit Andraeas Baccius affirmeth that the kinde of Weasils called Martynnes, and Apes also, haue primarilie (that is without the byting of any o∣ther creature) beene found mad. He maketh men∣tion also of a woman that being bitten by a cat, fell mad, and died within 14 dayes after. And againe he saith, that he knew a certaine Gar∣diner, who vpon the sodaine was assailed with an old red cocke, and bitten by him on the left-hand that it bled withall. Which Gardiner, the very same day shewed his teeth and grinned like a dogge, and streight after he offred to leape like a fighting cocke, at such as were neere him, with fierce and staring eyes, and the third day after his biting he died in tor∣ment to the terrour of the behoulders. But it is like,
in mine opinion, that both this Cat and Cocke were first bitten by some mad dogge, and this last the ra∣ther, because he made a grinning and showe of his teeth like a dogge. Aristotle also saith that Camels, Horses & Mules haue beene found mad in like sort, Lib. 8. de Hist. animalium. and my selfe knew a Mare of great worth, that was mad, but she had beene bitten by the nose by a mad dog. And swine I haue knowne mad vpon the like occasion, and so I am perswaded that the other creatures named by A∣ristotle, gat their bane also from madde dogges. Yet Petrus Salius showeth some reason to proue that this kind of madnes may be caused in man or beast, by some internall principle inbred within them, with out the biting or contagion from any other. And to that end he produceth a story of a woman his Pati∣ent, in manner following. A certaine woman about 36. yeeres of age, sicke of a feuer, Lib. de affect. Particula. Cap. 19. sent for me crauing my help. Being come, I perceiued that she was vexed with a pestilent fe∣uer, whose cure I take in hand, and the 11. day after, I left her restored to health. About so many daies after, she fell sicke againe of a bloudy flix and a feuer withall. Wherupon she sent for me the second time, and hereof I holpt her in the space of 7. daies, sauing that a light or mild feuer still remained, of whose cure I did deliberate. But before I could effect it, the woman fell into a great loathing and abhorring of all liquid things, and that so exceedingly, as she would neither receiue any her selfe, nor could abide to see any other body drinke before her, it being in the middest of sommer. Whereupon I supposed her
to be sicke of a doggish madnes called rabies. Yet she was well in her wits and vnderstanding, complai∣ning of nothing so much, as the detestation of drinke or liquid meates, the sight or imagination whereof, ministred so great horror vnto her as was wonder∣full. Otherwise she was very quiet, and would talke very sensibly. Whereupon I asked whether she had not at any time beene bitten of dogges? To which she answered no, neither did euer keepe any dog in the house. Then I asked her Mother also whether she had not been bitten when she was a little Girle or Infant? who also answered the like. Vpon consi∣deration whereof I began to doubt whether any bo∣dy might fall into this kind of affliction or hydropho∣bie by some inbred beginning or occassion, without contagion from any other. The woman could not be cured hereof, but the eight day after died in this manner of passion. The reason of this hydrophobie or water-feare in this woman, I leaue to be discussed of the learned. But in mine opinion this was the lesse like to proceed from the biting of a mad dogge, be∣cause it was not accompanied with any other of such accidents as are vsually wont to goe with it. And though this example be ex raro contingentibus, in a manner matchles, yet Soranus seemeth to parallel this of Salius by a historie that he reporteth of a child, whom he saw so fearefull of his nurces breast-milke, that it would not abide to tast it, yet no note or knowledge of doggish contagion going before.
Causes of this infirmitie. IN searching out the causes of this doggish mad∣nesse, diuers learned writers both olde and new, haue been very industrious, producing reasons agre∣able to the opinions they were of, which heere to set downe in order, would be more long and tedious, then pleasing & profitable, and therefore I will show breefly such as seeme most probable and truth-like. Of which some are immediate and inward: other some mediate and outward. The immediate and inward cause hereof, is a most pernicious and deadly poison ingendred and bred of such corruption of hu∣mors and notable malignitie, as peculiarly forteth and most agreeth to the nature of such creatures, as are afflicted therewith. Corruption and prauity of humors, is the mediate inward cause of such manner of poison, as the ex∣cesse of heat and cold, a hot and dry region, or such as is extreamely cold and dry, are the mediate out∣ward causes. All which argue that the temperature and complexion of dogges, is not any efficient cause of this infirmitie, though like enough to yeeld some furtherance thereto. For if dogges (being very an∣grie beastes) be restrained or kept much from drinke, choler doth so boile in them (as some thinke) that it ioyned with the peculiar propertie of their nature, helpeth forward the breeding of such a malignitie as forceth them to madnes. Which may happen at any time of the yeere, but especially in the heat of Som∣mer, and that cheefly in the dogge daies, or in the extremitie of winter. For both these constitutions
of the aire, though contrary, may worke the same effect. For as the extremitie of heat is of force to scortch the blood, so the extremitie of cold, doth thicken and congeale it in such sort, as for want of difflation it be commeth grosse and blacke, & there∣by infected with so euill a qualitie, as giueth occa∣sion of madnes. And therefore in these regions where the Sommer season is most hot, and the winter most cold, are commonly found most store of such dogs. But the very true cause indeed why a dogge is more quickely & easily turned mad then any creature els, is his peculiar and naturall propertie and inclination to such a maladie, more then of any other liuing creature. Among outward causes contagion or the byting one of an other is the chiefe. Their feeding also vp∣on carion, especially such as haue died of any murri∣on or rot, or been striken dead with thunder, or poi∣soned by the biting or stinging of any venemous beastes: or their eating of corrupt, rotten, stinking or very salt or spiced meates: much sorrow for want of their lost masters: for hereupon many times, they hunt vp and downe so long, without eating or drink∣ing, that by their restles trauaile, want of meat and drinke, ioyned with mourning & greife, their blood is so chafed and distempered, as it ministreth great occasion of breeding this kinde of fearefull pas∣sion. For as dogges doe exceedingly loue those whom they serue, so will they as much greeue for the losse of them. A dogs loue saith Ascanius Mancinellus hath this peculiar propertie aboue the loue of other crea∣tures,
that the more his Master beateth him, the more entirely he will loue him, and thereupon in a merry conceit, hee seemeth to prooue a womans loue and a dogs to bee contrarie one to the other, in that (as he saith) If a woman be beaten but once by her husband, shee will doe her vttermost to repay it againe a hundreth fold. Aetius out of Rufus and Posidonius, Tetru. 1. Ser. 2. cap. 24. saith, that dogs being hot and dry by nature, doe get an other kind of heat and drynesse in the Sommer time, by the ambient aire, and by the immoderate intempe∣rature thereof doe become mad. Galen saith, that no creature is troubled with this kind of madnesse, but onely dogs. Which speech of his, hath tryed the wits of many men in sear∣ching out the truth therof. Of whom, som thinke it vnderstood by Galen, for the most part, or none so madde as dogs, or none vexed with such a kinde of madnesse primarily, that is, from their owne pecu∣liar nature, as dogs be, but that such as are infected with this kinde of madnesse, haue it commonly from dogges by contagion. Galens words be these: Cum enim reliquorum animalium nullum rabie capian∣tur, solus canis co affectu corripitur. Thomas A Viega commenting vpon these words saith: Lege (nullo alio capto) solus: significat manenti∣bus alijs multis sanis, canem corripi ob promptitudinem temperamenti: non quasi alia non rabiunt. Petrus Salius, saith, Credatur hoc ab eo fuisse factum ob non habitam ab eo rei experientiam &c. That is, Let it be supposed that Galen spake thus, not vpon any experience he had of this matter, which if he had
seene, or heard any faithfull testimonie thereof, he would surely haue reuoked this opinion, and not haue auouched, that onely dogs and none other creatures are taynted with this manner of mad∣nesse. Ascanius Mancinellus endeuouring to explane Ga∣lens meaning, saith: Quando Galenus dicit canem solum &c. That is, When Galen saith that a dog onely is troubled with this kind of madnesse called rabies, it is to be vnderstood, first and principally, by reason he is more apt thereto than any other liuing thing, but other creatures by a secondarie meanes, and ac∣cidentally: for that this rabies, which inferreth the terrible passion of water-feare, seemeth to bee the proper passion of dogs, as a thing more often and rather afflicting them, then other liuing creatures. Which seemeth the more probable, for that of o∣ther creatures, not one among a thousand is found to be affected with this manner of madnesse; and such things as so seldom happen, are esteemed as though they neuer hapned. Beside this, the truth hereof seemeth more apparant, because I neuer found in any author or expositor, that the signes and notes accompanying this disease, haue been de∣scribed and spoken of in other mad beasts, or that such as haue been bitten by them, haue fallen into the passion of water-feare, as it falleth out in those that are bitten by a mad dog. Therefore wee may very well conclude, that this kind of affection be∣longeth properly and principally to dogs, and se∣condarily to other creatures, and thereby it may seeme no absurditie to say, that their madnes is not
vera rabies, because it wants the right notes of rabies, but rather a kind of furie caused by adustion of hu∣mors, according to part, and not according to the whole. And this I thinke may suffice for the expla∣ning of Galens meaning, though more I could pro∣duce. Signes of a madde Dogge. WHen a dog is become mad, Iacobus Greni∣ous, lib. 1. de Venenis, cap. 35. & alij. he is commonly altered in the whole habit and temperature of his body, growing leane, dry and thirstie, yet re∣fusing drinke, and fearing or flying from water and bright things. He is sad and pensiue, hanging down his head, or bearing it more toward one side than another: his eyes be red and fierie, his countenance horrible and very vnpleasant; and Paulus saith hee is altogether dumbe and seldom able to barke. Yet some say, he will now and then barke at his owne shadow, but with a very hoarse voice. His eares hang down, he dreueleth and fometh at the mouth and nose, his tongue hangeth out, being of a red or blackish colour, hee bloweth short, refuseth both meat and drinke, his tayle hangeth loosely, or is clapt betwixt his legs: hee goeth drowsily, and when he runneth, he reeleth to and fro, yet runneth he then faster then he was wont; hee knoweth nei∣ther his Master, nor any of the houshold, but will bite them as soone as any other. What creature soeuer he meeteth, either wilde or tame, he will of∣fer to bite it. In his running or going, he will stop somtime vpon the sudden. All other dogs are a∣fraid
of him, and runne from him if they may: but if they meet him on the sudden, they will crouch downe to him and flatter him for feare. These are noted to bee the signes of an absolute mad dog, but many mad dogs want some of these signes. Therefore when one is bitten with any dogge whatsoeuer, because Galen saith, Lib. de ther. ad Pison. cap. 16. that the byting of a mad dog, is like, and nothing different in show or feeling, from the byting of one that is not madde. Oribasius, and other ancient Writers, set downe this for a tryall, namely, to take the kernell of a Wainut well bruised, and lay it vpon the bitten place, accor∣ding to the Greeke writers, a day and a night, but Isaac and Haly abbas, thinke a night sufficient, Auicen, onely an hower, of which opinion is Gentilis, if the kernell be applied presently after the byting, but otherwise not. Some againe say, if the wound be great and bleed much, that an hower is sufficient, because that in great wounds a nut will much soo∣ner drink vp the poyson than in smal. Therfore the smaller wounds require a longer time. When it is taken of, cast it to Hens, who if they eat it and dye the next day after, it is a manifest signe that the dog was mad; or as some say, if they refuse to eat it. Or take a peece of bread, wet in the bleeding wound of one bitten, then offer the same to some other hungry dog to eat; if he refuse to taste of it, that is taken for a very had signe. Yet some thinke that these are not sufficient tryalls to repose trust vpon, and therefore it were better to note diligently whe∣ther the byting dog be afraid of water or not, for
that is accounted a certaine signe of madnesse, if he feare and refuse the sight of it. This kind of feare is named of the Greekes, , and is for the most part, an inseparable signe of a mad dog, or of any other thing that is mad by the byting of a dog. Neither can they abide the sight of any thing that is bright, as to behold a looking glasse, or such like. Among dogs, such are noted to be most apt to become mad, as are swiftest of foot, fullest of agility in body, leanest of constitution, and in colour red or blacke. A man bitten of a mad dog, first becommeth sad and full of imaginations, after the poyson begin∣neth once to worke, muttering and talking to him∣selfe, and being asked a question, answereth litle to the purpose. He is afraid, where is no cause of feare, his sleepe weareth away, he feeleth gry pings in his stomacke, and shunneth the companie of men; his countenance becommeth wild and gastly, hee is exceeding thirstie, his voice groweth hoarse, his eyes red and fierie, flying the light, and somtime weepeth without any manifest cause; his face swet∣tie, hee is very prone to anger more than hee was wont to be, his minde is far out of order. For the venome hauing made it selfe a way through the small veines and arteries into the great, in processe of time getteth vp to the braine, where it peruer∣teth and corrupteth the imagination, reason, and memorie. Yea sometime it so infecteth the syn∣nowes, as hee is vexed with grieuous crampes, and cruell convulsions, and in the end forceth him so far out of his wits, as hee will offer violence both to
himselfe and all that he is in companie withall, espe∣cially with his teeth like a dog, and will howle and barke after a doggish manner, fearing the sight of water, or any bright thing, and (as some Writers affirme) imagining that therein hee seeth a dogge, which of all creatures hee feareth and abhorreth most. Beside these remembred notes, Salius mentio∣neth one, which he auoucheth to be infallible, al∣though neuer obserued before by any but him∣selfe: which is a feeling of some kind of paine in the bitten place, though the wound haue been healed long before. For when the bitten body beginneth to grow into madnesse, he sensibly feeleth a paine, though not very great, in the place that he was bit∣ten in, which creeping from place to place, about three or fower dayes after it beginneth, or a little more, ascendeth to the brayne, where it causeth a kind of giddynesse and a certaine manner of con∣fusion withall, whereby the sicke bodie beginneth to stagger and reele this way and that way, and shortly after, falleth starke mad. This sensible feeling of paine in the bitten place when the mad humour beginneth to stirre, which Petrus Salius calleth an infallible note of this mala∣dy, neuer before obserued by any but himselfe, as he sayth, seemeth to be verified by a story of a mad body, related by an excellent Physition called D. Abel Roscius of Lausanna, in an epistle of his to Gui∣liel. Fabritius that notable Chirurgion of our time. The story as he hath reported it, is, as followeth. A certaine very honest Matron, the daughter of
a famous Doctor, and married not past two yeeres before to a Nobleman, one wel knowen to me, and very neere allied, as she passed one day through the citie, Anno Domini 1581. was suddenly set vpon by a madde dogge and bitten in the left arme. The neighbours and other that were in her company, being much grieued at this mishap, kild the dogge presently, and without delay were learned Physi∣tians sent for, who prescribed exquisite remedies, causing them to be applyed to the part affected ac∣cordingly, not omitting the administration of wholsome antidotes and apt preseruatiues inward∣ly. The bitten arme was streightly bound about the wound, and locall medicines of drawing facul∣tie for the bringing forth of the venome, were ap∣plied. After which a Chirurgion seared the place with a hot iron, so that within a few dayes space the woman (as it pleased God was quite healed) or seemed so to be, no hurt appearing in her arme, nor scarce any scarre perceiued, neither was there any suspition of the least iot of poyson remaining. But marke I pray you what followed. In the seuenth yeere after it was healed, shee was afflicted with much more cruell and grieuous accidents: In the arme that was bitten shee felt a most intollerable paine, like as it had beene torne and gnawed with the teeth of dogs: Very shortly after, she became furious, distract in minde, full of griefe and sorrow, voyd of sleepe, vexed with vnquenchable thirst, and after this with a feuer and exceeding decay of strength, abhorring meat extreamly, but not drink, neither did she refuse such liquid things as might
asswage her thirst. We thought her hard at deaths dore because wee saw no hope of life or health in her. Yet so notable remedies were with all dili∣gence administred to her by Physitians, and so well she was attended by her domesticals, as beyond all hope, shee recouered health againe in few dayes. Seuen yeeres after this inuasion, and in the four∣teenth yeere after the dogges byting, and in the third yeere after the death of her husband, shee be∣gan againe to be most miserably tortured, her fit still beginning in her left arme. She felt extreame paines, was vexed with vomiting and incredible belching, enduring all the symptomes that are wont to proceed from burnt choler, want of sleepe and exceeding thirstinesse. In the bitten place shee felt most cruell prickings shootings and exquisite paines, yet by good meanes she was againe holpen, I being still present with her, and seemed perfectly cured. Howbeit, I deemed that her griefes were rather dulled and as it were brought a sleepe, then quite extinguished, although she continued in this good state six yeares together, as afterward it ap∣peared. For in the twentieth yeere after her by∣ting, her former griefes returned againe, which be∣ing yet then also asswaged, they vexed her the next yeare following, and the very next yeere after this she had to grieuous fits thereof, and the next after that, three, and this last yeere two. Her fits in the three former yeeres were oftner, but shorter. In almost euery one of the mutations of these times, her paines still began in her bitten arme, I feare it will bee her death shortly. Of all this I am a wit∣nesse,
and haue been still present, &c. Thus far D. Abel Roscius. This story is produced as a thing of rare contin∣gence. The chiefe cause of the so often redinte∣gration of these mad sits in this Gentlewoman, (in mine opinion) was, for that the wound at the first curing thereof, was healed vp to soone. For it should haue been kept open and from healing, the space of fortie dayes at the least: and again, because the hot iron was applied before sufficient abstertion and correction of the venemous matter conteined therein, by conuenient lotions and the application of ventozes or horseleeches, to the place affected. Aetius, an ancient writer, reporteth a story of a Phylosopher, that being bitten with a mad dogge, and at length perceiuing his growing into that infirmitie, went to wash himselfe in a bath, wherein hee thought hee saw a dogge. Whereupon mu∣sing a pretty while, at length he tooke courage and lept into the bath, saying, what haue dogs to doe with bathes, and striuing against the growing infir∣mitie, dranke his belly full of the bath water, and so holpt himselfe. Dotage, or idle talking, hath been noted to bee one speciall accident that vsually followeth such as are growing into the extremitie of this cuill, thogh alwaies it falleth not out so. For Peter Salius before named, who had good experience of this bad ma∣ladie, saith, he knew some in great extremitie with∣out any show or token of dotage, and so sensible, that being persuaded to drinke at such time as they haue trembled at the sight thereof, haue requested
the offerers of it, that they would close their eyes or blindfold them, that they might not see the drinke or water offered them, and then bad them cast into their mouthes what they thought good, or any thing else mixt with their drinke that might be for their helpe. And when they grinned or gna∣shed with their teeth, and after a doggish fashion, were forced by the strength of the poyson working in them, to offer to byte such as were neere them, they would pray the by-standers, to hold or binde them fast, that they might not hurt any body by their byting, wishing them not to put their hands, or any part of their bodies to their mouthes, lest they should snap at them; for so the poysonous in∣fection enforced them to doe. These, saith hee, I haue knowen to lament their owne miserie, being greatly grieued, that they sought not for helpe in due time, committing themselues in all things to Gods mercy, crauing of him forgiuenesse of their sinnes, &c. If a man that is fallen madde by the byting of a mad dog, doe byte an other man, woman, or child, they likewise will be mad in time, except by good meanes it be speedily preuented. Yet this madnes caused by a mad mans byting, is much more easily preuented and cured, then the madnesse of such as haue it immediately from a dog. Howbeit, the by∣ting of some mad men or women, that is, such as be blacke or red hayred and freckled, is worse than the byting of other colours: and among other, such as be fasting. It hath beene much debated among Writers,
which should bee the chiefe and most speciall place affected in this maladie; some thinking that the synnowes were, because of the grieuous convulsi∣ons that the sicke haue been vexed with somtimes. Other, that the brayne, in which resteth the seat of the reasonable soule. Some, the mouth of the sto∣macke, obseruing their maner of vomiting, yexing, and insatiable thirst. Some, the heart onely. But others (whose opinion liketh me best) doe beleeue that not onely place or part of the body is affected therwith, but many, as the heart, stomacke, midrife, head, &c. For if the venome doe first peirce the veines or arteries, it passeth directly to the liuer and heart. If it first take possession of the synnowes, it mounteth thereby to the braine & the membranes or skins enclosing it, whereupon follow such terri∣ble convulsions as they are many times afflicted withall, and by consent from thence the mouth of the stomacke and consequently the heart. For they are not troubled with any feuer till the heart bee touched, which indeed is the part that all manner of poyson either mediately, or immediately doth inuade. Now if I be asked why mad dogs doe so greatly feare water, The cause of hy∣drophobia or water-feare. For answer I will produce the opinions of sundry learned Writers concerning this point. Hieronymus Capinaccius out of Galen de theriaca ad Pisonem, bringeth this for one reason: Namely, be∣cause a madde dog is so exceeding dry, as hee hath great need and desire of moysture, but being di∣stract in his minde and perseuerance, despiseth it, and flieth from that which might doe him good.
This, and diuers other opinions of ancient and some moderne Writers, are learnedly disproued by Baptista Codronchus, who afterward yeeldeth his ap∣probation to others more like to be true. But why do men which are reasonable creatures, feare also and tremble at the sight of water or other moysture or liquors, when they be mad by the by∣ting of a mad dog? This saith Capinaccius, proceedeth from the great abundance of melancholy, that sendeth vp a darke blacke vapour to the braine, whereby the animall spirit is made so thicke and cloudie, that the action thereof is hurt and perturbed. But why doe they feare water more than any o∣ther obiect? Because of the want of moysture, which is in such a manner, as the moyst forme of water hath gotten a fearefull impression hereof in the brayne. But if water be brought them, why is their feare sometime increased, and sometime they bee ready to vomit at the sight thereof? They be alwaies in feare, though they see no water, but when they see it, their feare is much more increased at the beholding thereof; calling some∣time to minde their byting, with an imagination that they see a dogge therein: and they become apt or ready to vomit, because the mouth of the sto∣macke is affected with poyson, whereby is stir∣red vp therein a certaine heauie and grieuous sense that is imparted to the inward sense, and is a cause that from the braine is imparted that loath∣some and hurtfull desiring power: whereby,
like as if the animall spirit be rightly offred from the braine to the mouth of the stomacke, the appe∣tite is good, and thereto agreeth the attractiue power of the stomacke: euen so while there is offred from the brayne, a vitious or corrupt appetiting fa∣cultie, there followeth loathing and aptnesse to vo∣mit, whereto assenteth the expulsiue faculty: which is the cause that they vomit vp such water as they drinke. Heerewithall may reason be inferred for the re∣conciling of two famous Physitians that seeme to haue vttered contrarie opinions or doctrines: that is Galen and Auicen: This man saith, that mad men die vpon the drinking of water, and Galen, contra∣rywise saith, that the drinking of it is good for them. To which it is answered, that if the madnesse be in the beginning, the drinking of water is whol∣some: but if it be farre gone, and the feare continu∣eth, then doe they die by drinking thereof, because the vitall spirit is almost wholely dissipate, so that vpon small occasion and very speedily it is ex∣tinguished. Iulian Palmarius thinketh, that (whatsoeuer the right cause of their fearing of water may be) there is some extreame antipathy or contrariety betwixt that madnesse and water, because (beside this ex∣ceeding feare of water) it hath beene obserued by experience, that if the new bitten wound bee but washed with water, the bitten body can afterward very hardly or neuer be cured & freed frō madnes: for that the water by this antipathie driueth & for∣ceth this kind of poison so deeply into the body, as
it cannot be fetcht out againe, or very hardly. Ther∣fore it behoueth such as be bitten, to take heed of washing the wounds with fresh water. This opi∣nion of Palmarius seemeth very truth-like. Petrus Salius very litle differing in opinion from Palmarius saith, that the poison of doggish-madnes followeth no peculiar temperament, but is a poy∣son of the whole substance: which being commu∣nicated to man, very slily or secretly polluting the humors without any sense or perseuerance of hurt, and by little and little creeping from part to part, as soone as euer it toucheth any principall part, it di∣sturbeth and greatly vexeth it, causing great thir∣stinesse. At which time, if the sicke doe drinke or take any liquid thing, they are tormented very ex∣treamely in their inward parts. This cannot be by reason of any temperature, because they feele one kind of torture whether they drinke hot liquor or cold; but by the peculiar nature of that kinde of poyson, which as it is a poyson hurtfull to man for the whole substance thereof, so hath it an antipathie or contrary disposition in it to all li∣quid things, by which it becommeth so exasperate and cruell, as the inward parts by the terrible pangs and grypings thereof, are more miserably vexed then otherwise they should be. This saith Salius, I haue noted to be the cause from whence they haue euen from the beginning abhorred liquid things, because all with one consent, haue affirmed that by the drinking of them, they haue been exceedingly afflicted. After the tryall whereof, they haue loa∣thed and detested all sorts of liquors so greatly, as
the onely sight of them, hath giuen occasion to turne them into the like tortures, and sometime worser. This opinion seemeth so well to bee liked of Co∣dronchus, that he nothing dissenteth from it. But otherwise, so different haue been the opinions of other Writers, as the true cause of this Hydrophohie or water-feare, seemeth so secret and hidden, as the most learned and ingenuous haue been and are en∣combred by the search thereof, and therefore for breuitie I leaue it, and passe to the cure of this mise∣rable and fearefull kind of madnesse. The Cure. WHEN one is bitten of a dogge, and resteth doubtfull whether he were mad or not, it were good to make a tryall, by moystning a peece of bread in the bloudy wound, and offering it to a hungry dog, which if he refuse to eat, it is very like that the byting dog was mad. For this tryall hath been found more assured than the giuing it to Pullen. For so exquisite is the smelling sense of dogs, as they are able to discerne therby that poiso∣nous infection which they are so apt to be hurt by. But hens and poultry haue been seene to eat such kind of bread or nut kernels as haue been moyst∣ned in the wound, without any hurt thereby. It were good also to note or hearken, whether he did byte any other creature else, or whether he were noted to be afraid of water, or the sight & be∣holding of looking glasses, or other bright things.
If the byting dog were knowen or found to bee mad, & the wound that he hath made be great, suf∣fer it to bleed wel a good while together, that some part of the poison may come forth with the bloud. But withall let the bitten member bee presently bound about, three or fower fingers bredth aboue the wound, with a garter or such like thing reaso∣nable hard, for the better restraint of the poysons piercing. For this kind of practise by the testimo∣nie of Galen, and the experience of others, hath been found very profitable in prohibiting the speedy piercing of poyson by the bytings of serpents and venemous creatures. Yet if the part bound doe grow benummed & senseles by the hardnes of the binding, let it be slackned somewhat, lest the bound member might thereby be mortified. But if the bitten wound be in such a part as cannot be hand∣somly bound, then let some astringent medicine bee applyed some reasonable distance aboue the wound, such as this: Take oyle of roses and myrtils, each an ounce, of bole armenake, sanguis draconis, myr∣tils and sumach, each halfe a dram; Temper these together with the white of an egge well beaten, and a litle vineger, then spread it vpon a linnen cloth, and binde it aboue the wound, moystning it with vineger, or laying to fresh when it is dry. Or if the rest cannot presently be gotten, then in the meane time till they may be gotten, vse the white of an egge beaten with a little vineger. Yet alwaies pro∣uided, that these or such like astringent medicines, be applyed quite beyond the place of the poysons abiding: For if the poyson haue gotten beyond
them, they may be a meanes to force it further into the bodie. But if the wound be small and nothing percei∣ued but the foame or slauer about it, then wash a∣way the foame with the vrine of a boy, or with lie, or such like, and then dilate or enlarge it, by paring awaie the flesh round about, that the hole may bee round which some call circination. For by this meanes the wound will the more easily be kept o∣pen, and not heale so soone as otherwise it would. Which maner of practize Galen doth approue. Lib. de theriaca ad Pisonem. Cap. 16. Some only scarrifie or scotch the skinne round about it, that it may bleed reasonable well. After the vse of circination or scarificatiō, let ventozes or cupping-glasses be set on with a good flame, and then either cauterize it with a hot iron or rather with a cauterie of gold, except the place be sinowe and very sensible. This cauterizing is commended by all writers as the most sure remedy for the extinguishing of the viru∣lent matter contained in the wound, which though it be terrible to the eye, yet the pain therof continu∣eth not so long as that which is caused by a poten∣tiall cauterie. This must not be slightly done, but strongly set on and deepely pressed in, as Guilielmus Fabritius a famous and singular Chirurgion vpon his often experience heerein, seriously aduiseth, saying, I speake by experience. For the more the wound is put in a heat and inflamed, the sooner wil the poyson be drawen forth. After it is seared, let the escharre or crust be cau∣sed to fall as soone as is possible, by often annointing
it with a mixture made of liquid varnish, the white of an egge and fresh butter. Or with fresh butter of it selfe as hot as the partie can endure it. And if the crust by these meanes come not off within two daies space, then may it be remoued by some instru∣ment and handy operation, lest by the long continu∣ance thereof the venemous matter that remaineth vnconsumed, may get a new strength, and the vlcer be sooner cured then is conuenient for this maladie. For it should be kept from healing the space of for∣tie dayes at the least. Or after the ventozes be remooued, there may be set on horse-leeches for the more effectuall drawing forth of the venemous bloud, and then to cauterize as is aforesaid. But if the bitten place be of exquisite sense, or in tender bodies, these meanes ought rather to be vsed to the parts next adioining then to it, laying or apply-more milde things vpon the biting. As if the bitten body can get one that will sucke out the venome with his mouth, that is the gentlest way, most harm∣lesse, and yet very effectuall. But hee that sucketh the wound must looke he haue no raw or skynles, or vlcered part in his mouth, lest he catch hurt him∣self while he doth his good will to help another. And though his mouth be whole, yet it is good for him to rinse or moisten it with some sweet oile, before he goe to sucking. For so hee shall keepe the venome from taking hold on any part thereof. Next to this, is commended the application of the fundaments of liue cocks or hens, hauing the fethers pluckt frō about them and held to a good while together, and
if one die thereby, then set to another presently, holding their b close that they breath not. For so they will draw the more forciblie, continuing this as long as any dieth by the strength of the poi∣son. Some rather like that these fowles or yoong pigeons, should be split through the middest aliue, and so layd to one after another or yoong whelpes in like sort. Such as cānot abide the searing with a hot irō, cal∣led an actual cautery, may haue some potential cau∣terie applyed to the byting, after the washing, scar∣rifying, and cupping thereof as before hath beene declared, among which kinde of cauteries, argentum sublimatum tempered with some cooling oyntment is much commended, as a most helpefull medicine, and the crust which it causeth, doth commonly fall off within two dayes, if it be often annoynted with butter. Aetius commendeth the laying of stamped leeks, or bread tempered with salt or onions or garlicke vp∣on the bitten place, but especially this composition. Take of sal fossile, an ounce, of aerugo russa, as much, of the seeds of Horehound a dram. Let these be kept dry in a box of brasse, vse them first dry, til a crust be growne on the wound, then vse them tempered with the oyle of roses till the crust fall off. In very tender bodies, some lay to the wound a plaster of pigeons dung and greene rue stamped to∣gether. Or mustard seed stamped with wall-nut ker∣nels, garlicke, salt and honie laid to plasterwise. Ambrosius Paraeus affirmeth that treacle dissolued in aqua vitae, or generous wine excelleth all other re∣medies,
to rub the green wound withall hard till it bleed, & after the wound is clean wipt & dryed, to lay liniments to the place tempered therewith; af∣ter the remouing wherof it is good to lay on garlick or onions beaten with salt and turpentine. With this only remedie he cured one of the daughters of the noble Lady Gron, that was bitten in the calfe of the legge with a mad dogge. I haue read great commendations in an old writ∣ten booke of this medicine followings as sure reme∣die to helpe the byting of a mad dogge. Take wormewood, rewe, hony, and salt stamped well together, and lay it plaster-wise to the bitten place, and it will draw out the poyson, sease the paine, and take away the swelling. The very like is noted also by Leuinus Lemnius Lib. 3. de occult. naturae mirac. Cap. 13. And by Ioh. Huera. de capitis morbis. Cap. 13. Dioscorides prescribeth an emplaster made of gar∣licke, onyons, and wheat-cornes chewed in ones mouth, which hath beene proued very effectuall for the poorer sort of people and robust bodies. It draw∣eth forth the pison & dilateth the vlcer, but many times it causeth very great paine, which wilbe som∣what amended by tempering it with oile of Hype∣ricon, or oyle of wormes. If it bee laid to euery o∣ther day, it will suffice. Galen lib. de theriac. ad Pison. affirmeth that hee hath applyed plaster-wise, onely treacle mixt with oile of roses, with very happy successe. It is much commended, to dresse the vlcer daily with precipitata as a thing that both keepeth it from
healing, and draweth out the poyson. Or mix precipitata with any conuenient oynt∣ment or emplaster, and some vse it alone, because it is very forcible to draw the poyson from the depth. All these remedies doe cause paine more or lesse, but Guiliel. Fabritius saith, hee regardeth not the paine they cause, so that it be not excessiue, because paine in this case is very profitable; for with the attraction of his humours, it draweth the venome outward to the mouth of the wound. His manner was after hee had cauterized the wound, to lay vpon it bombaste moistened with aqua-vitae that treacle hath beene dissolued in, and after that to lay on this plaster following being spred vpon linnen. Take of onions somewhat rosted in the embers of leuen, and the powder of mustard seed, each an ounce, of treacle halfe an ounce, of the leaues of rew and scordium each halfe a handfull, mixe them in a morter by adding a little hony. The next day after this maner of dressing, he separated as much of the crust as he could with a penknife, and then againe applied the same medicines, til the crust were quite remoued, and then to prohibit the closing vp of the vlcer, he thrust a pease into it twice a day, and by this meanes kept it from healing as long as hee thought good. Some to keepe the vlcer open, and draw foorth the venome, lay on a plaster made of garlicke, onions, and the powder of mercurie beaten together. If the vlcer be about to drie vp, Rhasis aduiseth
to lay on a peece of the salt fish called Tunnus, or salt beaten, or to sprinkle it with vineger. But neuer let it bee washt with fresh water, but rather with pure wine, as Paulus aduiseth, or with hot foamen∣tations of camomile and lapathum, that is dockes, boyled in water, to procure it to bleed, sucking it first, or rubbing it strongly with the hand, or with scarification, or by setting to of horseleches or ven∣tozes. It is sayd that the ashes of a fig-tree cast vpon the bitten place, being closed vp, will open it againe. But for the more suretie, it were good withall to scarrifie it. This plaster following is much commended to lay on the sore. Take of the ashes of crabfishes burnt, of garlicke, mynt, gentium, aristolochia rotunda, each two drams: bay-berries, bole armeniake, each a dram. Temper them with the ioyse of mynts and make a plaster, and wash the place often with the vrine of a yoong boy. This powder following, is very excellent to bee cast on the vlcer twice or thrice a weeke. Take of the powder of precipitata, of bezer-stone, and the powder of angelica rootes each a scruple. Mix them together. This doth wonderfully draw forth the malignity, and is of great force against poyson. Inwardly also must be vsed Antidotes that haue vertue against such kinde of poyson, as that which is mentioned of Galen, by the prescript of Asinius, made in this maner. Take of fresh water crab fishes dried and beaten to powder, ten drams; of gentium seuen rams; of frankencense, one dram. Mix them,
and giue the bitten body euery day three drams in water to drinke, for the space of 40. daies together. Aetius putteth but fiue drams of gentium to the rest. Another mixture very like this is set downe by Di∣ofcorides in this sort. Burne crabfishes with the twigs or proinings of vitis alba, that is white brionie, and reserue the powder of gentium roots thus: Take of crabfish powder three drams; with which may bee mixt the powder of gentium one dram and halfe; of pure wine six ounces. Let so much be drunke fower daies together, which being ended, let the double or triple quantitie be drunke certaine other dayes. Some compound them thus: Take of gentian roots two drams, of crabfish powder three drams; of terra sigillata halfe an ounce. Mix a dram of this powder with some fiue or six ounces of the decoctiō of crab∣fishes, and giue it euery day to drinke. This compo∣sition I like very well, and so doe I this which follow∣eth, described by Ioseph Quercetano. Take of gentian and valerian rootes, each an ounce and halfe; of Consolida minor (which some take for the herbe called Selfe heale, but other for the daysie) of dry rew and penny-royall (that some call organy) each a handfull; of mummia, and crabfishes calcined each an ounce. Boile these together in wine. Of this decoction giue the bitten body, about two or three ounces in the morning fasting, for the space of eight daies together. Vntill things of greater efficacie can be prepared and made ready, it is thought profitable to giue the bitten body some of the mad dogges liuer burnt to ashes, and enioyne them withall to a conuenient
diet, as meats of good iuice, & rather moyst thē dry, & that the bodie be loose, & prepared with opening roots that haue vertue or power to procure vrine. Aetius commendeth the giuing of Treacle, about the quantitie of a filberd nut, the three first dayes, saying that he neuer knew any fall into hydrophobie, that is the feare of water (which is the extreame and last act of this tragicall infirmitie) that vsed to drinke treacle. And Petrus Salius also vpon his owne often experience, giueth it the price aboue all in∣ward medicines that euer hee made triall off. The powder of harts horne burnt, and the bezour-stone are very good also to be vsed heerein. Some beside treacle aduise also the vse of mithri∣date, or the confection called Diatessaron, (which spe∣cially is commended against the byting of a madde dogge) to be giuen also, after the poyson is spred in∣to the vaines and arteries, because they thinke that the inward parts are heereby fortified. Howbeit Capinaccius sayth, that the great Antidotes (among which these are the cheefe) should not be giuen at all, after one is attached with madnesse, although before that time they ought to be vsed with al speed tempered with sorrell water, or the decoction of la∣patium acutum, which some call herbe-patience, or some other apt or conuenient liquor. There is no remedie more vsuall or better hoped off among the vulgar sort, then presently after the byting, to wash the bitten body two or three daies together in sea water. Which hath beene found very effectuall in some bodies of good complexions, or in light hurts, but it is not catholicon, that is to
say it seemeth not in all persons. Nether will it doe any good at all, after the first three or fower dayes, from the byting. This practise was first deuised and vsed by such as dwell neere the sea, whereupon such as haue dwelt farther from thence, in imitation of these, haue cast their bitten bodies into brackish water, which is so far from doing good, as it is indeed exceeding hurt∣full, by reason of the antipathie betwixt his kinde of poyson and fresh water, from which it is very lit∣tle different. Neuerthelesse Corn-lius Celsus aduiseth that such as be entring into hydrophobie, should suddenly bee cast vnawares into a poole or riuer of water, and if they be vnskilfull in swimming, to suffer then to sinke into the water, as it may run well into their mouths, & then to raise vp their heads again. But if they haue skil in swimming, then to sowse their heads somtime vnder the water, that they may drinke whether they wil or not. For so both their thirst & fear of water, wil be amended, as he saith. But in this practise he wish∣eth one thing to be looked vnto, that is, least their weake bodies be caught with a crampe or conuulsi∣on, which if it happen, he wisheth them to be put into a vessell of hot oyle, after they haue been taken out of the poole. But how weake a remedy this is, hath been by example declared before, out of An∣draeas Bacius Elpidianus. Some put the bitten body into a bath, and make him sweat therein, as long as he is able to endure it, the wound being kept open that the poison thereof might the more easily be soked out, then doe they
make him drinke a good draught of pure & vnmixt wine, which is esteemed a thing contrarie to all poi∣sons. This being done three daies together, they thinke the bitten body safe from all danger. This practise is somewhat agreeable to that which the Philosopher before spoken of, vsed on himselfe, that Actius maketh mention of. But Oribasius would not that any should aduen¦ture to bathe themselues, before 20. daies after the biting, were expited, and some 40. daies: and Aui∣cen admitteth it only in the declination of the euill, that is, after all other medicinall practises, which indeed is most agreable to reason. Petrus Salius saith that the vulgar sort of his coun∣trie people, put so great confidence in the vertue of holy bread and holy water, that whosoeuer eateth and drinketh thereof from the hand of a Priest, shall neede none other remedie then onely this for his cure. But of what force this superstitious remedy is, he sheweth by an example of one bitten by a madde dog, who very orderly and deuoutly had taken this sanctified bread and water, and had the wound well healed vp, as he thought. Yet about two monthes after, catching a great blow or brusing vpon the bo∣tome of his belly, he was presently vexed with a fe∣uer, and a doggish madnes, with all the symptomes and consequencies, that vsually accompany this manner of madnes, and very shortly after, in great wretchednes and miserie, tooke his leaue of this world. After the first three or foure daies from the begin∣ning of the hurt, if the venome be perceiued to be
of so quicke operation, as it is dispersed through the body, let purging be vsed, or if it seeme to be of slowe proceeding, as in flegmatike and melancho∣like bodies, whose humours are grosse, and passa∣ges narrow, let a longer time be past before pur∣ging, hauing yet a care to apply conuenient reme∣dies to the bitten place. And when purging is per∣ceiued to be needfull, then let it be performed as the occasion shall seeme to require, although the mat∣ter be neither concocted, nor doe boile or mooue in the body. The like consideration some hould of phlebotomie, though Salius can in no fort like of this in any body tainted with any kind of poison. And in∣deed the ancient Greekes, as Dioscorides, Galen, O∣rbasius, Paulus, and Actuarius, where they speake of this infirmitie, doe show by their silence or not men∣tioning of phlebotomie, to dislike thereof: and some excellent men of the late writers, as Fracastorius, Fernelius, and Capinaccius, do disswade the practise of it. But such as do approne it, doe withall aduise, that it be not in any wise put in practise in the begin∣ning, least the poison that remaineth then about the bitten place, might thereby be drawne from thence into the inward parts of the body. Neuerthelesse, when such practise hath beene neglected, as ought to haue beene vsed at the first, and the venome is perceiued to be spred throughout the body, then is it aduised as very requisite, to open a veine, especi∣ally, if the body be plethoricke or full of humours, whether it be in the biting of a dogge, or any other venemous beast. Or for a more generall doctrine this may passe,
that in bodies cacochymicke, (that is) where the humours be corrupted, or badly tempered (purging should rather be vsed, then letting of blood. But in plethoricke or full bodies, letting of blood rather then purging. And where is both corruption of hu∣mours and plenitude, there should both be vsed, the conditions still being obserued that haue been be∣fore aduised. Baptista Codronchus seing the diuersitie of opinions concerning this point, and the reasons pro & contra, Lib. 2. de Hy∣droph. Cap. 6. as a man not well knowing whether part to approue, concludeth with these words. Nos igitur in hoc anci∣pti casu &c. That is to say: We therefore in this doubtfull case, hauing a respect to both, would per∣swade that there should be euacuation by blood, though not by cutting a vaine, but rather by ven∣tozes, set to the lower parts, by which may be drawne out more or lesse blood as we list, according to the ability of the body, and so may both the ple∣nitude be abated, and the venome be diuerted and drawne from the vpper, downe to the lower ex∣treame parts. But now returning to purging. The tenderer bo∣dies may be purged with purgations made of sena epithymum, polypodium, blacke hellbor, and such like. But the stronger, with pils made of hellebor, elateri∣um, veratrum album, and the most vchement medi∣cines, as antimonium, and such like. Petrus Salius (a man of great experience in these doggishmaladies) preferreth the vse of Elleborus albus (prepared in such sort as he setteth downe) be∣fore any purgers whatsoeuer, in these affects, Lib. de affect. par. ium. cap. 19. except
in weaklings, fearefull & extenuate bodies, streight brested, or trobled with a cough, or other affects of the brest. His manner of preparing and vsing it, he hath set downe at large, and therefore for breuities sake I passe it ouer, referring the Reader to the place in the Margent cited. This and other strong purges before named, beside their forcible expelling of the poison, haue also a secret qualitie, like either to the offending humours, or the doggish poison, by which they deliuer the body thereof. This following, is a very good purge in this case: Rost a great onion in the embers, (hauing first made a hole in the top of it, and filled it with good treacle) then stampe it, and straine out the iuyce with water of pimpinella, or carduus beneictus, and mixe there∣with a sufficient quantity of extractum ellebri, and a little of the confection of Hamech, and so giue it for a purgation. Elaterium may be giuen to the quantitie of their graines in both, or some proper decoction. Or the seeds of Cataputia. Some to purge also by vrine, make a medicine of Cantharides, mixt with equall quantitie of hulled len∣tils, and giue thereof halfe a scruple at once, many dayes together. This is esteemed profitable, by rea∣son that the poyson hereby, is led to the bladder, and expelled with bloody vrine. But Rhasis, and Ioh. Damascenus, two famous Phy∣sitians, prepare cantharides as followeth. Seperate from them, their wings, heads, and feet, and infuse them a night and a day in sower butter milke, then drie them, and mixe them with the flower of lentils
and wine, and so make them vp in trochises or little round cakes, of a scruple-weight apeece. Of these little cakes, they gaue euery day one, in some con∣uenient liquor, many daies together. And if it chan∣ced by the vse of these, that the sicke did pisse blood, they gaue him new milke to drink, which did amend the acrimonie or sharpnes of the vrine, remedie the bleeding, and so did they preuent the feare of water. Yet some of good iudgement and practise, bee very iealous and doubtfull in giuing cantharides into the body, though neuer so skilfully prepared. In the beginning of the disease, cantharides are very profitable to lay to the bitten part. But into the bo∣dy ought none of these vchemēt purges by stoole & vrine, be giuen in the beginning, while the poysonous matter resteth in the bitten part only, or neere it. Nether is phebotomie then to be admitted, as hath beene noted before, least the hurtfull pollution bee drawen thereby from the outward to the inward parts, and therefore better to be vsed with the latest, than with the soonest. If in any diease Extrema extremis, according to the rule of Hippocrates, ought to be put in practise, then surely in this, as most, both of the ancient and moderne Physitians haue counselled. For after the poyson heereof is once dispersed through the body, then will it not (as they say) be vanquished without the helpe of extreame and very violent remedies. All which ought to be vsed before hydrophobie. For that hauing once gotten the possession, most men are of opinion, that all physicke commeth to late. Now concerning the gouernement and dyet of
the bitten bodie, it is thought best to lodge him in a chamber that is hot and very lightsome, for the bet∣ter euocation of the spirits and blood to the outward parts of the body, and neuer suffer him to be alone, but accompanied (if it may bee) wh such as with pretty pleasing tales, and merry iests, or instruments of musicke, or both, are able to giue refreshment to his dulled spirits. Let no means be vsed to put him in feare, nor to make him sorrowfull. His diet must be in a mediocritie, neither very plentifull, nor slender. Emptinesse or want of eating, encreaseth the euill qualitie of humours, which is a very pernitious thing in any malignant vlcer. He may eat of veale, mut∣ton, hens, chickens, or capons flesh, and such other as breed good iuyce, being seasoned with the iuice of orenges, limmons, citrons, which he may eat by themselues also. And the powders of tormentill, pimpinella, mary-golds, borrage, and such other like herbes, very good to strawe or sprinkle vpon his meat. Rabbi Moyses forbiddeth the eating of pigeons, be∣cause, saith he, they be very exceeding hurtfull for such as be thus affected, through a speciall property of substance in them. But contrariwise he commen∣deth the mutton or flesh of rams, though it breed but bad iuyce, for that it hath a secret property to do good in this infirmitie. All writers with one consent approue and coun∣sell the vse and eating of fresh water crabfishes, for the natiue & inbred propertie they haue against the poyson of this malady, as often experience hath proued.
Creuises also boiled in good wine, are approued. Paulus Aegineta, aduiseth, that such meat and drinke should chiefly be vsed, as is of force to dull and extinguish the strength and working of the poison, and keepe it from spreading it selfe through the bottome of the stomacke: both which proper∣ties hee saith, are performed by drinking of pure wine that is sweet and old; or by drinking of milk, and eating of garlicke, onyons or leekes. Aetius approueth the eating of garlicke, and such other sharpe and hot meats in the beginning, but not after, least the poyson thereby might become more forcible, but he forbiddeth the drinking of wine. Neuerthelesse, most writers doe esteeme it very medicinable to drinke strong wine at the very be∣ginning, as wel as to eat hot and sharpe meats. And some like of grosse and slimie meats also, that by encreasing of obstructions, may the better hinder the piercing of the poyson to the principall parts. But after fiue or fix daies be past from the begin∣ning, then will it be best to reduce all to mediocri∣tie, as was sayd before, and forbeare very hot meats and drinkes. Then will it be good to vse drinke of meane strength, in which are steeped the leaues of pimpinella, that is burnt, and the flowers of mary∣golds. A Iulep also made of firupe of cichorie, and the decoction of sorrell and barly, is good to drinke. This Iulep following, is very goodalso to vse. Take of the iuyce of limmons and citrons, each halfe an ounce, of the iuice of sower pomgranates, two oun∣ces,
sorrell water and rose water, each an ounce, spring water boyled, as much as will suffice. Make heereof a  according to art, of which it is good to drinke often. Rost meats are not so good to be vsed, as meats boised, especially in some liquor that opening sim∣ples apt to procure vrine, are sod in. Their bread should be made of the best wheat, and well leuened. Of fruits they may vse, walnut;, sigges, and al∣mons, and some say that chesnuts haue a propertie to doe good. Let such as accompanie the sicke at their meat, take heed they can not of any meat they haue ta∣sted. And some thinke it dangerous also to drinke in the cup or glasse that they drinke in, except it be first very well washt, The vse of vineger and sower fruits or herbes, is thought good. Some admonish the bitten body, not to touch the cornell tree, nor rest within the shadow of it, or the tree called Sanguinaria, which is the female cor∣nell tree or shrubbe, nor to sleepe vnder the sernice tree, but to shunne them for the space of a whole yeere, because these trees are reported to haue such a kind of propertie in them, as will quickly hasten forward their madnes. Sleepe, especially if it be much, is hurtfull, till the strength of the poison be well abated, or till the sicke be much distempered for want of sleepe. Venerious actions should be forborne a yeere together.
It were very requisite that the sicke body should be kept indifferent loose or soluble, all the time of his sickenes or infirmitie, and to goe once or twise in a day to stoole, and pisse freely, if he can. Now for the better dilucidation of the manner of curing this kind of maladie, I thought it good heere to insert the method and meanes which Fran∣ciscus Valleriola, a very learned Physitian vsed, in curing one far gone toward madnes, by the biting of a mad dogge. This man was bitten a little aboue one of his an∣cles, Obser. lib. 3. Obser. 3. and thereupon was carried by his freinds to a village called Les Sainctes Maries, which of the vul∣gar sort is accounted a place sacred or hallowed for the curing of such as are bitten by madde dogges, where he was washed & bathed in the sea the space of nine daies together; after which he was brought home againe to Arles where he dwelt, the wound being growne very grieuous. He looked with a writhen or warped countenance, vsing little speech, and seemed full of meditations like such as be trou∣bled with melancholie. The wound was of a pale or ashie colour, and full of venemous matter, and therefore speedily to be taken in hand. Finding his body very costiue, he caused this clyster to be pre∣pared for him. ℞, Malnar. althaeae cum suis radicib. matrum violar. branc. vrsin. mercurialis, melissophylli, ana M, j. flor. chamo∣mel, melilot. rorismarin. ana, P, j. epithym. ℥ss. furfuris macri, P, j. Fiat omnium decoctio in iure capitis castrati & omasorum, ad lib. j. & coletur. In colutura adde cathol.
℥j. Confect. hamech, ʒ iij. ol. violar. ℥ iiij. sacchari rub. ℥j. Fiat Clyster. This clyster hauing performed his operation, he presently made the wound to be cauterized with a hot iron, and for the more speedie remouing of the crust or scabbe caused by the searing, he anoin∣ted it with a mixture made of fresh butter, the yelke of an egge and swines grease, and sometime he mix∣ed Vnguentum basilicum with it. While these things were in hand, he gaue preseruatiues inward, for the subducting of the poisonous infection: and because he was a plethorike young man, and of bad hu∣mors also, he did both let him blood & purge him. For he feared not the recoyling or drawing inward of the venemous matter left, because a great part of it had been consumed by washing in the sea, & ap∣plication of the cauterie, and for the remaining poi∣son, he thought it very requisite to doe that now, which in the beginning might not be permitted. His cure was, to drawe forth as much as he could, by the wound, keeping it open almost 60. daies to∣gether, and diligently clensing it; to strengthen the inward parts with appropriate Antidotes: and lastly to heale it vp. For correcting and qualifying of his melancho∣like disposition and restrayning of the poison, hee caused this Apozeme or syrupe following, to bee made. ℞, Borag. bugloss. amborum cum radicib. suis, lapatij acu∣ticum toto, ana M. j. summata tum fumer. lupulor. & fraxini, ana M. ss. mellissoph. M. j. beton. tantundem, sem.
citri, acetos. & card. benedict. ana ʒ ij. polypodij queru. recentis non corrosi, & purum contusi, ℥j. pussulur. exa∣cinaturum, N, vj. Fiat omnium decoctio in aqua hordea∣cea recenter facta ad lib. ij. & colatur. Colatura adde succorum Inmar. lupulor. & pomorum redolentium ana ℥iiij. aceti, ℥iij. Fiat syrupus cum saccha∣ro clarificatus & aromatizatus cum puluere theriaculi Guidonis, ʒ j. This is to be giuen fower mornings together, and to bee iterated againe some other three or fower mornings. After the sicke man had vsed this sirupe, eight daies together, and now appeared some notes of concoction in his vrine, and the grosse humors see∣ming sufficiently attenuated, he purged him with this purgation following. ℞, fol. sen. Oriental. mundat. ℥iij. epithym. ʒ j. ss. anis. & cinnamomi electi, ana ℈ij. trium flor. commumum, folior. meliss. & beton. ana P, j. Fiat decoctio ad ℥iiij. & cole∣tur. In colatura dissol. rhabarb. electi; in sero lactis ca∣prini per noctem infusi cum tantillo cinnamoni, & mane fortiter expressi, ℈iiij. confect. hamech prima descriptio∣nis, ʒ ij. ss. thriacae elect. puluer. theriaculis Guidonis, ana ℈ij. syrup. rosarum ex infusione rosar. syrup. de pomis, ana ℥j. Fiat Potio. By this purgation, he auoided many cholericke, burnt and melancholike excrements. The next day following, he gaue him treacle tem∣pered with the powder of betonie and sugar. For the bitten wound, hee caused a cataplasme to bee made thus: Take of white onions in number three, make holes in the tops of them, and fill them vp
with treacle, then couer the holes, and rost the oni∣ons in hot embers till they be soft, after which, beat them in a morter, and force them through a haire siue. This done, ad of both sorts of aristolochia beaten to powder, each ʒ iij. of galbanum, bdellium, myrrh, each halfe an ounce; of the powder of crab∣fishes, siue drames. Mixe them in the forme of a cataplasme, spread it and lay it on the wound. After the crust was seperated from the vlcer, he prepared a mundificatiue, made of rosine mixt with the powder of crabfishes, and the rootes of a∣ristolochia, and vpon the vlcer he laid this emplastar. Take of galbanum, sagapenum, and opopanax, each halfe a drame, of cuphorbium, iridis Florentiae, aristo∣loc. rotund. and gentian rootes, each a dram; powder of crabfishes, two drams; of waxe a sufficient quan∣titie; of turpentine, two ounces. Mixe them and make a plaster. This did drawe a wonderfull deale of filthie matter out of the vlcer, and kept it from healing. Inwardly hee gaue him this powder following, for the space of fortie dayes together, about two drams at once, to drinke in buglosse water. Take of the ashes of riuer crabfishes, ten ounces, of gentiā rootes, fiue ounces, of olibanum, one ounce. Mixe them together, and make a very fine powder. When he had brought his cure to the point of healing, he gaue the sicke, epithymum in whaie of goats milke, and sometime he purged him with dia∣catholicon and the confection of hamech: and many times he washed the vlcer with the vrine of a yong boy. For this a Auicen sayth, doth forciblie draw
forth the venome. And lastly he healed it vp, and recouered him perfectly from the danger of this cruell and fearefull euill, But now to proceed as I began: It is very whole∣some to drinke the decoction of oxylapathum and pimpinella, or mary-golds, tempered with a spooneful of aqua vitae, that gentium and treacle haue beene in∣fused in. Some country people haue made great account of a medicine made of rew, wormewood, garlicke, daysie leaues, mary-golds, balme, and a little blacke hellebor, salt, and vineger stamped and strained together, and the iuice heere of giuen to drinke euery other mor∣ning fasting forthrice, which is wont to purge them vpward and downeward in such manner, that they thinke, the venome of the byting is thereby so throughly expelled out of the body, as they will neuer be touched with hydrophobie, or water feare, yet in the beginning, while the venome resteth still in or neere the bitten place, I thinke it not safe to vse it. When the malignitie of the poyson is dispersed into the entrailes or inward parts, some account the giuing of antimonium, to bee a thing of speciall vertue, because it maketh expulsion euery way, as by vomit, siege, and sweat. For in this case it is hol∣den but lost labour, to purge with other then such as be violent in operation. In outward applications to the wound, a hot iron (as hath beene sayd before) is much commended: yet if three or foure daies after the biting, be past without the vse of any other good meanes, it is
commonly to late to vse it, but instead thereof may scarrifications be made, and some blistering medi∣cins as horse-leeches be applyed. Such as are afraid of a hot iron, may haue a po∣tentiall cauterie instead thereof, made of Vnguentum rosatum and sumblimatum tempered together. Such as are vexed with this infirmity, haue many times a continuall hot feuer withall, for whose ease Aetius commendeth the vse of a medicine or anti∣dote made of nuts, as followeth. R. sagapeni ʒij. op. ij. Thebaici, ʒ ij, Croci, ʒ ss. Lycij Indici, ℈ixj & ss. Car∣nis nucum iuglandium non valde veterum, ʒ 40, Misce. The dose of it is about a dram at once in raine water hot, toward night, and after the vigour of the feuer, so that in the morning before be giuen an antidote of crabfishes, and at night this of nuts. For it is of very great efficacie to procure sleepe where is great want thereof. After the cure is finished, he aduiseth such as be cured, to be purged once a yeere with Hiera, for pre∣seruation, about the approching of that time of the yeere they were bitten in; and vpon the in∣stant day of their byting to take treacle for three dayes together. For further cure of the sicke if need be, Paulus sayth that Dropacismi, & Sinapismi, with great profit be made all the body ouer. But the most effectuall remedie of all other, he sayth, is the right vse of ve∣ratrum often practized and taken. Which Salius seemeth to approue, where he sayth that the case is very desperate and hopelesse, where this doggish madnesse is not holpen by gining of white ellebor
well prepared. It is good for the sicke to drinke whay, Smithes water, sorrell or lettice water, which may easily be giuen them before they begin to feare water. But after they once beginne to feare it, let them be kept from the sight both of it, and all other li∣quid things. For nothing doth put them into such horrour, and trembling, and vexation, and confu∣sion, as the beholding of these, and some other bright things. It were good also that they might not see such meat as is prouided for them. Yet if they refufe to eat or drinke, they must bee forced therto: although this be noted commonly in them that they swallow with great difficultie. As there may be deuices to keepe them from the sight of their meat that is prepared for their eating, so may drinke be spowted into their mouthes, or downe their throats, with a syring, or giuen them in a suckling bottle, or such like. Some not yet come to the feare of water, but be∣ing at the point thereof, haue suddenly vpon the sight of water, fallen very grieuouslie into the feare of it, by the sudden motion and stirring of that vi∣rulent and poysonnous matter contained in the body, which in nature is contrary to water. Some very superstitiously take vpon them to cure this disease, with words and charmes; which because it is vngodly and deuilish, I passe ouer as a thing much more offensiue to God, then healthfull to man. When the cure is brought either neere, or to an end, by the vse of such meanes as haue beene decla∣red,
it would be very profitable and to good pur∣pose, after a clister giuen if the body bee costiue, to cause the bitten body to sweat in reasonable sort, for the vtter expelling and vapouring out of the re∣lickes and remainder of the venemous matter, as well by inward as outward meanes. And before the sore be quite healed vp, a tryall may be made whether any of the venemous matter remaine yet vnremoued, by the application of such things as haue beene before aduised, for to know whether the byting dog were mad or not, as the kernels of wal∣nuts, or bread & such other layd to the sore & of∣fred to hungry dogs, but first the sore place should be so sweetned from the sent & smel of such salues, and medicines as haue beene vsed thereto, as dogs by reason of them, might not take any dislike of the bread that is offred them. And also triall may bee made by setting to the fundaments of cockes or hens, as hath beene sayd. And though the cure be as well performed, as the skill of the Phisitian or Chyrurgian can deuise, and no likelihood of any future harme seem to be fear∣ed: yet for the better assurance and preuention of relapse, some aduise as a point of good prouidence, that the bitten body should be purged once euery quarter of a yeere, and once in fifteene daies to eate a little of the best kind of treacle. I haue not read in any mans writings that hath intreated of this doggish euill, how dogges may be ordered to keepe them from madnes, sauing only in Plinie, or the citers of Plinie, lib. 19. cap. 5. who sheweth that the ould Phisitians before his time, v∣sed
to cut a worme, as they call it, out of their tongues, which indeed is no worme, but a sinowy matter, round in the fashion of a worme. And some to that purpose cut of the end of whelpes tailes af∣ter they be fortie daies ould. And the same, Plinie saith also, lib. 8. cap. 40. that the elder and bigger dogges, should euery yeere in the dogge daies, bee giuen hen-dunge mixt with the meat that they eat. For in those daies they are most apt to be caught with madnes; but if they chaunce to bee mad be∣fore the vse of these meanes, then to purge them with elleborus. But yet in my conceit, vpon the con∣sideration of that which before I haue noted, and gathered out of the best & most iudiciall & practi∣sed writers, before the purging of them, there should be vsed outwardly (if they were bitten by any other dogge) some of those good remedies that are set downe for men, and inwardly to giue them treacle and other good antidotes vsed against this infirmitie. But the surest way is to hange them vp, or kill them outright, least being kept a liue, they mischeiue others. But for the preuenting and keep∣ing dogs from madnes, whether they be sound or bitten by a mad dog, no meanes can be vsed more excellent & effectuall for the sound then while the dog daies last, & for the bitten at any time to mixe with their meat, or water that they drinke, some of this excellent powder following, that Doctor Iulian Palmarius, hath so much commended. All the aduise, counsell, and manner of curing this fearefull maladie, carefully set downe by anci∣ent & moderne Phisitians, hath no further scope,
then to helpe such as are not fallen into hydrophobie or feare of water, which is the extremitie of this disease, and so hard to be holpen, as none finding the sicke in that case, would aduenture the curing of them, but leaue them as past all helpe and re∣couery. Yet now of late yeeres through the carefull and commendable industrie of some notable men, there is found out an Antidote of so excellent and preti∣ous vertue, as being rightly vsed, hath by much ex∣perience been tried most sure and infallible, not on∣ly for preuenting of hydrophobie, but also for the cu∣ring of such as haue been attached therwith, so that the wound be not in any part of the head aboue the mouth, nor washt with fresh water. For where either of these is found, there remaineth either none, or very small hope of helpe. This pretious Antidote, or all-curing medicine, Iulian Palmarius a worthy Physitian, hath made knowne for the benefite of all sorts of people, affir∣ming vpon his owne sundry trials thereof, that it is so excellent in vertue, as it will cure and helpe the bitten bodies, at what time soeuer they be bitten, yea though they haue neuer been purged, or vsed any of the meanes before set downe, or though they be vexed with the hydrophobie, the conditi∣ons only excepted that are before noted. By which meanes, the sicke are freed from many tortures that in other manner of curings, they be forced to endure. This remedie of so rare vertue, is made as fol∣loweth.
Take of the leaues of rew, veruen, of the lesser sage, of plantaine, the leaues of polypodie, common wormewood, mint, mugwort, balme, betonie, the lesser centaurie, of each equall waight. These must euery one of them be gathered at such time of the yeere as they be of most force, which commonly is in Iune, about the full of the Moone. Let them be put seuerally into paper bagges, and suffred to drie in such a place, as neither Sunne, nor raine may come neere them, least they should grow too dry, or wax mouldly. Thus dried, let them be kept for future vses, but so as they be renewed eue∣ry yeere. When there is occasion to vse them, take of each sort equall quantitie, and beat them to a very fine powder. Of this powder, giue to such as be bitten, halfe a dram euery day fasting, either out of a spone, being mixt with the doble waight of sugar, or with wine, or sidar, or broth, or tempered with butter or hony in forme of an Opiate, three how∣ers before meat. Although a dram and halfe or two drams at once, be sufficient, either for man, or any kinde of beast, though cruelly bitten, yet it will not be a misse to proceed to three or fower drams, especially if it be long since the partie was bitten, or that he be growne into hydrophobie. If he be hy∣drophobicke or mad, let him be boūd that he can∣not slacke or doe hurt, and then temper this pow∣der with wine or other conuenient liquor, and powre it downe his throat, whether he will or not, putting something into his mouth to hould it o∣pen. This may best be done in the intermission of
his madnes or fury. But to one that is newly bitten, there needs no more to be done, then first to wipe and drie the wound, either with a sponge, or some drie linen cloth, and then to bath it with wine or hydromell, in which halfe a dram of this powder is dissolued. This should be done twise or thrise euery day, then lay on some ointment or plaster, such as is wont to be laid on other wounds, and so suffer it to heale, without any feare of hydrophobie. While this practise is thus ordred, there wilbe no need, either to alter the ordinarie diet, or to keepe the house, or to take any purging medicine, except the bitten body be vexed with hydrophobie be∣fore he be taken in hand. For that being remoued, the humors of the body that bee distempered, should be amended, partly by purging, and partly by good and wholsome diet. This noble remedie, was first receiued from a man of great nobilitie, called Iacobus Syluanus, Lord of Pyrou, as a thing worthie to be dignified by the authoritie and patronage of true nobilitie, and di∣nulged by Iulianus Palmarius a noble minded Phy∣sitian. Admirable must needs be accoūted the operation of this medicine, whē it being hot in tēperature is of force against hot malignant & continuall feuers, ac∣companied with most fearefull symptomes, such as commonly follow the the byting of mad dogges: and in allages & sexes, of what complexion soeuer, and also in the helping of bruit beasts. Palmarius saith he neuer knew it faile in curing either the new
bitten, or such as haue not had aboue two or three fits of hydrophobie. This therfore being of so wōder∣full efficacie against this maladie, all that I haue set downe before concerning the cure heereof, out of ancient and late writers, might seeme needlesse, were it not that this is not like to be alwayes in a readinesse in all places, or peraduenture not prepa∣red as it ought to be. These things considered, I thought it good to ioyne both sorts of cure toge∣ther, that where the one is wanting, the other may be vsed. And after these so many much commended, and experienced medicines, set downe by learned writers for the cure of this disease I will communi∣cate one more, much commended vnto me from a friend, who reporteth, that this medicine hath beene often experienced, with most happy successe, in the curing of wounds caused by the byting of madde dogges. And is made as followeth. ℞Capitum Allij ℥ ij. fol: Ruta M j. stanni puluerizati ℥ ij. Theriaca opt. Androm: ℥ iij. Boile all these together in muscudine, so much as will suffice in Balneo Mariae, the vessell wherein they are being close stopped, or if you cannot get wine, take so much Ale as will suffice to boile them in, and when they are well boyled, straine them and let the grieued patient drinke ℥vij thereof at a time, taking so much a time at three seueral times within 24 houres. The first draught to be taken so soone as possible you can make this medicine rea∣die after the patient is bitten; then take the second draught, eight houres after that; and the third
eight houres after that, and so to continue the gi∣uing thereof euery eight houres, for the space of 7. or 8. dayes together. Or you may vse it longer if you see any cause to suspect danger, and towards the end, you may change it from euery 8. houres to euery 12. houres. And you must alwaies applie vnto the wound bitten with the dogge, the feces, or dregges, that were left of the drinke, after the strayning thereof, and it must be applied to the wound very warme. And you must alwaies heere obserue, that you are not to apply either this medicine, or any other, vnto the wound, vntill you haue (by some of the meanes before named) clensed the wound, from that venemous slauer, and filth, left there by the mad dogges byting by boxing-glasses with scarri∣fying, and by washing the wound as before hath beene taught. Now for conclusion, I suppose it wilbe expe∣cted, that after this my demonstration and publi∣shing of other mens opinions, aduises, counselles, practizes, and experiments for the helpe of this in∣firmitie, I should also bring to light, such peculiar knowledge, obseruation and experience, as my selfe haue had at any time, in dealing with this kinde of subiect. To whose expectation I answere, that although I haue beene a practiser in Physicke, aboue thirtie yeeres, and haue dealt mith many sorts of infirmities, yet in al this time I ingenuously and plainly protest and confesse, that neuer hither∣to hath any cures of this condition, come to my hand, neither haue I knowen that any Physitian of
mine acquaintance hath beene called to counsell for it. The reason heereof (as I conceiue) is, because the byting of a mad dogge, in all places where I haue beene, hath so little beene regarded and fea∣red, as they think it not of such moment that it may need the helpe of a Physitian: But when any such thing hapneth, they either apply some triuiall me∣dicine that they haue a good opinion of, to the bit∣ten place, or post them with what speed they can to the sea, though it be three or fower dayes before they can get thither, and then they thinke them as soundly holpen, as any Physitian or Chirurgian can doe. And truly, till by the reading of many writers of great knowledge and experience, I found it to be a matter of more regard then so slightly to be passed ouer, I esteemed in a manner as lightly of it as they. But now hauing offred a perspectiue glasse, to all such as be willing to accept of it, for the better loo∣king into the consequences, and dependances of these kinds of bytings, I doubt not but the wiser sort of such as shall haue the perusall of this small pam∣phlet, will as occasion may be ministred, more seri∣ously thinke of it, then peraduenture they haue hi∣therto done. But yet because I am loth altogether to frustrate their expectation of somewhat from me, that may helpe to direct such as be nouices in the practise of physicke, for ordring the cure heereof when occasi∣on shal happen to be offred, I wil in few words shew them, how I would proceed in hope of their helpe, if any such came vnder mine hand. First therefore if the byting be new and fresh, I
would binde the bitten member, about foure or fiue fingers distance aboue the bitten place, if it were in such a part, as I might well doe it, or lay on some astrictiue plaster, such as before hath been set downe, for the better restraint of the poysons pas∣sage, especially in sanguine or cholericke bodies, whose waies and passages are large, and the heat of their complexions some motine to the speedier wor∣king of it, the quantitie and qualitie of the venome being considered withall. But in bodies of grosse humours and cold com∣plexions, the regard of such astriction may bee the lesse, for that in such bodies the poyson findeth not his passage or operation so easie. This done, I would note whether the wound were great or small: if great, I would suffer it to bleed well: if small I would enlarge it, and make it bleed sufficiently (hauing first washt away the foame or flauer of the dogges mouth, with the vrine of a boy, or some other good lotion) either by circination as hath beene shewed before, or scarification, or leeches, & then set on a great cupping glasse, with a good flame, if the bit∣ten part would receine it, or a cupping horne; after the remouing heereof, I would wash and foment it againe, with some strong brine or salt water tempe∣red with the best sort of treacle, or with the lo∣tion that Ambrosius Paraus vsed to the Lady Grons daughter, and lastof all I would foment it in such maner, as Iulian Palmarius hath aduised, with a mix∣ture of his powder (if I had it in a readinesse) and giue of the same powder inward according to his counsell forbearing to torture the bitten body with
cauteries as much as I could, and rest only vpon the operation of this so much commended Antidote, which I would continue for the space of 40. daies at the least, still fomenting and bathing the hurt place euery day as I should finde occasion, and withall vse meanes to keepe the fore from healing vp al that while, though Palmarius affirme it needlesse so to doe. But if this powder were not in readinesse, then after the binding, washing, and clensing with such lotions as before are named, and cupping with scari∣fication, I would seare it either with an actuall or a potential cautery, according to the doctrine before deliuered by the learned, procuring the fall or com∣ming away of the scabbe or crust, with what speed I could, and keeping open the sear a sufficient time, vsing euacuations, by purging, bleeding, and swea∣ting in their due times, and inward corroboratiues and diet, &c. in such sort as hath beene specified. But except I should see the greater occasion I wold in stead of opening a vaine in the arme, vse a pra∣ctise that none of them haue spoken of that I haue read, namely the opening of the hemorrhoidall vaines in the fundament. For so by all probabilitie the venemous pollution would be drawen downe thither from the princip all parts, without detriment to any other. If many daies were past, before the bitten bodie came to my curing, I would deale with him as Do∣ctor Palmarius counselleth, if I had his Antidote in a readines, or els as Franciscus Valleriola dealt with his patient, or like differing from his practise.
Prognosticke notes ALl that be bitten o a mad dogge, if they bee neglected or badly cured, wil fall into the pas∣sion of fearing water called hydrophobie, at one time or other; and much the rather if they be repleat with euill humors. But all this may easily be preuen∣ted, if at the first there bee good order taken. For fewe haue miscaried thereby, that presently haue vsed good meanes to withstand it. Petrus Salius saith that in his countrie, it hath been long time obserued for truth, that if such as be bitten by a mad creature, chance to touch the plant or tree called Cornus, or Sanguinaria, that is the Cornell or dogbery tree, within the space of one yeere after his biting, he will certainely fall mad. And some also affirme that if the bitten doe sleepe vnder the tree called Sorbus, which we call a Seruice tree, he will doe the like. Though the biting be but small, and in the vpper part of the skinne, yet all speed ought to be vsed for cure thereof. For otherwise it wilbe a very hard mat∣ter to preuent the mischiefe depending thereon. The poison conteined in the slauer or spittle of a mad dogge, is hot and drie, malignant and conta∣gious, causing a distemper like it selfe in all such as bee hurt thereby: which if it be suffred to lie on the skinne of any part of the body, and not quickly washt away with salt water, vrine or such like, it will infect the whole body, though it be not bitten. The fome or slauer of a mad dogs mouth, touch∣ing ones lippes or tongue, will so quickly and easilie
peirce though those parts, that it wil very speedily induce madnes, if it be not quickly preuented, which is verified by a historie out of Caelius Orlerianus, which makes report of a certaine Semster or Sew∣ster, that while she was making a shirt, a dogge that she no whit suspected to be madde, snatcht at the shirt, and rent it with his teeth, which rent place she afterward held betwixt her teeth to plucke it out streight, that she might the better sowe it euen, but by this houlding betwixt her teeth, she so lickt the bitten rent of the cloth, that the third day after, she became starke mad, and so died. That this is like to be true, heare what Guiliel. Ib. Obser. & Cuat Crur. Obser. 86. Fa∣britius, a very excellent and expert Chirurgian of our time reporteth of the like, in his chirurgicall ob∣scruations and cures. A certaine Matron or ancient woman, hapt to be met in the way by a madde dogge, who catching hould of one of her coates, tare it in two or three places, and so went his way without hurting any part of her body at all. This woman not knowing or sup∣posing the dogge to be mad, at her comming home sowed vp the rents of her coat, and when she had done, bit of the thred with her teeth, without percei∣uing any hurt at all thereby, till three monthes were past. After which, she began by little and little to grow melancholike and troubled with imagina∣tions, horrible visions and feares, and lastly she fell into a great loathing of water, wine, and liquid things, and moreouer to barke like a dog, loosing the knowledge of such as were vsually in the house with her, and offring to bite them, continuing in
this state till she died. The scratching also with the nailes, as well as the slauer may induce madnes, as Caelius Orrelianus affir∣meth which was found to be true, An. Dom. 602. by an instance produced by the fore-named Fabriti∣us in the same obseruation cited. The story is this. A certaine young man about 20. yeeres of age, called Daniel Perrin, in the har∣uest time of the yeere aboue named, was scratcht on the thombe of the right hand, by a madde Cat, but yet so lightly as the very vpper rinde of the skinne, which the Greekes call Epdermis, was scarce hurt, which, because the yonge man had noe suspition of the Cats madnes, he made none account of, and the rather for that he felt no paine of it, but on the first day of March following, he began by little and lit∣tle to be very solemne, fearefull, and mooued with strange imaginations, so that the next day hee was afraid to goe abroad. The third day of the same Month, saith Fabritius, I was sent for, & found him hydrophobicke, so exceedingly abhorring water, wine, or any liquid or bright thing, that hee could not endure the sight of them. His face, necke, and brest were inflamed, with the mixture of a blewe colour, sweating and fainting much, and sometime casting himselfe so violently this way and that way on his bed, that three strong men could scarce hould him, offring to bite such as stood neere him, trem∣bling and quaking at the sight of meat and drinke, & in this wretched estate ended his life that night: Thus farre Guil. Fabritius. This Catte no doubt, had been bitten before by
some mad dogge. Hereby furthermore is shewed a most admirable force of this kind of poyson, that is able to pearce e∣uen the very nailes, being of a solid, senseles & horny substance, in such sort as to be able to worke so strang effects. D. Esaias Meischuerus in his obseruations hath this story following. A Stripling or youth belonging to a noble gentleman, by chaunce found a sword cast vnder a bedstead, with which a mad dog had been thrust through many yeeres before. Which sword he begd of his master, who bad him take it. The youth hauing gotten it, fell to scowring off the rust thereof, but being earnest in this his busines, he, chanced to catch a very slight hurt therby vpon one of his hands, yet as small as the hurt was in showe the sequell thereof proued it great, in that very shortly after he became mad thereby, and so died. Laurentius Surius reporteth that a certaine In∣houlder in the Duchie of Wertenberg, Comment. rerū in orbegestar, on a time entertained some of his Guests with swines flesh that had been bitten by a mad dogge, whereby all the eaters thereof became presently so mad, that they bit and tare one an other with their teeth. Many are of opinion, that if the principall parts, that is the braine, heart, or liuer, bee affected, but especially if the sicke doc once beginne to feare wa∣ter, there is no hope, or verie little, of recouery. It is reported also a sgne of small hope, if the sicke will lie downe and tomble on the ground, and doe speake with a hoarse voice. A biting or wound quickly closed vp, is much
worse then a great and large wound. No man neglecting meanes of helpe, ought to account himfelfe safe from perill, that hath been bit∣ten of a mad dogge, though he finde no alteration in his body within the space of a yeere. For Albertus saith, that some haue become mad not till 12. yeeres after. Galen also and Guinerius, and other more (as hath partly been noted before) haue spoken of a greater number of yeeres that haue passed betwixt the biting and the madnes. And Alharabius of some called Alzaranius an Arabian, affirmeth that hee knew it fortruth, that the poison of a mad dogges biting, hath lien lurking in the body of the bitten, the space of forty yeeres, before it hath shewed it selfe. And such is the propertie of it, that the long er it lieth lurking in the body vnperceiued, the sooner it killeth when it breaketh out into action, as Petrus Forestus by examples hath notified. The spittle or slauer of any beast, is thought to haue something in it that is contrary to mans nature, as also the scratchings with their nailes &c. and therefore is not to be neglected. Auicen is of opinion that none bitten of a mad dog are past helpe, that are able to know themselues in a looking glasse. It is not so dangerous to be bitten of a body that is mad by the biting of a mad dogge, as to be bitten of a mad dogge. Concerning prognostickes, thus writeth Petrus Salius: There be only two things worth the noting for prognosticke signes in this infirmitie: Namely whether they bee only fore-showers of madnes im∣minent
or to come: or whether the madnes be alre∣die present. In the former case there is hope of health or recouery, if the disease be oppugned with valiant and strong medicines, and not with such as be gen∣tle and light, because as yet the poison hath not wholely inuaded or possessed the principall mem∣bers: but if it haue once gotten the mastry of them, I am of opinion with the more famous sort of Phy∣sitians, that it is past all helpe and remedie, and therefore but lost labour to vse any meanes for curing thereof. And if Dioscorides hath testified that he cured Eudemus sicke of this disease, and that the Physitian Themison was also deliuered from it: though this be true, yet is it to be numbred among admirable things, and such as exceed the power of man. Againe, if they were deliuered from this dis∣ease, I am of minde saith he, that they were delt withall in the beginning, and not in the state or pro∣gresse thereof. But Paulus saith, that these were not bitten of a mad dogge, but that this affection was transferred to them, by some man that had beene bitten of a dogge, and that therefore Themison might be saued, because he had it by a light contagion from a friend of his that had beene dogge-bitten. The difficultie therefore of this matter, being thus exemplified, may put the wisely carefull in minde, the better to regard it, and looke to it in time. For it hath gone current from time to time that if once they be growen mad, they are past recoue∣ry, and therefore the Poet Ouid who liued not long
after Asclepiades, a Physitian of greatnote in his time could say: Soluere nodosam nescit medicina podagram: Nec formidatis vlla medetur aquis. Which I haue made speake english in this manner: The knottie gowte to cure, no medcins counted sure: Nor doggish waterfeare, that euer I could heare, The biting of a dogge that is not mad. COrnelius Celsus saith, that euery biting of a beast, hath some kinde of venomnes in it: therefore the biting of a dogge that is not mad, should not be neglected. For the paine that ensu∣eth thereupon, some thinke to bee an argument of malignitie from the biter, because the biting of any creature is more painefull and hard to cure, then a∣ny simple wound. Yet the paine of biting, more then by a simple wound, may be by reason of the tearing of the skinne and flesh through the thick∣nes of the teeth, which rather doth bruise, then pearce the flesh, except they bee pressed very hard. And such wounds as make round holes, or such as be caused by stones, staues, stripes and such like, are also more painfull and hard to cure, then those that be made with swords, daggers, kniues, and such like. Wherefore whether a man, woman, child, horse, cowe, swine or other creature, be bitten with a dogge that is not mad, or by a man, or ape, or such like, let the biting bee presently fomented or bathed with vineger and nitrum, called saltpeter mixt together. Or as Oribasius aduiseth, lay on a
sponge soked in vineger: or bruse a fenell root and lay it on with hony. Paulus Aegineta counselleth that the bitten wound should first be sprinkled with vineger, & then bea∣ten with the open or flat hand, after which, to powre vineger vpon it from a loft, the vineger be∣ing first tempered with nitrum, and then to lay on a newe sponge soked either in vineger alone, or tem∣pered with nitrum, and so let it lie the space of three daies on the wound, moistening the sponge with vineger when it drieth, for it healeth perfectly, as he saith. Or lay on lana succida wet in vineger, or an onion brused with hony, or the toppes of origanum tempered with salt and onions in equall portions. But for bitings that are come to suppuration or matter, temper the meale of eruum with hony and lay it on: For it is speciall good for such bitings. If they be enflamed, anoint them with spuma argen∣ti or litharge beaten with water. After the place hath been formented, as before is said, and the sponge remoued, some account it ve∣ry good to lay vpon the wound a cateplasme made of walnut kirnels, onions, hony and salt boiled to∣gether, and made vp with wheat meale, or farinaer∣ui, beaten together. It is good to keep the wound open some reasonable time before it be healed vp. Amatus Lusitanus being called to the cure of one bitten by an English Mastiue dogge that was not madde, kept the wound from healing, Curat med. Centur. 2. Cu∣ra. 78. a month to∣gether, to preuent all danger that might haue hapned.
Simples of great vertue against the byting of a mad dogge. AGrimonià, Eupatorium, Agrimonie is of force to purge by vrine, and giuen either in pow∣der, or the iuyce of the greene herbe drunke of one bitten with a mad dogge, after three or fower daies from the beginning, is of great effect, especially if the body haue beene dealt withall before with o∣ther conuenient meanes. It is very excellent also a∣gainst the biting or stinging of serpents, and other poisons. Allium, Garlicke, is of very great operation a∣gainst all cold poisons, and the biting of a madde dogge. Alysson, Madwort, or Galens Moonewort. Ga∣len affirmeth it to be a maruelous herbe in curing such as are bitten of a mad dogge, yea though they were entred into madnes. It is brought out of Spaine, and Italy: but nowe some of our Herbo∣ristes haue it growing in their gardens. Amygdala, Almons beaten with hony, are very good to lay to the biting of a mad dogge. Angelica, is very excellent against the biting of a mad dogge or any other venemous beast. Aphronitrum, Spumamaris, tempered with swines grease, auaileth much against such bitings. Arnoglossa, Plantago, Lambes tongue or plantain, is also very good. Beta, Beet is commended for a good herbe in this case.
Betonica, Betonie is also greatly commended for such bitings. Brassica, Colewort, This herbe saith Rabbi Moises, hath a peculiar propertie against the biting of a mad dogge. Bulbi omnes impositi iuuant. Cancer fluuiatilis, Riuer crabfish, The ashes of these fishes (as Galen saith) are of wonderfull vertue, by the propertie of their substance, against the biting of a mad dogge, either alone, or much more by mixing them with gentian and frankencense or oli∣banum, in such sort as there may be offrankencense one part, of gentian fiue, and of the ashes of crab∣fishes ten parts. This he learned of his Master Aes∣chrion the Empiricke, who alwaies had this powder in a readines, prepared as followeth. Into a pot of red brasse hee put a number of crabfishes aliue, wherein he burnt them so long till they might bee beaten to very fine powder. This he did after the rising of the dogstarre, the sunne being in the signe of Leo, and the Moone being 18. daies ould. This powder he gaue the dog-bitten body, euery day, fortie daies together, about a spoonefull at once, sprinkled with water. But after three or fower daies from the begining, he gaue euery day two spoone∣fuls sprinkled as before. An other of his Masters called Pelops, did no lesse esteeme the powder of these fishes, then the former. Oribasius, Paulus and Aetius, prepare them much after the same manner. The vse of them is very much regarded both of ould and late writers. Caepe, Onion. The iuice of onions tempered with
hony, rue and salt, is very profitable against the bi∣ting of mad dogges. Centaurium minus. The lesser centurie is an herbe of very great excellency for the same. Chamitis, Herbe-Iuie, or ground pine stamped greene with hony, is of vertue against poyson, or the byting of any venemous beast. Gentiana, Gentian or Felwort, a dram of the pow∣der of the root of gentian or felwort, mixt with a little pepper and herbe grace, and giuen inward, is profitable for such as are bitten or stung with any maner of beast, or for any that hath taken poyson. Hyaenaepellis, the skinne or hide of the beast Hyaena, is of so admirable efficacie, saith Aetius, that if it be lapt about one that beginneth to be mad of the bi∣ting of a mad dogge, he will quickly be restored a∣gaine to his wits. Or the powder of it burnt and giuen in drinke, will asswage the affection of hydro∣phobie. Imperatoria, masterwort, the root with the leaues stamped and layd vpon the bytings of mad dogs, or rather venemous beasts, will cure them. Lapatium, Docke or herbe-patience is greatly commended by Aetius, to be laid plasterwise on the wound or byting, and the decoction therof drunk, saying, he knew an ould man that vsed none other remedie. Lichnis Plumaria, Fethertop or wild campion, the weight of two drams of the seed heereof beaten to powder and drunke, is good for such as are bit∣ten of any venemous beast. Lycopsis Anglica, Echium, Alcibiadion, vipers bu∣glosse
or wall buglosse: this herbe chewed and the iuyce swalowed downe, is a most singular remedie against poison and the byting of any venemous beast, or the root chewed and laid on the sore, wor∣keth the same effect. Melissa, Melissophyllon, Balme drunke in wine, or applyed outwardly, is of great vertue against the byting of mad dogges, or other venemous beasts. Nepeta, Nep dry, is a very good herbe for this purpose: It draweth all the circumstant moisture from the deepest parts of the bodie, as Oribasius writeth. Origanum wild marierome drunke in wine, is good against any kinde of poyson. Oxalis Acetosa, Sorrell brused and layd on, or the decoction thereof drunke, is of great force in this case as Aetius reporteth. Some vse it as a secret, both in meats and medicins prepared therewith and ap∣plyed to the wound. Pimpinella, Burnet, This is a herbe of excellent vertue against the biting of a mad dogge. Of this herbe a hunts-man belonging to the french King Henry the second, made report vnto Doctor Iohn Fernelius (while he had him in cure of a grieuous disease) that he knew by often experience, so great excellency in it for preuenting of hydrophobie or feare of water, that whosoeuer being bitten of a mad dogge, did vse to eat thereof certaine mor∣nings fasting, either in a salade or otherwise ordred did neuer sustaine any hurt by such byting, which he first made proofe of in the Kings hounds, with notable good successe.
Porrum, Leeke, the iuyce of Leekes drunke with hony, is good against the byting of venemous beasts, and so are the leaues stamped and layd on the wound. Potumogeton, pond-weed tempered with salt and layd on the sore, will not suffer any to fall into hy∣drophobie, saith Aetius. Prasium, Marrubium, Horehound is one of the three herbes of account that Galen mentioneth. Ruta siluestris, or agrestis, the seeds of this herbe are very excellent to drinke against all bytings. Scordeum, water-germander, or garlick-german∣der, is an herbe of very great account, not onely against all bytings of venemous beasts, but also a∣gainst the plague and other poisons. This herbe and Centaurium minus, and Prasium, haue beene re∣tained sayth Galen, as great secrets for these infir∣mities, among the ancient Physitians: but yet hee preferred Terra Lemnia before them all. Scorzonera, Viper grasse is also reputed of great vertue against poisonous bytings. Serpillum, wilde time is good against the bytings of any venemous beast either taken in drinke, or outwardly applied. Triticum, wheat chewed betwixt the teeth, and laid on the bitten wound, is very curatiue. So is the meale thereof tempered with vineger, or the branne of it. Balmes either naturall or artificiall, are very ex∣cellent to dresse the bittenwound withall. Some remedies named in this treatis, I haue set downe in Latine, as I found them in the Authors
thereof, partly because any Apothecatie vpon the sight thereof, can prepare them in better sort then other that are not vsed to such practises: and partly for that many remedies heretofore (and too commonly indeed) diuulged and laid open to the vnskilfull managing of women and al-daring Empirickes, (though of themselues very excel∣lent, where they bee ordred per manum artificis, by the ministration and application of a skilfull artist that knoweth the true times and opportunities of their vse) haue fallen out to doe great hurt to such as they haue beene practised vpon, to the great dis∣credite and vndeserued blemishing of the most no∣ble science of Physicke, especially in matters of pur∣ging and phebotomie, and such particulars as spe∣cially belong to the secret mysteries of Physicke. For now are start vp so many Thessalian Physitians in euery corner, whom many not vnproperly doe tearme Dogleches, that this neuer too much com∣mended Science, containing in it the hidden secrets of all the whole Elementall world, is growne now so triuiall and basely common, as euery smattering Surgion, euery Apothecarie, yea almost euery wo∣man, and euery botching Asse that hath read a little in English bookes of medicine, take vpon them to bee as good Physitians, as those that in the vniuersities haue spent many yeeres, and much mony in the suite and studie thereof, and been dignified with the highest degrees of schoole, be∣longing to that profession, that the Vniuersities can bestowe vpon them. .
