22975 99852890 18244
A Briefe Discourse of the Hypostasis, or substance of the water of Spaw; Containing in small quantity many pots of that Minerall Water. Ʋerie profitable for such Patients, as cannot repaire in person to those Foun∣taines, as by perusing this Discourse, it will plainly appeare. Translated out of French into English, by G. T. This abouesaide Hypostasis, or substance of the water of Spaw, is to be sold by Doctor Hieroni∣mus Seminus, Italian, dwelling in S. Paules Alley, in Red-crosse-street.
A briefe Discourse of the Hypostasis, or substance of the wa∣ter of Spaw, conteyning in small quantitie many pots of that Minerall water. WHereas the singular ef∣fects that are yearely ex∣perimented, by drinking the water of Spaw, doe cause the concourse of sundry persons of diuers Countries and Nations to those Fountaines: whereunto many more patients would willingly repaire, were they not letted, either by extraor∣dinary defect of health, or ordinarie want of wealth, or such other impeachments, as dayly occurre in the course of this transitory life. In consideration whereof, it hath seemed verie expedient to some, who haue disposed their stu∣dies
and labours, to the good of others; and whose residences are not farre from those Foun∣taines, nor themselues estranged from the en∣search of naturall things, to deuise the meanes, that such as are absent, may be made partakers of those Minerall waters; and consequently, of those healthfull effects, that by the drinking of them are produced. The accustomed course hitherto taken, hath beene to fill numbers of Bottles with the water of the vpper or the lower Fountaine, and to con∣ueigh those Bottles (being closely stopped) vnto their designed places; as to France, England, Ita∣ly, Germany, Polonia, Moscouia, and other farre distant places. But this way is found by experi∣ence, no lesse troublesome, then chargeable in the carriage; considering, that a huge quantity of water, containeth but a very little of the Mi∣nerall substance, wherein the vertue of the water consisteth; and the saide substance being so thin∣ly diuided into a great quantity of water, looseth much of the force and vertue, before it can bee brought into so farre distant places; the which hath beene the cause, why the persons before in∣sinuated, haue employed their studye and Tra∣uaile, to reduce the pure Hypostasis or substance of the saide Minerals, into so little a quantitie, as that one pot may supply for farre more then an hundred pots; and withall, that no part of the force or vertue of the saide Minerals should bee
impaired. And to the end the Reader may receiue some kinde of satisfaction, who perchance is curious to looke into the practise heereof; or at lest, into the speculation of this Maistry, three points hee is then to obserue. First that the extraction of the saide Minerall essence bee made in Sommer; in which season, those Waters are of more efficacie: And if the extracter bee himselfe present at the Fountaines, it is so much the better. Secondly, that he finde out the secret how to part the Minerall substance from the VVater, without distillation, (for that would not quite the cost) but by precipitation, whereby the Minerall powder falleth downe, and setleth it selfe in the bottome of the glasse, depriuing the VVater of all Minerall taste and operation; which secret, is soone performed by a skilfull Artist. Thirdly, when he hath a sufficient quantity of that precipitated powder, hee must not dissolue it with any corasiue, but with a competent mea∣sure of such Liquors as are agreeable vnto the health of man: and in these three obseruations the whole practise consisteth. It followeth now, to declare in what quantitie this Hypostasis or extraction dissolued thus into a liquor, is to bee taken; which must bee as follo∣weth. Take a dram weight of this Liquor, which is
the eight part of an Ounce; and contayneth as much in quantity, as will fill a great Thimble; poure this into a glasse or stone Bottle, & poure thereunto fifty Ounces of the best and clearest water that is to be had; whether it be Fountaine water, Riuer water, or Well water: This water is to be put vnto the dram weight of the other li∣quor, at the time that the Patient is ready to drinke it, and not before; not that any inconue∣nience may ensue thereof, but because the fre∣sher the water is, the more grateful it is vnto the taste, and the Minerall substance in length of time, will descend vnto the bottom of the glasse: and albeit it may bee newly stirred and mingled with the water, and so taken; yet will it notwith∣standing, be more to the liking of the Patient, as before is noted, to haue his water brought fresh from the Spring, &c. This quantity of fiftie Ounces of Water to a dram of the Minerall substance, is the ordinary and best proportion, which hetherto by practise hath beene tried, being also lesse distastfull vnto the drinke; yet, in some diseases, as in retention of Vrine, or in quenching the heats of Agues, it will stand the Patient in better steede to followe this proportion, then to take it in lesser quantitie of water. And this is spoken vpon proofe and ex∣perience: how be it, if the learned Physitian shall thinke it expedient,Vt in morbis in quibus humidi∣tas perualet. that in some diseases the quantity of the water be diminished, the matter
is referred vnto his graue iudgement, consenting with the Philosopher, that Frustra fit per plura, quod potest fieri per punciora. The water being in the former proportion prepared▪ the patient may drinke thereof accor∣ding to the quality of his disease;Till the water is past by the belly, or by the Vrine Meatus: & that the sto∣mack is empty as for example. For the stone and grauell, or heate of the raynes, he may take euery morning fasting fiftie Ounces at seuerall times, and hee must abstaine from meate two houres after, and if within that space he be in plight to walke, or to vse some o∣ther moderate exercise, it will worke the better. Heere is also to bee noted, that albeit such as drinke the Spaw water, to take 100. 200. or more ounces in a morning. Yet this notwithstanding, these-fiftie-ounces will be of as great efficacie, because there is more pure substance conteyned in those fiftie ounces, then in a far greater quan∣tity of Spaw water. Thus much taken in a morning, will be suffi∣cient the first weeke for the whole day. The week following, so much more may be drunken in the afternoone, about three or foure of the clocke, if it shall seeme good to the learned and expert Phisition, to whose discretion and direction are referred, these and sundry other particular cir∣cumstances that may happen (which in schooles are tearmed Hic & nunc) in sundry diseases, and in the diuers dispositions of different patients: in which occurrences all purgations and other
preparations that mny be prescribed, are to goe before the taking of this water, as in like sort the prescription of dyets, and the like heedfull and healthfull obseruations, as when or how often the patient may drinke the water alone, or ming∣led with wine, at meates or at other times. These and other circumstances must in all reason be re∣ferred to the discretion of the learned Phisition. In the retention of vrine it will be needfull to take those fifty ounces euery morning, and as much more in the afternoone, vnlesse the partie finde amendment, and in that disease to walke, and vse some exercise, will bee of great impor∣tance. The same quantity may bee prescribed in the dropsie, morning and euening, especially after the first weeke, and if the disease haue not taken very deepe roote, the patient will finde sencible amendment, and his strength day by day verie much to encrease. In Tertian and Quartaine Agues, the Patient must drinke euery morning 50. Ounces on his good dayes; but on the dayes of his fit, hee may take before the accesse 20. Ounces, and in the heate of the fit, thirty Ounces. The like obseruations may bee vsed in Quoti∣dian Agues, to wit; that 20. ounces be taken be∣fore the fit, and o. in the heate thereof, if it shall seeme good to the Physitian, whose iudgement is also to be vsed concerning the time and quan∣tity,
when and how much of this water may bee vsed in continuall Agues. In pestilentiall Agues, there hath not (as yet) any assured triall bene made. In all Obstructions, as the Greene sicknes, and the like,For the paines of the Spleen, hardnesse and swellings ther∣of. the Physitian may prescribe it in place of the powder of steele, it being vndoubtedly far more secure, and of more effectuall operation. In the weaknesse of the stomacke and heate of the Liuer, it is a singular water, being dayly taken in the aforesaide quantity of 50. ounces. In the Flux, and in the abundance of VVo∣ment Courses it may also bee taken; and beeing mingled now and then with red wine, it will bee the better. In womens infirmities (as aforesaid) if this water bee mingled with distilled Plantine water, it will worke the better. For other disea∣ses, the Reader may see what is added in the end of this discourse, which is taken out of the Trea∣tise of the vertues of the waters of the Forrest of Arden, and principally of those of Spaw, written some yeares since in the French tongue, by the learned M. Gilbert Lembourgh, Doctor of Phy∣sicke, & dedicated vnto the Prince of Liege. Ob∣seruing neuerthelesse by the way, that as the said Fountaines of Spaw do not benefit euery one in particular; so is it not promised, that this Hyposta∣sis thereof shall worke infallible cures in all kinde of diseases, and vpon all persons, as though one saddle should fit euery horse; for diuers persons
haue diuers constitutions of body; and the same Medicine which is auaileable to one, is not al∣wayes profitable to another, as reason and expe∣rience dayly sheweth. Wherefore to conclude, the ordinary proportion as before hath bin said, is to mingle fifty ounces of pure water to a dram of this Mineral Hypostasis or substance of the Spaw water; not that there is any danger if one should drinke one dram onely with an ounce of com∣mon water, but for the more efficatious working: this ordinary quantity is found to be more con∣uenient, hauing therein some resemblance with the copious abundance of the Spaw water. Heere also the patient may obserue, that it shall not he needfull for him alwayes to weigh the water; for hauing weighed it once, and put it into a glasse of conuenient greatnesse, hee may see to what fulnesse of the glasse his fifty Ounces of water do reach, and so vse that measure for the saide weight. The Patient may moreouer min∣gle the water with wine, in all such Diseases as are not hot. They do vse at the Spaw to make Brewesse or sops of that water, boyling it with Butter, which they finde both toothsome and wholesom; in al which particularities it will alwayes be good (as before is saide) to follow the aduice of a learned expert and vnpassionate Physitian. Of sundry diseases, which principally are cu∣red by the vse of drinking the water of Spaw, ta∣ken
out of the treatise of the vertues therof, writ∣ten by M. Gilbert Lembourgh, Doctor of Phy∣sicke, and consequently of the Hypostasis of the saide water being mingled with pure common water, as in the precedent discourse is declared. The drinking of this water doth mightily quench thirst, and it bringeth the hot Liuer vnto a good temper, as also the Kidneyes. It strengthneth the stomacke, and giueth it appetite thorough the astrictiue vertue that it hath, but for an extreame cold stomacke it is not so good. It is greatly profitable against all obstructions, and debility of the Milt, for it doth dissolue and cure the cause thereof. It deliuereth the Kidneyes and bladder from Grauell, and is aidefull against all defluctions of those parts. It correcteth Rheumes and Cararrhes, in what part of the body soeuer they descend; as in the breast, the stomacke, the Kidneyes, Sinewes, on Muscles. It cureth Dropsies, how be it such as in whom this disease is confirmed by length of time, and that the forces of the Patients are thereby much weakened, are verie hardly cured. And so are al∣so such Dropsies as proceede of a hardnesse of the Liuar, which Galen saith, are incureable. Experience also sheweth, that such dropsies as come of drinesse of the stomacke, and of long
resolution and humidity of the intestine parts are not easily cured. But among such as the beginning of this Di∣sease commeth of the ilnesse of the Milt, the o∣ther parts not naturally well, many persons haue bin perfectly cured. It helpeth greatly the parts that are softned & resolued by defluctions, as the Sinews, Muscles, &c. It strengtheneth the Matrix that i subiect to too much humidity, and disposeth it in such sort that it retaineth the conceiued fruite, and so ex∣pelleh barrennesse. It aydeth against strangulations and suffoca∣tions of the Matrix. As touching such as are verie Leapers; if it do not wholly cure them, yet doth the continu∣all vse thereof, impeach and hinder their disease from any more increasing. As for the curing of Agues, the Reader may note what hath bin saide in the precedent Dis∣course. The Reader is lastly to be aduertised; That whereas the most vsuall taking of the VVater of Spaw is in Sommer, it is chiefly because of the abundance of Raine and Snow that falleth into those Fountaines in winter, which weakneth the force of them; and so is the force also weakened in Sommer in rainy weather; as contrary-wise in winter, in frosty and dry weather, the water hath
his perfect force. In which respect, this Hyposta∣sis thereof being mingled with pure VVater, in such quantity of the one and the other, as be∣fore is mentioned, may aswel be vsed in winter, as in Sommer. FINIS.
