24590 99846823 11815
A TALE OF TVVO Swannes. VVherein is comprehended the original and increase of the riuer Lee ommonly called Ware-riuer: together, with the anti∣quitie of sundrie places and townes sea∣ted vpon the same. PLEASANT TO BE READ, and not altogether vnprofitable to bee vn∣derstood by W. V. printer's or publisher's device LONDON. Printed by Roger Ward, for Iohn Sheldrake. 1590.
TO THE READER THe reasons be manifold (good rea∣der) that mooued me to publish thys present Tale. First, that I might (in what I was able) illustrate or make better known to ye world, my countrie or place of byrth: to which (as Cicero saith) each man doth ow the third part of his life, & for which ther is no good man, but wil ieopard his life, aduenture his safetie, and hazard the dearest things hee dooth possesse: neither yet was there euer any man so brutish, but reioyceth to heare his countrie commended, and is deligh∣ted when he heareth the same wel spoken off and praised: such is the affection that euery man beareth to it: that Ouid expres∣sing the same, said, he coulde not tel howe it came to passe, nor whence it should proceede. His words be these: Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos Ducit, nec Hence it came to passe that antiquity gaue diuine honor to such as had deserued wel of their countrie: either in peace, by inuen∣ting something to the profit or wealth thereof: or in war, by ad∣uentring their bodies in defence thereof. Another reason was, that albeit neither my writing, nor other indeuour whatsoeuer, be able to perfourm any thing that might either beautifie or adorne the places I speake of: Yet hereby I would animate, or encourage those worthy Poets, who haue writtē Epithalamion Thamesis, to publish the same: I haue seen it in Latene verse (in my iudgment) wel done, but the Author I know not for what reason doth suppresse it: That which is written in English, though long since it was promised, yet is it not perfourmed: so as it seemeth, some vnhappy Star enuieth ye sight of so good a work: which once set abroad, such trifles as these would vanish, and be ouershadowed, much like the Moon and other starres, which after the appearing of the Sunne are not to be seene at all. Thirdly, being fully resolued to leaue my country, I held best before my departure Cigneum aliquid canere: not vnlike the
Swans, who before their death do sing as Ouid, Uirgil, Mar∣tial, Horace with all the poets do constantly affyrme. The Phi∣losophers say, it is because of the spirit labouring to passe tho∣row the long and small passage of her necke, makes a noise as if she did sing. Pithagoras did thinke their soules were immortal, and saith, how before their death, they reioice and sing as going to a better life. The maner of their singing M. Thomas Watson in his Odes expresseth thus: Qualis vbi longo moerore Castrius ales confectus senio graui. &c. Which verses A. F. hath englished on this wise. Like to the siluer Swan, who seeing death to be comming, Wandreth alone for a while through streams of louely Caister: Then to the flowring bankes all faint at last he repairth, Singing there sweet bird, his dieng song to Caister: Geuing there sweete bird, his last farewell to Caister: Yeelding vp, sweet bird, his breath and song to Caister. The last, and not the least motiue was my friendes request, whose importunate demaund without breach of amitie, I could not gainsay: to whom, as also to thy fauourable construction (curtcous and friendly reader) I commit the same. IOHN TVRNER of the worke. TO tell a Tale, and tell the trueth withall, To write of waters, and with thm of land. To tell of Riuers, where they rise and fall▪ To tell where Cities, Townes and Castles stand. To tell their names both old and newe, with othr things that be most true. Argues a Tale that tendeth to some good. Argues a Tale that hath in it some reason. Argues a Tale, if it be vnderstood, As looke the like, and you shall find it geason. If when you reade, you find it so, Commend the worke and let it goe. I. T.
A TALE OF TWO SWANNES. WHen nature nurse of euery liuing thing, Had clad her charge in braue and new aray: The hils reioyst to see themselues so fine: The fields, and woods grew proud therof also: The medovves vvith their partie coloured coates, Like to the Rainebow in the azur'd skie, Gaue iust occasion to the cheerefull birdes, With svveetest note, to sing their nurses praise▪ Among the vvhich, the merrie Nightingale With svvete and svvete, (her brest against a thorne) Ringes out all night the neuer ceasing landes of God, the author of her nursse and all. About this time, the Lady Uenus viewd, The fruitfull fieldes of Hartfordshire: And savv the riuer, and the meades thereof Fit for to breede her birdes of greatest prise. She calles in haste for vvinged Mercurie, And sendes him to Cayster, siluer streame: Fetch me (saith he) tvvo Cignets of the best, And in the Laund, hard by the parke of Ware, Where Fanshawe buildes for his succeeding race, Thy speedie comming I will there avvait. The messenger of all the heauenly court, Makes haste avvay to doo his mistresse quest: And from the brood tvvo Cignets of esteeme He sleely takes, vnseene of any Svvannes, Which in that riuer be so plentifull. To Ware he comes, and to the Launde he flies, Where Uenus, like the Goddesse of great Loue, Sate louely by the running riuer side,
Tuning her Lute vnto the waters fall, Wherewith she did record the loue and armes Of mightie Mars, the God of dreadfull warre. The present come, she layeth downe her Lute, And takes these Cignets of so great esteeme, Throwing them both into her riuer Lee: And posted straight vp, to the throne of Ioue, Where louely, like to verie loue it selfe, Shee set her selfe, vpon her yeelding knee, And craues of him but onely this request, That her two Swannes might prosper in the streame, And rule the rest, as worthie King and Queene. The mightie Ioue, vnwilling to denie His daughters sute, for feare of further ill, Graunts her request: and more to pleasure her, Saith, that these two so fruitfull shall become, That all the Swannes, yea, the verie Thames Shall be replenisht with their princely race. Uenus yeeldes thankes, and hastes her selfe away, To mount Troclya, where she tooke her rest. Long liued these Swannes in Lee, with great increase Of honour, royaltie, and in high estate: Inricht with issue of the fayrest breede, That liues in Seuerne, Humber or in Trent, The chiefest floudes that water English ground. Three times had Venus vs'd them for to draw Her Iuory Chariot, through the loftie ayre. A speciall fauour (as the Poets say) Graunted to such, as she holdes in accompt. Now as these Swannes began to waxen old, As time out weares eche creature that doth liue: It pleased them to send throughout their realme, For all their subiectes of the highest bloud: With full intent to make a progresse cleane, Throughout their land to see the boundes thereof, And euery brooke that harbours anie Swanne,
With all the Isles that vnto them belong. No sooner vvas this message knovvne abroad, But there resorted to their being place, Such troupes of milke-vvhite Svvannes, as vvell beseem'd The royall state of tvvo such princes great. Among vvhich troupes, the King and Queene made choise Of fortie Svvannes of high and royall bloud, For to attend vpon their Maiesties. Then looke hovv Cynthia vvith her siluer rayes, Exceedes the brightnesse of the lesser starres, When in her chiefest pompe she hasteth dovvne, To steale a kisse from drousie Endymion: So doe these princes farre excell in state, The Svvannes that breede vvithin Europaes boundes. And in this pompe, they hie them to the head, Whence Lee doth spring, not farre from Kempton tovvne, And svviftly comming dovvne through Brooke-hall parke, Leaues Whethamsted, so called of the corne: By Bishops-Hatfield then they come along, Seated not farre from antient Verolane: His Citie, that first did spend his blessed life, In iust maintaining of our Christian faith. When they had past Harting fordbury tovvne, The first arme of increase. A quite contrarie course they doe finde out: And though it were some labour gainst the streame, To trace this Riuer, feeding christall Lee: Yet vvorthily they holde their first resolue, And vp by Tewing, vvide of Butlers house, To Digswell haste, vvhere Horsley dvvelt of late: And then to Welwine, passing vvell beknovvne, And noted for a vvorthie stratagem: I meame the Danes, vvho on S. Bryces night, Were stoughtly murdred by their vvomen foes: To Whitwell short, vvhereof doth burbling rise The spring; that makes this little riuer runne. Thence backe againe vnto the chiefest tovvne;
Of all the shire, and greatest of accompt, Defended with a Castle of some strength, Well walled, dyched, and amended late, By her, the onely mirror of the world, Our gracious Queene and Prince ELIZABETH. Not far from hence, stands many a milkewhite Swanne, Attending for to entertaine their Prince: Among the which, was one of chiefe accompt, That busked vp his winges in greatest pride, And so salutes this worthie companie: And with a speeche that well did him beseeme, He tels hovv that neere Walkhorne Capels seate, The Bene doth rise, and giues his proper name The se∣cond. To Bgton, and so to Watton runnes: And then by Staplefrd, to Beneghoo heere, Where vve, vvith all the Svvannes and Cignets both, That liue in Bene, doe rest at your command. Right graciously the Princes tooke his speeche: And so departed towardes Edwardes Ware, But ere they come vnto the Mead or Laund, Where Venus first did put them in estate, They passed vp a riuer of good depth, The third. The greatest branch that feedeth christall Lee: With speedie pace (as Svvannes doe vse to svvimme) They passe to Wadesmill, and to Thundrich Church, And so to Standon, honoured vvith the house Of vvorthie Sadler Knight, and Counseller To all the children of King Henry seuenth: Whose sonne suruiuing, holdes the verie path, That leades to vertue and to honours throne. By Puckhridge likevvise they doe svvify passe: And so to Horne-meade more and lesse, and then To Withhall, to Buckland and to Barckway both, Where is the head and verie vtmost bound Of this surpassing cleere and goodly streame. Returning backe againe, the companie
Were ? And this vvas done least that They should passe by the guested towne of ▪ Thus ordered, they come by  house, That vvhilom was the rothers place. Then by the Crowne, and all the  of Ware. And so approching to the late built bridge, They see the barges lading malt ▪ And people wondering at so great a troope: Among the which, a man whose  heares Seem'd to excell the whitenesse of the rest, Bespake them thus. Long haue I liued, and by this bridge was boe, Yet neuer saw I such a companie: So well beseene, so ordered, and so faire: Nay (as I thinke) the age that is by past, Nor yet the same that after shall in Neuer beheld, nor lookt vpon the like, The people listened to this aged man, As one they loued, and held in . A ri let or rill. And as they stoode, behold a sodaine ▪ From South-side of the bridge, hard by the same, Two goodly Swannes, with Cignets full fifteene Presents themselues, and theirs vnto the Prince: Excusing well their slackenesse, and offence In not appearing at their first command. The Queene beholding such a goodly broode, Receiu'd them all, and pardoned euerie misse: Demanding where they vs'd▪ and all their state, After a becke in signe of humble thankes, The Cocke made answere with a modest grace. A place there is, not farre from hence (O king) A chalkie hill, beneath the same a hole, Cal'd Chadwell head, whence issues out  streae, That runnes behind broad Meade that you see heere: A little rill, yet great inough for vs,
And these our breede, yet (gratious Prince) A tale there is deliuered vnto vs From hand to hand, how that a hunted ducke, Diuing within this Chalk-well head or hole, Was forced vnderneath the hollow ground To swimme along by waies that be vnknowne: And afterward at Amwell spring (they say) Was taken vp all fetherlesse and bare. The King and Lordes tooke pleasure at the tale: And so made haste quite through the arched bridge, To Amwell, when they easilie did espie The spring and rill that comes out of the hill: The fifth. And is supposed to rise at Chadwell head. Beneath the same comes downe a little streame That fosters Svvannes, and comes from Haddam small: And so by Haddam, vvhere the Bishops house Hath bene of long, and so to Wydford towne: The sixth. And here at Amwell falles into the riuer Lee. Then troupes this traine to Stanstead, called Le Thele, And Stanstead where as Bashe did lately build, Whose sonne yeeldes hope of vertue worth the place, And liuinges which his father purchast him. And here againe out of the kingly streame They passe by Raydon through little Estwyke quite: The seuenth. Then they salute Hunsdon the nurserie And foster house of thrise renowmed Svvannes: Whose honour, and vvhose noble progenie Giues glorie to that honourable house: Lord, hovv they liue all glorious as the sunne, With tipes, and titles fit for their degree, As kinsmen to our most redoubted Queene, And men of high desert vnto the state. From hence to Sapsford, and to Starford, cald The Bishops: then to Farnam and to Maundes, And so to Clauering, vvhere it riseth first, And then comes dovvne againe into the Lee.
From Ssted vnto Hodsden goe these Svvannes, From  to Broxborne, and to Wormley vvood And so salute the holy house of Nunnes, That late belongd to captaine Edward Dennie, A knight in Ireland of the best accompt Who late made execution on our foes, 1588. I meane of Spanyardes, that vvith open armes Attempted both against our Queene and vs: There novv lord Talbot keepes a noble house: Novv see these Svvannes the nevv and vvorthie seate Of famous Cicill, treasoror of the land, Thebals. Whose vvisedome, counsell, skill of Princes state The vvorld admires, then Svvannes may doe the same: The house it selfe doth shevve the ovvners vvit, And may for bevvtie, state, and euery thing, Compared be vvith most vvithin the land. Downe all along through Waltham street they passe, And vvonder at the ruines of the Abbay, Late supprest, the vvalles, the vvalkes, the monumentes, And euerie thing that there is to be seene: Among them all a rare deuise they see, But nevvly made, a vvatervvorke: the locke Through vvhich the boates of Ware doe passe vvith malt, This locke containes tvvo double doores of vvood, Within the same a Cesterne all of Plancke, Which onely fils vvhen boates come there to passe By opening anie of these mightie dores vvith sleight, And strange deuise, but novv decayed sore. And as they stayed here, thy chaunst to see The stately crosse of Elnor, Henries vvife. Then Enfield house that longes vnto our Queene, They all behold, and vvith due reueuerence Salute the same. From hence by Hackney, Leyton, and old-Foord, They come to Stratford, cal'd also the Bovve: And vnderneath the bridge that thvvartes the streame
And partes the shires of Middle sex, and E both▪ At last (though long and wearie was the They come vnto the mouth of riuer Lee Where all the Svvannes of that part of the Th Attend to see this royall companie: So that from Woolwich to Blackwall vvas seene Nor vvater, nor the medowes thereabout▪ For looke hovv in a frostie night or day. When Snovve hath fallen thicke vpon the ground, Eche gasing eye is daseled vvith the sight, So Lillie-white vvas land and strand beseene With these faire Svvannes, the birdes of louely loue. After a noyse in signe of passing ioy, A Svvane of Thames inuites the King and Queene Vpon a day prefixt, to see and celebrate The marriage of tvvo Riuers of great name. Which granted, euerie one departes his vvay, The King and Queene againe into their Lee: Where yet they liue  and happie state, Or if not so, they dyate. FINIS.
A COMMENTARIE OR EXPO∣sition of certaine proper names vsed in this Tale. HArtfoord-shire: so called of the town. Hartfoord. King Alfred was the first that de∣uided this Land into Shires, Hun∣dreds,  Te, hereby hee re∣pressed the ges and s which the English men (following therein the Danes) committed one vpon another. Hee appointed that e∣uery man should  in some hundred or tenthe, and if he were accused of any offence, if he found not in his hundred or tenth a sucrie or pledge for hunself, he was grie∣uously punished: hereby he brought to passe, that hanging gol∣den bracelets by cros-waies, there was none dust steale or take them away. This Shire aboundeth in penty of corne, pasture, medowes, water and woods: and hath  120 Parishes. Lee, called also Lygan, Lygean and Luy. Lee. Caister. Caister. A riuer in Boetia, where is supposed the airest and largest Swannes doo breede. Fanshaw. One of the remembrancers of her Maiesties court . of er er, and one that especially ten∣dereth the  of Ware, whereof he hath purchased the Lord∣ship. Ware. ded in the yeare of our Lod 914. by R. Edward Ware. the sonne of R. Alred. This towne since th  theeof,
hath greatly increased, and by procuring to themselues the free passage of their bridge, greatly hindred the Shire-towne of Hartford: For in old time the bridge was chained and kept by the Bailiefe of Hartford, but in the time of King Iohn, when the Barons warred one against another, and against the King himselfe. The townesmen trusting to their Lord Wake, brake the chaine, and haue euer since enioyed their pas∣sage, whereby it is greatly encreased, and is likely still to doo aswell, for that by means of the Lord Treasaurer, the riuer is made passable for boates and barges, as also through the dili∣gence of the Townesmen, who, with helpe of M. Fanshaw haue erected a newe markette house, with entent to procure cer∣taine Fayres to be helde there yeerely. The Bridge was reedi∣fied lately, and the arches made of stone at the charges, viz. 140. poundes geuen by her Maiestie. The rest by the towne and Countrie. Thames, the chiefest riuer of England: the name is deriued Thames. of Tame and Isis, which rising in Glocester-shire, runneth to the towne of Tae, where ioyning together, they make the Thames, whereof read Leland or M. Harison in his descrip∣tion of Britaine. Seuerne, a riuer that arriseth in Wales, passeth by Mount∣gomery, Seuerne, Shrewsburie, Brydgenorth, Bewdly, Worcester▪ Glo∣cester, and Bristoll: it parteth Wales and the West countrey, and falleth into the sea betwyxt Mylford hauen and Padstow: The course of this Riuer, as also the rest require a speciall treatise, Humber, or rather Hull, falleth into the Sea at Rauen∣spur, Humer, and ariseth out of sundrie Riuers, whose confluence make a mighty water▪ &c. Trent is one of the most excellent riuers in England, and Trent. as M. Harison saith, increased with so many Waters, as it seemeth, it may becompared with Seuerne or Owse, of which Riuer, whosoeuer is desirous to see or read more, may find the same in M. Harisons workes, and therefore I omit to speake further of it.
Cynthia, the Moone. Endymion, a shepheard, who (as the Poets faine) was cast Cynthia, a sleepe vpon the hill Latmos an hundred yeares by the Moone, to the intent she might inioy his loue. Uerolane, called by Antonine, Uerolanium, of Tacitus, Uerulanium, of Ptolomy, Uerolanium: The Sarons called it Verolane. Watlingchester of the high-way called Watlingstreete, & Wer∣lanchester of the riuer Werlam that ran by it. And yet it's cal∣led Verulam, albeit there be nothing left but the ruines and rub∣bish of the walles. It hath bene a citie in olde time of great and especiall account, well walled, and defended with a great fishing pond, which wel neer did compasse it. There is yet to be seene (as M. Camden saith) ancient coyne with this inscription, Tasc Verul: which Doctor Powell interpreteth to be Tributum Ve∣rulamij for Tasc in walsh signifieth tribute, and Tascia a tri∣bute penie. This citie was greatly distressed in the time of Ne∣ro the Emperour, by the warres which Bundwica the Queene made against the Romans, as may easily appeare to such as be any thing at all conuersant in reading the Romane histories: yet did it flourish againe, and continued in good estate, and a∣mong other thinges famous, for bringing foorth to the world, Albon the Prothomartir, or first martyr of this land, of whome M. Gerard Leigh in his accidence of armorie wryteth. Albon was knight of the Bath, and Lord of Uerolane, nowe called Saint Albons: who in his youth, for the honour of this realme made a royall chalenge of Iustes at Rome, and did there other Knightly disportes in Armour, where hee had onelye the prise, and was made Knight by Dyoclesian then Empe∣rour of Rome, who had this Realme then in subiection. This Albon was Prince of Knightes, and soueraigne Steward of Brittaines: and after was conuerted to the faith of Christ by Amphybalus that holy Knight, who went to Rome with Bassianus the Sonne of Seuerus in the com∣panie of 1500 of the chiefe Lordes sonnes of Britaine and Cornewall, where Zepherinus then Bishop, priuily instru∣cted him in the fayth of Christ, which, at his returne, he taught
to Albon in such sort, that openly professing the same, they were in the time of the  Dsian th martired. Wher∣of you may reade in Gldas and Bede. After this, the Citie was yet in good estate, vntill the time of the , when Oct and Oesa taking it for their refuge, were besieged by Vther Pendragon, w brake the es and defaced it. Ater this, by Ltle and Litle it langshed, so that it became a deane or harbour of theeues and  vntill King Offa, about the yeare of our Lord 793. ded an Aey in honor of S. A bon, in a place calld : henceforth the olde citie decaied, and S. Abons flourished. And Alfricke the seuenth Abbot of the house, bought the fishing pond of the King: and for that the Fisher∣men dayly endoaged the religious people, it was with great st drayed, & made drie. There remaineth at this day a street in S. Albons, called Fishpole street: and for that there hath bene foud about the Citie, AAnchors keles of beates, old nailes and such trash, some haue supposed the Thames to haue runne that way, which errour grewe by corruption of Gyldas booke, where he mentioneth of S. Albons death: but it is not so: but heare what ancient recordes doo testifie concerning the same. In the tune of Kng Edgar, when Aegelred was Abbot, he caused the ruines of Verolane to be searched, the vaultes to bee vncouered, and the pauements to be digged vp: where he found Pillers, peeces of antique worke, thresholds, door-frames, pil∣lers for windowes of fine masonrie worke, some of Porphyrte, some Touch, some Alablaster, all which were verte conuenient for his purpose: besides, hee found sockets of Lattyn, and of brasse, with diuers other thinges which hee reserued towardes the foundation of a new abbey, which he intended to build. But being preuented by death, Edmerus his successor digged a∣gaine, and found Idols, Altars richly couered, Iugs and cruses wih puts, some of wood, some stone, and some gold, artificially wrught and caed. And proceeding farther, hee found pots of gold, siluer, and some of brasse, some with coyne, and some with bones and ashes of such as haue bene burned or buried: all which were reserud, and the mettels melted, and kept for this
new▪  which  at last  was great store of ges and old pleges, and the new towne of S. Albons dayly more and more increased, famous as well for the , as also for two notble fought there, the  betwixt the two great huses of York and : Thus much of Verone whereof more might be said, which for  sa . Bishop Hatfield or Hethfield. Iohn Morton bishop of Ely Bishops Hat∣field, o Heth∣field Hdon. builded thre a house which nowe belongeth to her .   as Leland▪  belonged once to th   Beryers from the to the Howards, Th.  ,  suspectg that a tow of the house would all by reason of the height, tooke downe a part therof. And king Henrie the eight making an exchange with the Duke, newly reeded the house sinc whose time it is honred with the title of a Bar, which Henry Cary, Lord Chamberlaine of her Muest hous∣hold, efetenant of Northfolke and Suffolke, and Captaine of Barwike at this day enioyeth. Hartford called by Antonine & the Romans, Durocobriuas, Hartfoord. the  or Welen called waer Du Co, & Briua, them as also  the signifieth ouer the water, as Briua Odera, Briua Iara which signifie passages ouer riuers of the same name. The Saxons called it Herud∣ford as in one booke remaining with Iohn Stowe (a diligent earcher and reseruer of antities, it is written Hford. Bed in the fourth booke of his  history ∣neth how Theodorus Archbishop of Canterb held or prociall counsell at Herudford, Anno. 670. but now it is corruptly (as I thinke) called Hartford, which Leland inter∣preteth Cer vad the toord of  it hath  in olde time of good account, as well by  of the  also, of the  the Castel was  first by Edard  in the ninth yeare of his raige as Henry Hungton saith, whose wordes ,  Anno.  sui construx Hrefor∣dium castrum no  sed pulcherium tamen in∣ter , , & sed clarissima tamen. This castle hath
by the Clares, and then by the Dukes of Lancaster, for Roger de Clare in Henry the second his time was created Erle of Hart∣ford. And Robert Fitzwalter that came of the same house in king Steuens time did boldly affirme that the keeping of the Castle did of right belong vnto him: Henry the third gaue the Castle with the honour belonging to it to William Ualence Erle of Penbroke, Anno. 1247. After it fell to the Dukes of Lancaster, who vsed to lodge at it verie often. In the yeare of our Lord 1357, the Queene of Scottes, sister to king Edward the third departed this life, lying at Hartford with her sister in law, the Queene of England, and in the yeare 1458 for a fray made in Fleetestreet in London, the king sent the principals of Clifford, Furniuall, and Barnardes In, as prisoners to Hart∣ford castle. King Henry the sixt vsed often to keepe his Christ∣mas there: and to conclude, king Edward the sixt was nursed and schooled there. The priorie was builded by Ralfe Lord Lymesoy, who came into England with William the Conquerour, and was (as the Monkes reported) his sisters sonne. The townesmen of late haue procured to themselues a new corporation, and haue on the Saterday a good market and eue∣ry yeare three faires. In Edward the 3. time, as I haue seene in an olde record, they had two markets in the weeke and but two fayres. In the time of Henry the eight viz. 1507 there was a paper Mill at Hartford, and belonged to Iohn Tate, whose father was Mayor of London. Waltham, a market towne: the Abbay was builded by king Harold, who shortly after hee had built it was slaine by Waltham William the conqueror, his mother with great and earnest sie obtained his body, and intoumbed the same in the Abbay. Aelners Crosse cōmonly called Waltham crosse. K. Henry the first set it vp in memory of his wife (who died in Lincoln∣shire) Alnors Crosse. and wheresoeuer her body was caried, there hee erected a crosse with the armes of England, Castile and Pontoys, geuen n the same, of which the crosse in Chepe, and Charing crosse be two of the fayrest.
TO HIS BELOUED FATHER IOHN Valans, W. U. wisheth the grace of God with health and prosperitie. THe dutie (deare Father) I owe vn∣to you, the regard of my promise, to∣gether with the remēbrance of your reasonable request, doo not a litle mooue me to write a few words con∣cerning the matter whereof, at my being with you last, weth cer∣taine of our friendes talked, A  am well assured that you re∣member what a styr N. B. kept, when I said that shippe had bene at Ware, affyrming, how it was vnpossible that that riuer which but of late was scarce able to beare a smal whyrrie, shold in times past beare: big and mighty ships. Truly his wordes were many & great, but his reasons were smal. And since that, at that time I promised to send you in a letter a plaine and eui∣dent prooffe of those words which there I vttered, I doubt not but in these few lines fully to satisfie, not only your request, but also your mind, and confirme you in that opinion which fewe men (vnlesse such as be altogether ignorant of the matter, and of the place) wil denie. And for so much as the cause for which the ships went thether, and what they did there, then will I plainly prooue both by auchoritie and examples, that it is like∣y that they were ther. Lastly, I wil (as my promise was) shew you about what time and by whome Ware was builded. That Shippes haue bene at Ware THe Danes (who as Polidor Virgill saith) dwelled in olde time beyond Ister, but now be they inhabitants of the Ger∣mane Ocean or Denmark, perceiuing how that their Coun∣try was ouermuch pressed with the great multitude of people yt in habited ye same, determined to subdue the land, to driue out ye
Englishmen, and to plant themselues and thir posterity for e∣uer  the same: for perfourming and accomplishing. whereof, they armed great store of chosen souldiers: who about the yeare 832. in 34. shippes entered the riuer of Thames, landed by great force, spoiled, fired, & wasted the country so far, that Eg∣bert who then was king of the more part of England, was fame with an hoast of men to succour and relieue hs dstressed subiectes. But such was the will of God for the punishment of sinne that then was rise, that the kinge ioining battaile with the Danes, was by them discomfited and put to flight. After this battile, the Danes were so encouraged, that they  out of thee countrie like farmes of Bees,  that if  one weeke there were fiue thousand of thei , yet in the werke following ther would come eight thousand more to supply their roomes. They were oftentime discomfited, and the greater part of them driuen bke by diuers akant kinges and princes, bu yet by reason of their often arriuall, therr force was still in∣creased and maintained. One while they arriued in one place, & then in another, spoiling, burning, & killing all they could come by. I were too long to tell, and verie grieuous it is to thinke how religion was decaied, learning forgotten, all partes & quar∣ters of the Realme wasted and spoiled: howe cities, townes, churches, abbes & religious ouses were consumed with fire & flame, how miserablie the Commons were afflicted, how piti∣fully men, women and children, and all fortes of people went to wracke, how wonderfully the kinges themselues were amased, the coning of their enemies being both suddaine and violent: how crelly fire and sword, famine and death raged thorow out the land heauen and earth intending as it were the fatall destru∣ction and vtter dcay of the realme. This miserie continued the space of 300 and ddde yeares, within which yeares, namely a∣bout the yeare of our Lord 217 the 23 yeare of King▪ Alfreds rns a great armie of Danes hauing reeiued an ouerthrow at a place caed Butington beside Seuethe, fled into east Eng∣land, and there wintered, and prepared a great hoast againe out of Northumberland and other places, leauing there their wiues and children, together with their money, shippes and munition,
in east England, and with great speed got to the Citie of  (which at that e was delate, the inhabtes ha∣uing for feare of the Danes forsaen it) or euer king Alfred & Ethered the vnder king with their armies could ouertake the. And yet such was the  that king Alfred this purs, that or euer his enemes had  the , he wth hs companie tooke a great deale of their criage with all the boo∣ties of  and other thinges that they in their iourney by robbing and spoyling had obtained and driuen away. Hee also besieged the citie two or three daies, but perceuing it woulde finally auaile, he was fane (a grieuous thing to heare) to burn vp the greatest pate of the corne that grewe there aboutes and bestow the rest amongst his horses, least his enemies shoulde haue the fruit and commoditie thereof. The Danes perceiuing that, and seeing there was nothing left whereof they might liue in those partes, departed from thence, and in great hase got them to north Wales, where they spoyled and hartied the countrie farre and neere, driuing away great booties of Cartel, and carrieng with them rich spoiles. From hence they departed And because for feare of the Mercians they durst not traueile that way, they coasted along the countrie till they came to Nor∣thumberland, and so through middle England, taking the shippes their wues & children out of cast England with them, they arriued at a little Island scuate in the Sea, in the east part of Essex called Merseyge. From thence they departed and came into the riuer of Thames, and seeing that Winter was now at hand, they drew or rowed their shippes vp the riuer Lygean. And twentie miles from London they began to buylde a Fort, which being finished, they taried there all that wynter, spoyling, robbing and burning those quarters without mercy. When Winter was past, a great part of the Citizens of Lon∣don, with those that inhabited neere thereaboutes traueiled thether, and by force minded to breake downe the Fort or mu∣nition which they had there buylded. But the Danes stoutlye resisted them, and not far from the place gaue them a sharpe battaile, where the Christians were put to flight, and foure of King Alfreds men were slaine.
Thus the pagane or heathen Danes remained Lordes or maisters of those quarters, compelling the husbandmen to eare and till the ground, meaning themselues to reape the commo∣ditie of it. But the good King Alfred, who alwaies was care∣full for the welfare of his subiectes, gathered an armie, and be∣fore haruest time pitched his tents neer to the place of their a∣bode. By whose comming, the enemies were so affraid, that they durst not once peepe out of their hold to fetch either cattell or corne out of the fields by force. In this space, it happened on a time, as the King rode alongst by the riuer side, he viewed the water, and perceiued how that in some places of it, the cha∣nell might easily bee stopped, and the streame made lesse. Whereupon he (as Huntington writeth) caused it to bee cut in∣to three seuerall braunches or armes: but howsoeuer it was, hee so weakened the streame, that the Danes could not bring back their ships the same way they came. Which thing the Danes perceiuing, and knowing well it was in vaine for them to abide any longer there, they left their Shippes, and fled by land as fast as they could to Quatbridge, sending their wiues and chil∣dren againe into east England. After this the king departed, and the Londoners and Countrimen seeing the Danes were gone, burst downe their Holde, and got some of their ships backe againe to London, and the rest they burned and brake all to peeces. But here peraduenture you will aske me, howe I shoulde come by the knowledge of these thinges, beeing done so many hundred yeares agoe. To this I answere, that in things that were done long before any man that is now liuing can remem∣ber, wee must credit that our Fathers haue committed to wri∣ting concerning the same. And in my opinion, the neerer the re∣porter liueth to those times in which the thinges he speaketh or writeth of were done, the more credite is to bee geuen to him. And as concerning this matter, it is confirmed by the reporte of a verie auncient, reuerent and and learned Wry∣ter, namely Asserus Meneuensis, Bishop of Saint Da∣uies, that liued in the verie selfe same time when these thinges
were done, and Maryanus Scotus who liued and wrote a chro∣nicle at least 500. yeares ago, as Florentinus a Monk of Wor∣cester, who continued it, doth witnesse and declare. Besides di∣uers others of great antiquitie and credite as Henry of Hun∣tington, Mathew of Westminster, and manie moe, who de all confirme that which is before declared. Besides there remay∣neth yet the ruines of an old Castle or Fort betweene Hartford Castle and the Mill, which I doe vndoubtedly beleeue was the verie selfe same Fort that the Danes builded. Moreouer, O. Crosse did credibly enrine me that at ye buil∣ding of Stansted bridge, there were found within the riuer, pee∣ces of broken ships or Craets, nayles and other thinges which seemed to belong to some great shippes or vessels. All which thinges considered, together with the parting of the streame before remembred, me thinkes should be sufficient to confirme your minde, and cause you to beleeue that there haue bene ships at Ware and Hartford. Hereunto may bee added that it was a common vse of the Danes to row or drawe vp their ships into some smaller creeke or riuer where that they might ride all winter with least dan∣ger. And time worketh some alteration both by water and by land, yt where great riuers did somtimes run, nowe it is vtterlie drie, and in stead of maine waters we haue goodly & florishing Meades. And in like sort, where goodly cities and castels some times did stand, there now groweth corne. For examples of this we need not seeke farre, since yt in London not aboue 277. yeeres ago namely in the yeere of our Lord 1300. when Henry Waleys was Mayor of the citie there ran a riuer through Walbrook wt two bridges ouer it, whereof William Iordan and Iohn de Be∣uer were maisters and gouernours. What is become of the ri∣uer Wer. that ran by S. Albons of which the great city that in old time stood there, took the name and was called Werlamche∣ster, whereof Leland in his cōmentaries maketh mention, con∣cerning cities the diligent reader of chronicles shal meet with ye names of many, of which ther is at this day no rubbish nor ruin to be seen, as Andres Chester▪ yt stood in Sussex on ye edge of the great wood called Andreds weale of Ihancester, yt stood in the
Panta i Essex;  of innite e, of which as I sayd, ther is left n tken, but as the Poet saith Est  vb . Thus haue you heard (deare father) both the doings of the Danes not only in Engl▪ ut lso what they made in those  of the d wherof e talked, and where you dwel. There  now to write  ou as , how kg  is  Ware was built, nd in what ges dies the same was e, of which I  to say no more then that which hath bene alreadie written by such as haue in their histories and chro∣les made metion o sh  as were builded by king Edward  aboute; I cannot but much mislik that affirme that the towne of Hartford was  by king Edward the rst before the conquesh: Seem  by the very wordes of Huntington it appeareth that it was ut the Castell that he builded, for we read in Beda his histoy  a counsel of Bishops that was b at Hartford lg bef Edwardes time, this castle I meane of Hartford was builded  the yeare of our Lord 12, by Edward the se of king Al∣, and two yeares after hee builded a towe n the North  of Lee which is the same tht I doe take  be Ware and ws in hand when Witham in Essex was also beg yeres since. Thus much (father) for this time. I thoug vnto you concerning this matter; thing doub∣ bu  herereafter when all thinges be finished that by  of the Lord Treasurer, maister Fanshaw and other  m  in hard for the amendement and scing  riuer, you and I both shall see, though not shippes, yet  bg boates and vessels passe too and fro betwxt London  Ware to the commoditie and profite of the whole countrey, whh God graunt. Your obedient sonne W. Vallans, FINIS.
