24832 99842616 7284
A TRVE AND SINCERE declaration of the purpose and ends of the Plantation begun in Ʋirginia, of the degrees which it hath receiued; and meanes by which it hath beene aduanced: and the resolution and conclusion of his Maiesties Councel of that Colo∣ny, for the constant and patient prosecution there∣of, vntill by the mercies of GOD it shall retribute a fruitful haruest to the king∣dome of heauen, and this Com∣mon-Wealth. Sett forth by the authority of the Go∣uernors and Councellors es∣tablished for that Plantation. A word spoken in due season, is like apples of Gold, with pictures of siluer. Prouer. 25. 11. Feare is nothing else, but a betraying of the suc∣cors which reason offereth. Wis. 17. 11. AT LONDON, Printed for I. Stepneth, and are to be sold at the signe of the Crane in Paules Churchyard. 1610.
A true and sincere declaration of the purpose & ends of the Plantation begun in Virginia; of the degrees which it hath receiued; and meanes by which it hath bene aduanced: And the resolution and conclusion of his Maiesties Councell of that Colony, for the constant and patient prose∣cution thereof, vntill by the mercies of God it shall retribute a fruitfull haruest to the Kingdom of Heauen, and to this Com∣mon-wealth. IT IS RESERVED, AND onely proper to Diuine wise∣dome to fore-see and or∣daine, both the Endes and Wayes of euery action. In hu∣maine prudence it is all can be required, to propose Religious and Noble, and Feasable ends; & it can haue no absolute assu∣rance, and infalliblenesse in the Waies and Meanes, which are contingent, and various, perhaps equally reasonable, subiect to vnpre∣sent circumstances, and doubtfull euents, which euer dignifie, or beetray the Councells,
from whence they were deriued. And the higher the quality, and nature, and more re∣moued from ordinary action (such as this is, of which we discourse) the more perplexed and misty are the pathes there-vnto. Vpon which Grounds, we purpose to deliuer round∣ly and clearely, our endes and Wayes to the hopefull Plantations begun in Virginia: and to examine the truth, and safety of both, to re∣deeme our selues and so Noble an action, from the imputations and aspertions, with which ignorant rumor, virulent enuy, or impi∣ous subtilty, daily callumniateth our indus∣tries, and the successe of it: wherein we doubt not, not only to satisfie euery modest and wel∣affected heart of this Kingdome; but to excite and kindle the affections of the Incredulous, and lazy; and to coole and asswage the curio∣sity of the iealous, and suspitious; & to temper and conuince, the malignity of the false, and treacherous. The Principall and Maine Ends (out of which are easily deriued to any meane vnderstanding infinit lesse, & yet great ones) weare first to preach, & baptize into Christian Religion, and by propagation of that Gospell, to recouer out of the armes of the Diuell, a num∣ber of poore and miserable soules, wrapt vpp vnto death, in almost inuincible ignorance; to
endeauour the fulfilling, and accomplishment of the number of the elect, which shall be ga∣thered from out all corners of the earth; and to add our myte to the treasury of Heauen, that as we pray for the comming of the king∣dome of glory, so to expresse in our actions, the same desire, if God haue pleased, to vse so weak instruments, to the ripening & consum∣mation thereof. Secondly, to prouide and build vp for the publike Honour and safety of our gratious King and his Estates (by the fauor of our Superiors euen in that care) some small Rampier of our owne, in this opportune and generall Summer of peace, by trans-planting the rancknesse and multitude of increase in our people; of which there is left no vent, but age; and euident danger that the number and infinitenesse of them, will out-grow the matter, whereon to worke for their life, and sustentation, and shall one infest and become a burthen to another. But by this prouision they may bee sea∣ted as a Bulwarke of defence, in a place of aduantage, against a stranger enemy, who shall in great proportion grow ritch in treasure, which was exhausted to a lowe estate; and may well indure an increase of his people long wasted with a continuall
warre, and dispersed vses and losses of them: Both which cannot choose but threaten vs, if wee consider, and compare the ends, ambi∣tions and practises, of our neighbour Coun∣tries, with our owne. Lastly, the apparance and assurance of Pri∣uate commodity to the particular vndertakers, by recouering and possessing to them-selues a fruitfull land, from whence they may furnish and prouide this Kingdome, with all suchCopper, Iron. Steele, Timber for shipps, Yards, Masts. Cordage, Sope-ashes. necessities, & defects vnder which we labour, and are now enforced to buy, and receiue at the curtesie of other Princes, vnder the bur∣then of great Customes, and heauy impositi∣ons, and at so high rates in trafique, by reason of the great waste of them from whence they are now deriued, which threatens almost an impossibilty long to recouer them, or at least such losse in exchange, as both the kingdome and Merchant, will be weary of the deerenesse and perrill. These being the true, and essen∣tiall ends of this Plantation, and correspon∣ding to our first rule, of Religious, Noble, and Feaseable, two of which are not questioned, the third easie, and demonstrable in the se∣cond limme, when wee shall examine the cau∣ses of some disaster and distemper in the wayes vnto them: These beeing admitted of,
for such as we pretend them to bee, and stand∣ing yet firme and safe in them-selues, we hope easily to iustifie the first part of our vnder∣taking, and presume to auerre, that in this branche there ariseth to no peaceable man, any scruple or doubt, to suspect the issue, or to with-draw his affection and assistance, or to Callumniat the Proiect, or our choise of it. In discussion and examination of the second part, which is the wayes, by which wee hope to arriue at these ends, and in which no hu∣maine reason can so prouide but that many circumstances, and accidents, shall haue as great a stroake in the euent, as any Councell shall haue; wee must first briefly deliuer the course of this Plantation, from the Infancie there∣of; and then let vs equally consider, whether from so small a roote, it hath not had a blessed and vnexpected growth: Next, wee will call before vs all the obiections, and confesse in∣genuously all the errors & discouragements, which seeme to lye so heauie, as almost to presse to death this braue and hopefull acti∣on; and releeue it, wee doubt not, from that, which with reasonable men, can at most bee but a pause, and no entire desertion, and restore it to the Primarie estate, lîfe, and reputation.
In the yeare 1606. Captaine Newport, with three ships, discouered the Bay of Chessiopeock in the height of thirty seauen degrees of Northerly latitude, and landed a hundred per∣sons of sundry qualities and Arts, in a Riuer falling into it; and left them vnder the Go∣uernment of a President and Councell, accord∣ing to the authority deriued from, and limit∣ted by his Maiesties Letters Pattents. His re∣turne gaue vs no hope of any extraordinary Consequence, yet onely vpon report of the Nauigablenesse of the Riuer, pleasure, fertility, and scituation of the land, to our proiected ends, wee freshly and cheerefully sent in the next yeare a like number: and yet also re∣ceiuing nothing new, wee had courage and constancie to releeue them the third time, with one hundred more: at which returne ex∣perience of error in the equality of Gouer∣nors, and some out-rages, and follies commit∣ted by them, had a little shaken so tender a bo∣dy; after Consultation and aduise of all the inconueniences in these three supplies, and finding them to arise out of two rootes, the forme of Gouernment, and length and danger of the passage, by the Southerly course of the Indyes: To encounter the first, wee did resolue and obteine, to renew our Letters Pattents,
and to procure to our selues, such ample and large priuiledges and powers, by which wee were at liberty to reforme and correct those already discouered, and to preuent such as in the future might thteaten vs; and so, to sett and furnish out vnder the Conduct of one able and absolute Gouernor, a large sup∣ply of fiue hundred men, with some number of families, of Wife, Children, and Seruants, to take fast holde and roote in that land, and this resolution was with much alacritie and confidence. And to meete the second Incon∣uenience, wee did also prepare to sett out, one small shipp, for discouery of a shorter way, and to make tryall of the Fishing within our Bay, and Riuer. Hetherto, vntill the sending of this Auisall for experience, and Fleete for setling the Go∣uernment, appeares no distaste, nor despaire; for euery supply in some respect, was grea∣ter then other, and that in preparation grea∣ter then them all in euery respect, and must in reason hold Anologie and proportion with our expectations and hopes at the dis-inbo∣ging of it. So that what-so-euer wound or Palsie this Noble action hath gotten, & the sicknesse vn∣der which it seemes to faint, must needs arise
out of the successe of these two: which wee will now examine apart with all equitye and cleerenesse, and waigh, whither there bee any such reason, to desist from the prosecution thereof, in rectified iudgement; or to fall so lowe in our resolutions, and opinions of it, as rumor and ignorance doth pretend wee doe, or haue cause to doe. For the Discouerie, Captaine Argoll recei∣ued our Commission vnder our Seale, with instruction (to auoide all danger of quarrell with the Subiects of the King of Spaine) not to touch vpon any of his Dominions actu∣ally possessed, or rightly entituled vnto, and to shape his course free from the roade of Pyrotts, that hang vpon all streights and skirts of lands; and to attempt a direct and cleare passage, by leauing the Canaries to the East, and from thence, to runne in a streight Westerne Course, or some point neere there-vnto. And so to make an ex∣perience of the Windes and Currents which haue affrighted all vnder-takers by the North. By which discouery, there would growe to vs much securitie, and ease, and all occasion of offence remooued, and wee should husband and saue a moyetie of the charge in victuall and freight, which
was expended, and lost in the South erne passage. To these endes hee sett sayle from Ports∣mouth the fift day of May; and shaping his course South-south-west to the height of thirty degrees, leauing the Canaries a hun∣dred leagues to the East, hee found the windes large, and so tooke his course direct West, & did neuer turne nearer the South: & beeing in the longitude of the Barmudos hee found the winde a little scant vppon him, yet so, that on the thirteenth of Iuly he recouered our harbor: and in tryall found no currant, nor any thing else which should deter vs from this way. Hee made his iourney in nine weekes, and of that, was becalmed fourteene dayes: wher∣vpon hee hath diuers times since his returne publikely auowed, and vndertaken to make this passage within seauen weekes: and that the windes in all this course, are as variable, as at other places, and no apparant inconue∣nience in the way. So that the maine end of this aduise hath succeeded almost beyond our hopes; The second for fishing, proued so plentifull, especi∣ally of Sturgion,He that went for that pur∣pose dyed in the way. of which sort hee could haue loaded many ships, if he had had, some man of
skill to pickell and prepare it for keeping, whereof he brought sufficient testimony both of the flesh and Caueary, that no discreet man will question the truth of it, so it appeares cleerely that from hence there can bee deri∣ued no cause to susspect or desist from our first endes, but so contrary, that in this pro∣iect both our purposes and waies were happy and successefull euen to our desires. But from this Ship ariseth a rumor of the necessity and distresse our people were found in, for want of victuall: of which, though the noise haue exceeded the truth, yet we doe confesse a great part of it; But can lay aside the cause and fault from the dessigne, truely and home vpon the misgouernment of the Commāders, by dissention and ambition among them∣selues, and vpon the Idlenesse and bestiall slouth, of the common sort, who were actiue in nothing but adhearing to factions and parts, euen to their owne ruine, like men almost desperate of all supply, so consci∣ous, and guilty they were to them-selues of their owne demerit, and lasinesse. But so soone as Captaine Argoll arriued among them, whose presence and example gaue new assurance of our cares, and new life to
their indeauours, by fishing onely in few daies, they were all recouered, growne hearty, able, and ready to vndertake euery ac∣tion: So that if it bee considered that without industry no land is sufficient to the Inhabi∣tants: and that the trade to which they trus∣ted, betrayed them to loose the opportunity of seed-time, and so to rust and weare out them-selues: for the Naturals withdrew from all commerce and trafficke with them, cun∣ningly making a war vpon them, which they felt not, who durst no other-way appeare an enemye: And they beeing at diuision among themselues, and without warrant from hence, could not resolue to inforce that, which might haue preserued them, and which in such a necessity is most lawfull to doe, euery thing returning from ciuill Propryety to Naturall, and Primary Community: Lastly if it bee remembred, that this Extremitie in which they were now relieued, (which is as happy in the presage of Gods future blessing as in his present prouidence and mercy) was but an effect of that, we did fore-see in the first Go∣uernment, and for which the forme was chaunged, and the new in proiect, and ther∣fore cannot bee obiected as any iust excepti∣on to the successe of this, but a consequent
Considered, and digested in the former: It is then I say euident, that in al the progresse of this discouery, or any thing accidentall to it, there cannot bee rack'd nor pressed out any confession, either of error in the ends, or mis∣carriadges in the waies vnto them. To the establishment of a gouernment, such as should meete with all the reuealed incon∣ueniences; wee gaue our Commission to an able & worthy Gentleman, Sr. Thomas Gates, whome we did nominat and appoint sole and absolute Gouernor of that Colony, vnder diuers limitations, & instructions expressed in wri∣ting: and with him wee sent Sir George Sum∣mers Admirall, and Captaine Newport Vice-Admirall of Virginia, and diuers other per∣sons of rancke and quality, in seauen shippes, and two pinnaces, with seuerall Commissions sealed, successiuely to take place one after another, considering the mortality, and vn∣certainty of humaine life, and these to be de∣uided into seuerall ships. Our fleete weighed anchor from Falmouth the eight of Iune, the winde beeing fayre, they shaped a course for the height of the Canaries; within few dayes sayle, the Gouernor calling a Councel of al the Captaines, Maisters and Pilots, it was resolued, they should runne southerly
vnto the Tropicque, and from thence beare away West: (which error will take vpp all the obiections of sicknesse, the sun being then in it, was the cause of all the infection, and dis∣ease of our men) At this consultation, was de∣liuered an instruction vnder seale, to euery Maister, with a prouision what course should bee taken, if the fleete were seperated; which was that if the windes scanted, or were con∣trary, or that any lost sight of the Admirall, they should steere away for the West Indies, and make the Baruada an Iland to the North of Dominico, and there to haue their Rende∣vous, and to stay seauen daies one for ano∣ther. In this height and resolution, short of the West-Indies 150. leagues, on S. Iames day a ter∣rible tempest ouer-took them, and lasted in extremity 48. houres, which scattered the whole fleete, and wherein some of them spent their masts, and others were much distressed: Within three daies foure of the fleete mette in consort, and hearing no newes of their Admirall, and the windes returning large for Virginia, and they wea∣ried and beaten, it was resolued among them, to beare right away for our Bay, and to decline their commission, which
within fewe dayes they made, and arri∣ued in the Kings Riuer, on the eleuenth of August: In this passage, foureteene degrees to the South-ward of Virginia, ran no cur∣rent with them, which should hinder or make difficult that in Proposition by the North-west. Within sixe dayes after came in one, and within fiue, another of our fleete, the Maisters of both hauing fallen vpon the same Councell, by the opportunity of the winde, not to seeke the Baruada, but to steere away for our Harbor, which doubtlesse the Admirall him-selfe did not obserue, but obey∣ed his owne directions, and is the true or probable cause of his beeing cast so farre into suspition; where perhapps bound in with winde, perhaps enforced to stay the Masting or mending of some what in his ship, torne or lost in this tempest, wee doubt not, but by the mercy of God hee is safe, with the Pinnace which attended him, and shall both, or are by this time arriued at our Colony. Not long after these, another of our small Pinnaces, yet also vnaccounted for, recoue∣red the Riuer alone; and now seauen of our Fleete beeing in, they landed in health neere foure hundred persons; who beeing put a shore without their Gouernor, or any order
from him, (all the Commissioners and prin∣cipall persons beeing aboord him,) no man would acknowledge a superior: nor could from this headlesse and vnbrideled multitude, bee any thing expected, but disorder and ry∣ott, nor any councell preuent, or fore-see, the successe of these wayes. Now if wee compare the disasters of this supply, with the maine ends, it will appeare they haue weakened none of them, but that they still remaine safe and feasable, for any thing ariseth in obiection out of them. For that these accidents and contingencies, were euer to bee expected, and a resolution was to bee put on at first, armed against the probabi∣lity of them. Who can auoid the hand of God, or dispute with him? Is hee fitt to vnder-take any great action, whose courage is sha∣ken and dissolued with one storme? Who knows, whither he that disposed of our hearts to so good beginnings, bee now pleased to trye our constancie and perseuerance, and to discerne betweene the ends of our desires, whither Pyety or Couetousnesse carryed vs swifter? For if the first were the principall scope, hence ariseth nothing to infirme or make that impossible: But as it falleth out in businesse of greatest consequence, some∣time
the noblest ends, vpon which wee are most intense, are furthest remooued from the first stepps made vnto them, and must by les∣ser and meaner bee approched; so Plantation of religion beeing the maine and cheefe pur∣pose, admitts many things of lesse and secon∣dary consequence of necessity to bee done before it: for an error or miscarriage in one of which, to desist or staggar, were to betray our principall end cowardly and faintly, and to drawe vpon our selues iust scorne and re∣prehension. Whither we shall discourse out of reason, or example; that euery action hath Proporti∣onall difficulties, to the greatnesse thereof, such as must necessarily bee admitted from the first conception, and such as euen in the passage, dignifie both the actors and the worke, if with prudence they fore-see all the hazards, and with Patence and Constan∣cie, meete and encounter them. It must ey∣ther bee confessed, that it was folly from the Origen and first stepp, not to haue beene pre∣par'd for such as these; or that it is none now, not to quitt it, for them, but the grea∣test of all to say, who would haue expected this? If wee cast our eye vpon the Spanish Conquest of the Indyes, how aboundant their
stories are of Fleets, Battailes, & Armies lost: eighteene vpon the attempt of Guiana, and more then seuentie in both the Indies, and yet with how indefatigable industrye, and prosperous fate, they haue pursued and van∣quished all these, their many Armies main∣tained in Europe, can witnesse, with too la∣mentable an experience. If wee compare the beginnings, they were meaner then ours, and subiect to all the same, and much more vncertainty, If the Religion, which shall crowne the successe, it admitts no Controuersie nor Comparison, among those, to whome we write: if the Commodities, they, which wee haue in assurance and knowledge, are of more necessity, and those in hope equal∣ly rich and aboundant. But to come home to our purpose: that which seemes to disharten or shake our first grounds in this suppyle; ariseth from two principall sources, of which, one was cause of the other; First, the Tempest: and can any man expect an answer for that? next, the absence of the Gouernour, an effect of the former, for the losse of him is in suspence, and much reason of his safetye against some doubt; and the hand of GOD reacheth all the Earth. Now if these two onely bee the maine
crosses, which staggar the feasablenesse, con∣sider that of three voyadges before, no man miscaried in the way, and that all other depend on these, as the misgouernment of our men, their Idlenesse, their want, and the empty returne of out fleet, wherein if wee recouer and correct the Cause, we vanquish al things consequent vnto it, and yet in apparance, if with these wee com∣pare the aduantages which we haue gotten, in the Shortnesse and security of the passadge, in the intelligence of some of our Nation planted by Sir Water Raleigh (yet a liue) within fifty mile of our fort, who can open the wombe and bowells of this country: as is testefied by two of our colony sent out to seeke them, who, (though denied by the Slauages speech with them) found Crosses, & Leters, the Characters & assured Testimonies of Christians newly cut in the barkes of trees:With euery werowan or king, is buried al his wealth, for they be∣leeue that hee that dieth ritchest liueth in another world hapi∣est. if wee consider the assu∣rednesse of the commodities, Wines, Pitch, Sope-ashes, Timber for al vses, Iron, Steele, Copper Dyes, Cordage, Silke-grasse, Pearle, which, (though discoulered and softned by fire, for want of skill in the Naturalls to peirce them) was found in great aboundance in the house of their sepultures. If wee consider I say, and compare these
certainties and truthes, as lesse endes to strengthen, and produce our first and prin∣cipall, with those casuall and accidentall misaduentures and errors, which haue be∣falne vs, before euery equall and resolued heart, they will vanish and become smoake and ayre, and not only keep vpright, but raise our spirits and affections, and reconcile our reasons to our desires. If any obiect the difficulty of keeping that wee shall possesse; if this discourse could admit a disputation of it, it should easilye appeare, that our confidence against any enemy, is built vppon solid and substantiall reason: And to giue some taste thereof; Our enemies must bee eyther the Natiues, or Strangers; Against the first the war would be as easie as the argument. For the second; a few men may dispute the possession of any place wherin they are fortified, where the ene∣my is so much a stranger, as that hee must discouer and fight at once: vpon al dis-aduan∣tages of Streights, Foords, and Woods; and where hee can neuer march with horse, nor with ordinance without them; nor can abide to stay many months, when all his releefe must bee had from his shipps, which cannot long supply a number competent to besiege:
Neither is it possible to blocke vs vp, by planting betweene vs and the Sea, the Riuers beeinge so broad, and so many out-lets from them into the Bay. Besides the protection and priuiledge of Subiects to so Potent a King, whome any wise estate wilbe wary to affront or prouoke. Wee doubt not, but by examination of what is said, our first ends are yet safe, and the waies vnto them in no sort so difficult, as should more affright and deter vs now, then at the first meditation of them. But if these bee not sufficient to satissie, and encourage, euery honest affection we will not so desist, but vrge the necessity of a present supply, to re∣deeme the defects, and misaduentures of the last: that seeing all the dangers and sicknesses haue sprung from want of effecting our purpose of Sending an able Gouernor: wee haue conclu∣ded and resolued to set forth the Right Honor: the Lord de la Warr by the last of Ianuary, and to giue him all the liberties and priuiledges, which wee haue power to deriue vpon him, and to furnish him with all necessaries fit for his quality, person, and the businesse which he shall vndergoe, and so by Gods grace to per∣sist vntill we haue made perfect our good and happy beginnings.
If these shall not yet suffice to resolution, that a Baron and Peere of this kingdom (whose Honour nor Fortune needs not any desperate medecine) one of so approued courage, tem∣per, and experience, shall expose him-selfe for the common-good to al these hazards and paines which we feare and safely talke off,As a doore turneth vpon his hinges, so doth the slug∣gard vpon his bed. that sitt idle at home; & beare a great part vpon his owne charge, and reuiue and quicken the whole by his example, constancy, and resolu∣tion? If you haue no implicite faith nor trust in vs,Prou 26. 14. that gouerne this businesse; to whom there must be some aduantage granted in our prac∣tise, and intelligence (especially in this) aboue ordinary persons; that we haue no will nor in∣tent, to betray our poore Country-men, nor to burthen our owne consciences, nor to draw so iust scorne, and reproach vppon our reputa∣tions? If our knowledge and constant perswa∣sion, of the fruitfulnesse and wholesomnesse of this Land, and of the recompence it shall in time bring to this Kingdome, and to euery particular member of this plantation, be of no authority? If this seem not to you some argu∣ment, that euery man returned is desirous to go backe to that which they account and call their owne home: and doe vppon their liues iustifie, which else they wilfully betray; that if
the Gouernment be settled, and a supply of victuall for one yeare sent, so that they may haue a seed and Haruest before them, they will neuer neede nor expect to charge vs with more expence, for any thing of ne∣cessity to mans life; but they will haue lea∣sure and power, to retribute with infinite aduantage all the cost bestowed vpon them: If all these bee yet too weake to confirme the doubtfull, or awake the drousie, then let vs come nearer, and arise, from their rea∣sons and affections to their Soules, and Conscien∣ces: remember that what was at first but of Conueniency, and for Honor, is now become a case of necessity, and piety: let them consider, that they haue promised to aduenture and not performd it, that they haue encouraged & exposed many of Honorable birth, and which is of more consequence 600. of our Bretheren by our common mother the Church, Chris∣tians of one faith, and one Baptisme to a miserable and vn-euitable death, Let not any man flatter himselfe, that it concernes not him: for hee that forsakes another, whome he may safely releeue, is as guilty of his death as he that can swimme, and forsakes himselfe by refusing, is of his owne.
Let euery man looke inward, and disperse that clowd of auarice, which darkeneth his spirituall sight, and hee will finde there, that when hee shall appeare before the Tribunall of Heauen, it shall be questioned him what hee hath done? Hath hee fed and cloth'd the hun∣gry and naked? It shall be required, what hee hath done for the aduancement of that Gos∣pell which hath saued him; and for the releefe of his makers Image, whome hee was bound to saue: O let there bee a vertuous emulation betweene vs and the Church of Rome, in her owne Glory, and Treasury of good workes! and let vs turne all our contentions vpon the common enemy of the Name of CHRIST. How farre hath shee sent out her Apostles and thorough how glorious dangers? How is it become a marke of Honor to her faith, to haue conuerted Nations, and an obloquie cast vppon vs, that wee hauing the better Vine, should haue worse dressers and husban∣ders of it? If Piety, Honour, Easinesse, Profit, nor Conscience, cannot prouoake, and excite (for to all these wee haue applyed our dis∣course.) Then let vs turne from hearts of Stone and Iron, and pray vnto that mer∣cifull
and tender God, who is both easie & glad to be intreated, that it would please him to blesse and water these feeble beginnings, and that as he is wonderfull in all his workes, so to nourish this graine of seed, that it may spread till all people of the earth admire the great∣nesse, and seeke the shades and fruite thereof: That by so faint and weake indeuors his great Councels may bee brought forth, and his se∣cret purposes to light, to our endlesse com∣forts and the infinite Glorye of his Sacred Name. Amen.
TO render a more particular satisfaction and account of our care, in prouiding to attend the Right Honourable the Lord de la War, in this concluded and present supply, men of most vse and necessity, to the foundation of a Common-wealth; And to auoyde both the scandall and perill, of accepting idle and wic∣ked persons; such as shame, or feare compels into this action; and such as are the weedes and rancknesse of this land; who beeing the surfet, of an able, healthy, and composed bo∣dy; must needes bee the poyson of one so tender, feeble, and yet vnformed: And to di∣vulge and declare to all men, what kinde of persons, as well for their religion and conuer∣sations, as Faculties, Arts, and trades, we pur∣pose to accept of: wee haue thought it conue∣nient to pronounce that for the first prouision, wee will receiue no man, that cannot bring or render some good testimony of his religion to God, and ciuill manners and behauiour to his neighbour, with whom he hath liued; and for the second, wee haue set downe in a Table annexed, the proportion, and number wee will entertaine in euery necessary Arte, vpon proofe and assurance, that euery man shall bee able to performe that which hee doth vnder∣take, whereby such as are requisite to vs, may
haue knowledge and preparation, to offer themselues, and wee shall bee ready to giue honest entertainment and content, and to re∣compence with extraordinary reward, euery sit and industrious person, respectiuely to his paines and quality. The Table of such as are required to this Plantation. Foure honest and learned Ministers. 2. Surgeons. 2. Druggists. 10. Iron men for the Fur∣nace and Hammer. 2. Armorers. 2. Gun-founders. 6. Black-smiths. 10. Sawyers. 6. Carpenters. 6. Ship-wrights. 6. Gardeners. 4. Turners. 4. Brick-makers. 2. Tile-makers. 10. Fisher-men. 6. Fowlers. 4. Sturgion dressers, and preseruers of the Caneary. 2. Salt-makers. 6. Coopers. 2. Coller-makers for draught. 2. Plow-wrights. 4. Rope-makers. 6. Vine dressers. 2. Presse makers. 2. Ioyners. 2. Sope-ashe makers. 4. Pitch Boylers. 2. Minerall men. 2. Planters of Sugar Cane. 2. Silke dressers. 2. Pearle Drillers. 2. Bakers. 2. Brewers. 2. Colliers. FINIS.
