2972 S1204 21549337 178466
¶ Here begynneth the Py∣stles and Gospels, of euery Sonday and holy day in the yeare. ❧ The Pystle on the fyrst Sondaye in Aduent. The .xiij. cha∣pyter to the Romaynes. D BRethren we knowe that it is tyme nowe that we awake out of slepe, for nowe is our saluacion nerer then we be∣leued. The night is passed and the daye is come nye let vs ther∣fore caste awaye the dedes of darknes, and let vs put on the ar∣moure of lyghte. Let vs walke honestlye as it were in the daye lyght, not in eatynge and drynkynge, neyther in chambryng & wantonnes, neyther in stryfe and enuyenge, but put ye on oure Lorde Iesu Christ. ¶ The Gospell on the fyrst Sonday in Aduent. The .xxj. Cha∣pyter of Mathewe. A. WHen Iesus drewe nye vnto Ierusalem, and came to Bet¦phage vnto the mount Olyuete, then sent Iesus two of his disciples, sayenge to theym. Go into the Castell that lyeth ouer agaynst you and anone ye shall fynde an Asse bound, & her Colte with her, lose them and brynge them vnto me, and yf any man saye ought vnto you, saye ye that your lorde hath nede of them, & streyghte waye he wyll let them go. All thys was done to fulfyll yt which was spoken by the prophet sayeng. Tell ye ye doughter of Syon, beholde thy kynge cometh vnto the meke, & syttīge vpon an asse & a colte, the fole of an asse vsed to the yoke The disciples wēt & dyd as Iesus cōmaūded them & brought the asse & the colte & put on thē theyr clothes, and set hym there on. Many of the people spredde theyr garmentes in the waye. other cut downe braunches frō the trees & strawed them in the waye. {fleur-de-lys} Moreouer the people that went before, and they also yt folowed after, cryed saenge. Osanna the sonne of Dauid. Blessed be he that commeth in the name of the Lord.
¶ The Pystle on the seconde Sondaye in Aduent. The .xv. Chapiter to the Romaynse. A. BRethrē what soeuer thīges are w yrē afore tyme are wry∣ten for our learnynge yt we thorowe paciēce & cōforte of ye scrypture myght haue hope. The god of paciēce & cōsola∣cyō, gyue vnto euery one of you yt ye be lyke mynded one towar¦des another after ye ensample of Iesu Christ yt ye all agreynge togyther, may with one mouth honour god & the father of our lord Iesu Christ▪ wherfore receyue ye one another as Christ re¦ceyue vs to the prayse of god. And I saye yt Iesus Christ was a minister of the Cyrcuncysyon for the truth of god, to cōfyrme ye promises made vnto ye fathers. And let ye gentyls prayse god for his mercy, as it is wrytten, for this cause I wyll prayse the amōge the gentyls & synge in thy name. And agayne he sayeth ye gentyls reioyse wt his people. Agayne, yrayse the lorde all ye gentyls, & laude hym all nacions. And in another place Esaias sayeth, there shalbe the rote of Iesse, & he yt shall ryse to raygne ouer ye gentyls: in hym shall the gentyls trust. The god or ho∣pe fyll you with all ioye and peace in beleuynge, that ye may be ryche in hope thorowe the power of the holy ghost. ¶ The gospel on ye .ij. sonday in Aduēt. The .xxj. ha, of luke. D IEsus sayde vnto his disciples there shalbe sygnes in the sonne and in the mone. & in the starres, & in the earth, the people shalbe in suche perplexite, yt they shal not tell which wy to turne theym selues. The see & the waues shall rore, & mennes hertes shal fayle thē for feare & for lokyng after those thynges / whiche shall come on the earthe, for the powers of heuen shall moue, and then shal they se the sonne of man come in a cloude wt power & great glory, when these thynge begyn to come to passe then loke vp & lyft vp your heddes, for your redēcyon draweth nye. And he shewed them a simiytude / beholde the fygge tree, & all other trees when they shut forth theyr buddes, ye se & know of your owne selues that somer is then nye at hande. So lyke¦wyse ye (when ye se these thynges come to passe) vndestande, yt
the kyngdom of god is nye. Verely I saye vnto you, this gene¦racyon shal not passe, tyll all be fulfylled, heuen and earth shall passe, but my wordes shall not passe. ¶ The Pystle on the .iij. sondaye in Aduent. The .j. Pystle & the .iiij. chapiter to the Corinthyans. . BRethren let men this wyse esteme vs euen as the myni∣ster of Christ, & disposers of the secretes of god. Further more it is requyred of the disposers / that they be founde fayth∣full / with me is it but a very small thynge / that I shulde be iud¦ged of you (other of mānes day) no I iuge not mine owne selfe I knowe nought by my selfe, yet am I not ther by iustyfyed, it is the lorde yt iudged me, therfore iudge nothyng before ye tyme vntyll the lorde come whiche wyll lyghtē thynges that are hyd in darkenes & open the counsayles of the hertes. And than shal euery man haue prayse of God. ¶ The Gospel on the .iij. Sonday in Aduēt. The .xj. Chapyter of Mathewe. A. WHen Iohn̄ beynge in preson herd the workes of Christ he sent two of his disciples & sayd vnto him. Art thou he that shall come, or shall we loke for another, Iesus answered & sayde vnto them. Go and shewe Iohn̄ what ye haue hearde and sene. The blynde se / the halte go, the lyppers are clensed, ye defe heare, ye dead are raysed vp agayne, & the gospel is preached to the poore / and hapy is he that is not hurt by me. Euen as they departed Iesus began to speake vnto ye people for Iohn̄ what went ye for to se in the wyldernesse wēt ye out to se a rede wa∣uerynge with the wynde / other what went ye out to se went ye to se a man clothed in softe rayment. Beholde they yt were softe clothynge / are in kynges houses. But what went ye out for to se. Wēt ye out to se a prophet? ye I say vnto you & more then a prophet / for thys is he of whō it is wryten. Behold I sende me messenger before thy face▪ which shal prepare thy way before yt ¶ The Pystle on the .iiij. sonday in aduent the .iiij. chapiter to the Philippians. A.
BRethren reioyce in the lorde alwaye. And agayne I saye reioyce, let your softenes be knowen vnto all men, The lorde is euen at hande. Be not carefull, but in all thynges shew your petition vnto god in prayer and supplication wt gyuynge of thankes. And the peace of god whiche passeth all vnderstan∣dynge kepe your hertes, and mynde in Christ Iesu. ¶ The gospel on ye .iiij. sondaye in aduēt ye .j. cha. of Iohn̄. C. WHen the Iewes sente prestes and leuytes frō Ierusalem to axe Iohn̄▪ what art thou. And he cōfessed / and denyed not, and sayde playnly, I am not Christ. & they axed hym what then? art thou Helias & he sayd I am not. Arte thou a prophet And he answered no. Than sayed they vnto hym: what arte ye / that we maye gyue an answere to thē that sent vs▪ what sayest thou of thy selfe? he sayde I am the voyce of a cryer in the wyl∣dernes make strayght ye way of the Lorde, as sayed ye prophet Esaias. And they whiche were sente, were of ye pharyses & they ared hym & sayed vnto hym▪ why baptysest thou thē yf yu be not Christ nor Helias neyther a {pro}phet? Iohn̄ answered thē saying I baptyse wt water / but one is come amōge you, whō ye know not. He it is that cometh after me which was before me, whose shoo latchet, I am not worthy to vnlose. These thynges were done in bethabara beyond Iordan where Iohn̄ dyd baptyse. ¶ The pystle at hye masse on Christmas daye. The .j. chapyter to the Hebreus. A BRethrē: god in tymes past diuersly & many wayes, spake vnto ye fathers by the prophetes, but in these laste dayes he hath spokē vnto vs by his sonnes, whō he hath made heyre of all thynges / by whō also he made ye worlde. whiche sonne be∣ynge ye bryghtnes of his glory: & very ymage of hys substaūce bearynge vp all thynges wt the worde of his power, hath in his owne person pourged oure synnes, & sytteh on the ryghthande on thy Maiesty on hye, and is more excellente than the angels in as moche as he hath by euerytaunce obteyned an excellenter name then they haue / for vnto whiche of the angels sayde he at
any tyme thou art my sonne, this daye begat I the. And agayn I wyll be his father, and he shall be my sonne. And when he bryngeth in the fyste begotten sonne into the worde he sayth And all the angels of god shall worshyppe hym, and vnto the angels he sayeth, he maketh his angels spyrites and his mini∣stres flammes of fyre, but vnto ye sonne he sayth, god thy seate shalbe for euer and euer, the cepter of thy kyngdome is a ryghte cepter. Thou hast loued ryghtwysenes & hated iniquite wher∣fore hath god whiche is thy god, anoynted the with the oyle of gladnes aboue thy felowes. And thou lorde in the begynnyng hast layde the foundacion of the earth. And the heuens are the workes of thy handes. The shall perysshe, but thou shalt shalt endure, they all shal waxe olde as doth a garment / and as a ve∣sture shalt thou chaunge them, and they shalbe chaunged but yu art alwayes the same and thy yeares shall not fayle. ¶ The gospell at hye Masse on Christmas daye. The .j. chapy∣ter of Iohn̄. A IN the begynnyng was ye worde, & the worde was wt god and god was the worde. The same was in ye begynnyng with god. All thynges were made by it, & without it was made nothyng that was made. In it was lyfe / and the lyfe was the lyght of men, & the lyght shyneth in the darkenes, and the dar∣kenes comprehendeth it not. There was a man sent from god whose name was Iohn̄. The same same as a wytnes, to beare wytnes of the lyght, that all men through hym myght beleue, he was not that lyght, but to beare wytnes of the lyght. That was a true lyght, which lyghted all men yt come into ye worlde, he was in the worlde, & the worlde by him was made: and the worlde knewe him not / he came among his owne, & his owne receyued him not, vnto as many as receyued hym, gaue power to be ye sonnes of god, in that they beleued on his name, which were borne not of bloude nor of the wyll of the flesshe, nor yet of the wyll of men, but of god & the worde was made flesshe, & dwelt amōge vs, & we sawe ye glory of it, as the glory of ye on y
begottē sōne of ye father, which worde was ful of grace & verite ¶ The Pystle on. S. Steuens day The .vj Cchapiter of the Ac¦tes of the Apostles. C STeuen full of fayth & power dyd great wōders & myra∣cles among the people. There arose certayne of the Sy∣nagoge whyche are called Lybertynes and Syrenytes and of Alexandria and of Cylicia, and Asya, & disputed with Steuen & they coulde nor resyste ye wysedome, and ye spyryte / wt which he spake. When they hearde these thynges, theyr hertes cloue a sonder, and they gnasshed on him wt theyr tethe, but he beynge full of the holy Ghoste, loked vp stedfastly wyth hys eyes into heuen / & sawe the glory of god & Iesus standyng on the ryght hande of god, and sayd, beholde, I se the heuens open, and the sonne of man standynge on the ryght hande of God then they gaue a shoute wt a loude voyce and stopped their eares and ran vpon him all at ones, & caste hym out of the cytie, & stoned him and the wytnesses layde downe theyr clothes at a yonge mans fete named Saule. And they stoned Steuē calling on & sayeng Lord Iesu receyue my spiryte, and he kneled downe and cryed with a loude voyce. Lorde saye not this synne to theyr charge / And whē had thus spoken / he fell a slepe in our Lorde. ¶ The Gospell on Saynte Steuens daye. the .xxiij. chapiter. of Mathew. D. IEsus sayde vnto the Iewes and chefe prestes, beholde I sende vnto you wyse prophetes, wyse men and scrybes, & of them som shall ye scourge in your synagoges, and persecute from cytye to cytye and al ryghtuous bloude maye fall on you, whiche was shede vpon the earthe, frome the bloude of ryght∣uous Abell vnto the bloude of zacharias the sonne of Bara∣chias, whom ye slewe betwene the temple and the auter. Vere∣ly I saye vnto you, all these thynges shall lyghte vpon this ge∣neracyon Ierusalem / Ierusalem / which kyllest prophetes and stonest them whiche are sente to the, howe oft wolde I haue ga¦thered thy chyldren togyder, as the henne gathereth her chyc∣kens
vnder her wynges, but ye wolde not. beholde your habita¦cion shalbe lefte vnto you desolate. For I say vnto you. ye shal not se me henforth tyl that ye saye. Blessed be he that commeth in the name of the Lorde. ¶ The Pystle on S. Iohn̄ the Euangelystes daye. Eccles. xv. HE that feareth god wyll do good / and he that kepeth the lawe shall obtayne wysedome and she wyl come agaynst hym as an honourable mother, as a woman yet a vyrgyn shal receyue hym, She shal fede hym with the bread of lyfe and vn¦derstandynge and the water of holsome wysedome she shall gy∣ue hym to drynke & she shall exalte him amōge his neyghbours & shall open hys mouth euen in the thyckest of the congregaciō And he shall fyll hym wt the spyryte of wysedome & vnderstan∣dynge. and wyth the garment of glory shall apparel hym. She shall make him rych with ioye and gladnes, and shall inherete hym of an euerlastynge name. ¶ The Gospell on S. Iohn̄s daye the Euangelyste. The .xxj. chapyter of Iohn̄. E Iesus sayd to Peter folowe me, Peter turned about & sawe ye disciple whō Ies{us} loued folowyng which also leued on his brest at supper & sayd. Lorde which is he that shall betray ye? whē Peter sawe hym, he sayd to Iesus. Lorde what shal he here do? Iesus sayd vnto him, If I wyl haue hym to tary styl tyl I come, what is yt to ye folow yu me. Then went this sayeng abrode amonge the brethren yt the dysciple shulde not dye. And Iesus sayde not to hȳ, he shall not dye, but yf I wyll yt he tary tyll I come what is that to ye, the same disciple is he which te∣stifyeth of these thynges, & we knowe yt his testymony is true. ¶ The Pystle on Chyldermas daye. The .xiiij. Chapiter of the Reuelacyon of S. Iohn̄. ANd I loked and lo a lambe stode on the mounte Syon, and wt hym a C. & xliiij. M. hauynge hys fathers name writē in theyr forhedes, & I herde a voyce frō heuē, as ye sounde of many waters, & as the voyce of a great thonder & I herde ye
voyce of harpers harpynge with theyr harpes, and they songe as it were a newe songe before the seate, & before the .iiij. bea∣stes & the elders & no man coulde lerne that songe but the .C. & xliiij. M. which were redemed frō the erth. These are the which were not defyled with wemen, for they are virgyns. These fo∣low the lambe whyther soeuer he goeth, these were redemed frō men beynge the fyrste fruytes vnto God and to the lambe, & in theyr mouthes was foūde no gyle for they are without spotte before the trone of god. ¶ The Gospel on Chyldermas daye. The .ii. cha of Math. C THe angel of ye lorde appered to Ioseph in a dreame say∣eng. Aryse and take the chylde and his mother, and flye into Egypte & abyde there tyll I brynge the worde, for herode wyll seke the chylde to destroye hym. Then he arose and toke ye chylde and his mother by nyght & departed into Egypt & was there vnto the death of Herode, to fulfyl that whiche was spo∣ken of the lorde, by ye propher whiche sayth, out of Egypt haue I called my sonne. Then Herode perceyuing yt he was mocked of the wyse men was exceadynge wrothe, and sente forthe and slewe all the chyldren that were in Bethleem & in all the Costes therof as many as were two yeare olde and vnder accordynge the tyme which he had dyligently serched out of the wyse men Then was fulfylled ye which was spoken by the prophet Iere∣my, sayenge. On the hylles was a voyce herde, mournyng we∣pynge, and great lamentacion Rachell wepynge for her chyl∣dren and wolde not be conforted bycause they were not. ¶ The Pystle on the Sondaye after Chrystmas day, The iiij Chapyter to the Galathyans. A. BRethren I say yt the heyre as longe as he is a chylde dy¦fereth not from a seruaunt though he be lorde of all bu is vnder tutours & gouerners, vntyll the tyme apoynted of th father, Euen so we as longe as we were chyldren, were in bon¦dage vnder the ordynacions of the worlde, but when the tyme was ful come, god sent his sonne borne of a woman and mad
bonde vnto the lawe to redeme them, which were vnder ye lawe that we thorowe election myght receyue ye inheritaūce yt belō∣geth vnto ye naturall sonnes, bycause ye are sonnes. God hath sente ye spyryt of hys sonne into our hertes, which cryeth Abba father wherfore nowe arte thou not a seruaunt, but a sonne, yf thou be the sonne yu arte also the Heyre of god through Christ. ¶ The Gospell on the sondaye after Christmas daye the ij. Chapiter of Luke. E. IOseph and Mary, the mother of Iesus maruayled those thynges, whiche were spoken of him / and Symeon bles∣sed them / & sayde vnto Mary hys mother beholde thys chylde shalbe the fall, & resurreccyō of many in Israell & sygne whiche shalbe spoken agaynst / & more ouer the swerde shall pearce thy soule yt the thoughtes of many hertes maye be opened & there was Anna a prophetesse, ye doughter of Phannel of ye Trybe of Aser, & she was of a great age / & had lyued with an husbande vij. yere from her vyrginite & she had ben a wydowe about .iiij. score & foure yeres, which went neuer out of the Tēple, but ser∣ued there, wt fastynge & prayer nyght & day, and she came forth ye same houre / & praysed God & spake of hym, to all ye loked for redempcyon in Ierusalem. And as sone as they perfourmed al thynges accordynge to the lawe of the Lorde, they returned in to Galyle into theyr owne cytye Nazareth, & the chylde grewe and wexed stronge in spyryte and was full of wysdome and ye grace of God was with hym. ¶ The Pystle on new yeres daye. The .ij. chap. vnto Tytus. C MOste dere beloued Tytus. The grace of god yt bryngeth saluacion vnto all men hath appered & teacheth vs that we shulde denye vngodlynes & worldly lustes, and yt we shuld lyue sober mynded ryghtuously & godly in this present worlde lokynge for the blessed hope & gloryous apperynge of ye mygh∣ty god, and our sauyour Iesu Christ which gaue hym selfe for vs, to redeme vs from all vnryghtwysenes, and to pourge vs peculyer people vnto hym selfe feruentlye gyuen vnto good workes.
These thynge speake and exorte. ¶ The Gospel on newe yeres day. The .j. Chapiter of Luke. C ANd whē the eyght day was come that the chylde shuld be cyrcūcysed hys name was called Iesus whiche was named of ye angel before he was cōceyued in his mothers wōbe ¶ The Pystle on twelfe day. Esaye .lx. VP and receyue lyght Ierusalem: for thy lyght is come, & the glory of the Lorde is vp ouer ye, for beholde darknes shall couer the erth, and a thycke myste the nacyons / but ye lord shall ryse as the sonne ouer the and hys glorye shall be sene vpon the / and the hethen shall walke in thy lyght / and the kyn¦ges in the bryghtnes that is rysen ouer the / lyft vp thyne eyes rounde about and se, all these are gathered together & are come from farre / & thy doughter shall be euer by the syde / then thou shalt se and shalte haue plenty / thy herte shall wonder / & breke oute in ioye / when the multytude of the see are turned to the, & the ames of the hethen are come vnto the. The abundaunce of Camelles shall couer the / and the Dormadoryes of Madian & Epha shall come all of them frō Saba, & brynge golde / & frā∣kensence / and shall preache the prayse of the lorde. ¶ The Gospell on the twelfe daye. The .ij. cha. of Mathewe. A WHen Iesus was borne in Bethleē in iury / in the tyme of kynge Herode, beholde: there came wyse men from ye east to Ierusalem sayeng, where is he that is borne kynge of ye Ie∣wes / we haue sene his starre in the East, and are come to wor∣shyp hym. Herode the kynge / after he had herde this was trou¦bled, and all Ierusalem with hym / and he gathered all ye chefe preestes and scrybes of the people / and demaunded of them where Christ shulde be borne. They sayde vnto hym in Beth∣leem in Iurye, for thus it is wrytten by the prophet. And thou Bethleem in the lande of Iurye, arte not the loste concernynge the Prynces of Iuda / for oute of the shall come a captayne, whiche shall gouerne my people Israel. Then Herode pryuely
called the wyse men / and diligētly enquyred of them / the tyme of the starre that appered / and sent them to Bethleem sayenge Go and serche diligentlye for the chylde / and when ye haue founde hym / brynge me worde that I maye come and wor∣shyppe hym also / when thy had herde the kynge, they departed and so the Starre whiche they sawe in ye Easte, wente before them / vntyll it came and stode ouer the place where the chylde was / when they sawe the starre they were maruaylously glad and entred in to the house and founde ye chylde with Mary his mother, and kneled downe and worshypped hym, and ope∣ned theyr treasures / and offered vnto hym gyftes / Golde / Frankēsence / and Myrre. And after they were warned of god in their slepe, that they shuld not go agayne to Herod. They re∣turned into theyr owne countre another waye. ¶ The Pystle on the sonday within the vtas of the Epyphanye. VP and receyue lyghte Ierusalem. &c. Ye shall fynde this pystle on twelfe daye. fo. vi. ¶ The Gospell on the Sondaye within the vtas of the Epy∣phany. The .j. Chapiter of Iohn̄. D IOhn̄ sawe Iesus comynge vnto him and sayde. Behold the lambe of God / whiche taketh awaye the synne of the worlde. This is he of whom I sayde after me commeth a man which was before me, for he was yer then I, and I knewe him not but that he shulde be declared to Israell. Therfore am I come baptysynge with water. And Iohn̄ bare recorde sayeng: I sawe the spyryte descendynge from heuen / lyke vnto a done and it abode vpon hym and I knewe hym not he ye sent me to baptyse the in water sayde vnto me, vpon whome thou shalte se the spyryte descende and tary styll on hym / that same is he which baptysed with the holy ghost. And I sawe and bare re∣corde that this is the sonne of God. ¶ The Pystle on the .i. Sōdaye after the vtas of ye Epiphany The .xjj. chapiter. to the Romayns. A
BRethren: I beseche you by the mercyfulnes of God, that ye make your bodyes a quycke sacryfyce, holy and accep¦table vnto god, whith is youre resonable seruynge of god, and fassion not your selues lyke vnto this worlde but ye be chaūged in your shape, by the rennynge of your wyttes, that ye may fele what thyng the good that acceptable and perfecte wil of god is for I say thorow the grace that vnto me giuen is to euery man amonge you, that no man esteme of him selfe more then it be∣commeth hym to esteme, but that he discretly iuge of him selfe accordynge as god hath daelt to euery man ye measure of fayth as we haue many membres in one body, and all membres haue not one offyce, so we beynge many, are one body in Christe: and euery man amonge our selues one anothers membres. ¶ The Gospel on ye .i. Sondaye after the vtas of the Epiphanie The .ij. Chapiter. of Luke. F WHen Iesus was .xij. yere olde, they went vp to Ierusalē after the custome of the feaste, and when they had fulfyl∣led ye dayes, as they returned home, ye chylde Iesus bode styll in Ierusalē vnknowen to his father & mother, for they suppo∣sed he had bē in ye cōpany. They came a dayes iorney, & sought hym amōge theyr kynsfolke & acquayntaunce, & foūde hym not They went backe agayn to Ierusalē & soughte him, and it for∣tuned that after thre dayes, they founde him in the temple syt∣tynge in the myddes of the doctours both herynge them, & po∣synge them & all that herde hym, maruayled at his wytte & ans¦weres & when they sawe hym, they were astonyed, & hys mo∣ther sayde vnto hym, sonne why hast thou thus dealt wyth vs Beholde thy father & I haue sought the sorowynge, & he sayd vnto the how is it, that ye haue sought me, wyst ye not, that I must go about my fathers busynes, and they vnderstode not ye sayenge that he spake to them, & he went with them and came to Nazareth, and was obedyent to them / but his mother kept all these thynges in her herte / and Iesus encresed in wysedom and age, and infauoure with god and man.
¶ The Pistle on the .ij. Sonday after ye vtas of ye Epiphanie The .xij. chapiter. to the Romayns. C. BRethren: seynge that we haue diuers gyftes, accordyng to the grace that is gyuen vnto vs, if any man haue the gyft of prophecye let hym haue it that it be agreynge vnto the fayth. Let him that hath an office wayte on his offyce, let him that teacheth take hede to his doctryne, lett him that exorteth gyue attendaunce to his exortacion, if any man gyue, let hī do it with singlenes, let him that ruleth, do it with diligence, yf a∣ny man shewe mercy, let hym do it with cherefulnes, let loue be without dissymulacyon, hate that whiche is euyll, and cleue vnto ye which is good. Be kynde one to another with brotherly loue / in gyuynge honour / go one before another / let not the bu¦synes whiche ye haue in hande be tedious to you / be feruēt in ye spirite, applye your selues to the tyme, reioyse in hope be paciēt in tribulaciō cōtinue in prayer, dystribute vnto ye necessitye of ye sayntes & diligētly to harborowe. Blesse them which persecute you, blesse but curse not, be mery wt thē ye are mery: wept wt thē that wepe / be of lyke affeccyon one toward another / be not hye mynded but make your selues equall to them of ye lower sorte. ¶ The Gospel on ye .ij. Sonday after the vtas of ye Epiphany the .ij. Chapiter of Iohn̄. A. THere was a maryage in cana a cytye of galile / & Iesus mother was there, Iesus was called also and his disci∣ples vnto the mariage, and when ye wyne fayled Iesus mother sayd vnto hym / they haue no wyne. Iesus sayd vnto her / wo∣man what haue I to do wt the myne houre is not yet come his mother sayde vnto the ministers / what soeuer he sayeth vnto you do it. There were stādynge .vj. water pottes of stone after the maner of purifienge of the Iewes cōteynyng .ij. or .iij. fyr∣kyns a pece. Iesus sayde vnto them / fyll the water pottes and they fylled them vp to the harde brym / and he sayd vnto them. Drawe out now / and beare it vnto the gouernour of the feast & they bare it. whan the ruler of the feaste had tasted the water
that was turned vnto wyne neyther knewe whense it was but the mynisters whiche drewe ye water knewe / he called ye bryde grome and sayd vnto him al men at the begynnynge, set forth good wyne, and whan men be dronke / then ye whiche is worse but thou hast kept backe the good wyne vntyll nowe. This be¦gynnyng of myracles dyd Iesus in Cana of Galylt / & shewed his glory / and his dyscyples beleued on hym. ¶ The Pystle on ye .iiij. Sōday after ye vtas of the Epiphanye the .xij. Chapyter to the Romaynes. BRethrē: be not wyse in your owne opyniōs. Recōpēce to no man euyll for euyll, prouyde afore hande thynges ho¦nest in the syghte of all men, yf it be possible / yet on youre parte haue peace with al men derely beloued auenge not your selues but gyue rome vnto the wrath of god. For it is wryten / ven∣geaunce is myne / and I rewarde sayeth the Lorde. Therfore yf thyne enemy hūger fede hym / yf he thyrst gyue hym drynke for in so doynge thou shalte heape coles of fyre on his head / be not ouercome of euyl / but ouer come euyll with goodnes. ¶ The Gospell on the .iiij. Sonday after the vtas of the Epy∣phanye. The .viij. Chapyter of Mathewe. A WHen Iesus was come downe from the mountayne moch people folowed hym and lo there came a lepre and wor∣shypped hym sayenge / Master, yf thou wylt thou canste make me clene / he put forth his hande and touched him sayeng I wyll be thou clene / and immediatly his leprosy was clensed and Iesus sayd vnto him se thou tel no man, but go and shewe thy selfe to the preest and offre ye gyft that Moyses cōmaunded in witnesse to them when Iesus was entred into Capernaum there came vnto hym a cartayne Centurion, besechyng hym, & sayeng Mayster my seruaunte lyeth sicke at home of ye palseye, and is greuously payned & Iesus sayde vnto hym I wyll come and cure hym. The Centuryon answered & said. Sir. I am nat worthy that thou shouldest come vnder ye roufe of my house but speake the worde onely & my seruaunt ssall be healed, for I also
my selfe / am a man vnder power, and haue sould yours vnder me / and I saye to one go / and he goeth, and to another come & he commeth and to my seruaunt do this, and he doth it. whē Ie¦sus herde that he maruayled and sayde to them that folowed him. Verelye I saye vnto you. I haue not founde so greate fayth: no not in Israel. I saye therfore vnto you, ye many shall come from the East and west and shal reste with Abraham, I∣saac and Iacob, in the kyngdome of heuen, and the chyldren of the kyngdome shall be caste oute into the vtter darkenes there shal be wepynge and gnashyng of teeth Then Iesus sayde vn∣to the Centurion, go thy waye, and as thou haste beleued, so be it to the, and his seruaunt was healed the same houre. ¶ The Pystle on the .iiij. sonday after ye vtas of the. Ephipha∣ny. The .xiij. chapiter to the Romayns. B. BRethren to we nothynge to any man but to loue one ano¦ther for he that loueth another fulfylleth the lawe fo these commuandementes thou shalte not commit aduoutery thou shalte not kyli thou shalte not stele Thou shalte not bere fals wytnes. Thou shalt not desyre, and so forthe yf there be a∣ny other commaundemētes, they are all comprehended in this sayeng. Loue thy neyghbour as thy selfe, loue hurteth not his neyghbour. Therfore loue is the fulfyllynge of the law. ¶ The Gospel on the .iiij. Sondaye after the vtas of the Epi∣phanye. The, viij. Chapiter of Mathewe. C WHen Iesus entred into a shyppe and hys discyples folo∣wed him, and beholde there arose a great storme in the see in so much that the shyp was hyd with waues, and he was a sleepe and hys dysciples came vnto hym, and awoke hym say∣enge. Mayster saue vs we perysshe he saide vnto them why are ye fearefull. O ye of lytel fayth. Then he arose and rebuked the wynde and the see and there folowed a gret calme, and the men marualed and sayd what man is this that bothe wyndes and see obey hym.
¶ The Pistle on the .v. Sondaye after the vtas of ye Epiphany The thyrde chapiter to the Colossians. B. BRethren, now as electe of god, holy and beloued, put on tender mercy, kyndnes hūblenes of mynde, mekenes lōg suffecynge, forberynge one another, yf any man haue a quarell to another, euen as Christ forgaue you euen so do ye, aboue all these thinges put on loue, which is ye boūde of perfectnes, & the peace of good rule in your hertes / to ye which peace ye are called in one body / & se they be thankefull / let ye worde of Christ dwel in you plentuously in all wysdome teache & exorte youre owne selues in Psalmes & Hymnes / & spyrytual songes / which haue fauoure wt them syngynge in your hertes to the Lorde / and all thynges what soeuer ye do in worde or dede / do in the name of the Lorde Iesu / gyuynge thankes to god the father by hym. ¶ The Gospell on the .v. Sondaye after the vtas of Epypha∣nye. The .xiiij. Chapter of Mathewe. G IEsus sayde vnto hys dysciples. The kyngdome of heuē is lyke vnto a man whiche sowed good sede in hys felde, but whyle men slept, there came hys fo & sowed tares amonge the where & wente his waye. When ye blade was spronge vp, & had brought forth frute then appered ye tares also, The seruaū¦tes came to the house holder, & sayde vnto hym, Syr sowedest nat thou good seede in thy close, from whense then hath it tares he sayd to them the enuyous man hath done this Then the ser∣uauntes sayd vnto him. wylt thou then yt we go & gather them and he sayde nay lest while ye go about to wede out ye tares, ye plucke vp also wt them the wheate by the rotes let bothe growe togyther tyll haruest come, & in tyme of heruest I wyll say vn∣to my repers, gather ye fyrste the tares & bynde them in sheues to be brent, but gather my wheate into my barne. ¶ The Pystle on ye sōday after weddīg goeth out called Sep¦tuagesyma. The .j. Pystle to the Corynthians and ye .ix. cha. D BRethren: perceyue you not howe yt they which runne in a course runne all / yet but one receyueth the rewarde / so
runne that ye maye obtayne. Euery mā that proueth maystres abstayneth from all thynges, and they do it to obstayne a cor∣ruptible crowne, but we to obtayne an vncorruptible crowne I therfore so runne, not as at an vncertayne thynge, so fyght I not as one that beateth the ayre but I tame my bodye, and brynge hym into subieccyon, lest after that I haue preached to other, I my selfe shuld be a cast away. Brethrē: I wolde not yt ye shulde be ignoraunt of this / as your fathers were all vnder a cloude, and all passed thorowe the see / and were all baptysed vnder Moyses in the cloude / and in the see, and dyd all eate of one spyrytual meat, & dyd al drynke of one maner of spyrytual drynke and they dronke of that spyrytual rocke yt folowed thē, which rocke was Christ. ¶ The Gospell on the sondaye after weddynge goeth out cal∣led Septuagesyma. The .xx. Chapyter of Mathewe. A IEsus sayde vnto his dysciples. The kyngdome of heuen is lyke vnto an housholder, which wēt out erly in ye mor¦nynge to hyre labourers in hys vyneyarde and he agreed with the labourers for a peny a daye & sent them into his vyneyard And he went out about the thyrde houre, and fawe other stan∣dynge ydel in the market place, and sayd vnto them / go ye also into my vyneyarde / & what soeuer is ryghte / I wyll gyue you and they went theyr waye. Agayne he went out about the syxt and nynth houre and dyd lyke wyse. And he wente out aboute the eleuenth houre and founde other standyng ydell / and sayd vnto them. why stand ye here all the daye ydell. They sayd vn∣to hym Because no man hath hyred vs. He sayde vnto thē. Go ye also into my vyneyarde and what soeuer shalbe ryght, that shall ye receyue. when euen was come, ye lorde of the vyneyard sayde vnto hys Stewarde call the labourers, & gyue thē theyr hyre / begynne at the laste tyll thou come to the fyrste. And they which were hyred about the eleuēth houre / came and receyued euery man a peny. Then came fyrste / supposynge yt they shulde receyue more / & they likewyse receyued euery man a peny. And
when they had receyued it / they grudged agaynste ye good mā of the house sayenge. These laste haue wrought but one houre, and thou haste made them equall vnto vs / whiche haue borne the burthen & hete of the daye. He answered to one of them say∣enge: frende I do the no wronge / dydeste thou not agree wt me for a peny. Take yt which is thy dutye, and go thy way / I wyll gyue vnto this laste / as muche as to the / is it not lawfull for me to do as me lysteth with myne owne is thyne eye euyll / by∣cause I am good / so the laste shalbe fyrste / and the fyrst shalbe laste / for many are called / but fewe be chosen. ¶ The Pistle on ye Sonday of lx. the .ij. Pystle to ye Corinthiās and the .xi, chapiter. G. BRethrē suffre foles gladly because that ye your selues are wyse / for ye suffre euen yf a man brynge you into bon∣dage / yf a mā deuoure / yf a mā take / yf a mā exalte hym selfe / yf a man smyre you on ye face I speke as cōcernynge rebuke as thoughe we had bene weke howe be it wherin so euer any man dare be bolde / I speake folysshelye / I dare be bolde also / They are Ebrues / so am I / They are Israelytes: euē so am I: They are the sede of Abrahā / euen so am I. They are ye mynisters of Christ. I speake as a foole: I am more. In labours more abū∣dāt / ī strypes aboue measure / in pryson more plētuously in deth oft / of the Iewes / fyue tymes receyued I / euery time xl strypes saue one. Thryse was I beatē wt roddes. I was ones stoned. I suffred thryse shyp wrake nyght and day haue I bene in the depht of the see in iorneynge often. In parels of waters / in pa¦rel of robbers, in ieopardies of myne owne naciō in ieopardies amonge the hethen / I haue bene in parels in cytyes / in parels in wyldernes / in parels in the see / in parels amonge false bre∣thren in laboure and trauayle / in watchynge oft / in hungre / in thyrst / in fastynge often / in colde / and in nakednes / besyde the thynges which outwardelye happen vnto me. I am combred dayly and care for all cōgregacyons. who is sycke / & I am not sycke / who is hurte in fayth / & my herte burneth not: yf I must
nedes reioyce / I wyll reioyce of myne infyrmites. God ye father of our lorde Iesus Christ / which is blessed for euermore know∣eth that I lye not. ¶ The Gospell on the Sondaye of .xl. the .viij. Chapiter of Luke. A WHen moch people were gadered togyther / and were come to Iesus out of the cytyes / he spake by a symylytude. A so∣wer went out to sowe his sede. And as he sowed / some fel by the waye syde / and it was troden vnder fete / and the foules of the ayre deuoured it vp / & some fel on stones / & as sone as it was sprōge vp / it wythered away because it lacked moystnes / and some fell amonge thornes / and the thornes spronge vp wt it / and choked it. And some fell on good grounde / and spronge vp & bare frute an hōdreth folde / And as he sayde these thinges he cryed / he that hathe eares to here / let hym heare / hys dyscy∣ples asked hym sayinge: what maner symylytude thys shulde be / and he sayde vnto you it is gyuen to knowe the secretes of the kyngdome of god: but to other in symylytude / yt when they se / they shulde not se / & when they heare / they shulde not vnder∣stande / the similitude is this / The sede is ye worde of god those that are besyde the way are / they that heare / and after warde commeth the deuyll and taketh awaye the worde out of theyr hertes, lest they shulde beleue and be saued. They on the stones are they which when they heare the worde receyue it with ioy / and these haue no rotes / which for a whyle beleue & in tyme of tēptacyon go away. That which fell among thornes, are they whiche heare and go forth / & are choked wyth care and ryches and voluptuous lyuynge and brynge forth no fruyte. That in the good grounde, they are whiche with a good and pure herte here, the word and kepe it, and bryng forth fruyte wyth paciēce. ¶ The Pystle on the Sondaye of .l. the fyrste Pystle to the Co∣rynthyans. The .xiij. Chapyter. A BRethren thoughe I speake wyth the tonges of men and angels, & yet had no loue I were euen as soūdyng brasse
and as a tynklyng cymball. And though I coulde prophesye, & vnderstode all secretes, & al knowledge, ye yf I had al fayth so yt I coulde moue moūtaynes out of their places, & yet had no lo¦ue, I were nothyng. And though I bestowed all my goodes to fede the poore. And though I gaue my body euē yt I burned & yet haue no loue, it {pro}fyteth my nothyng, loue suffereth longe & is curteo{us}. loue enuyeth not, loue doth not frowardly, swelleth not, dealeth not dishonestly seketh not her owne, is not prouo∣keth to angre, thynketh not euyll, reioyseth not in iniqite, but re¦ioyseth in ye truth / suffreth al thyng, beleueth al thīges / hopeth all thynges. And endureth in all thynges. Thoughe yt the pro∣phesyeng fayle, other tonges shal cease, or knowledge vanyshe awaye / yet loue falleth neuer away, for oure knowledge is vn∣perfyte, & our prophesyenge is vnperfyte, but when ye whyche is perfyte is come / then ye which is vnperfyt shalbe done away when I was a chylde: I spake as a chylde. I vnderstode as a chylde, I ymagyned as a chylde: but as sone as I was a man I put away al chyldyshnes / now we se ī a glasse euē in a darke speakynge: but whē shall we se face to face. Now I knowe vn∣{per}fytly. But whā shall I know euē as I am knowē, now aby∣deth, fayth, hope, & loue euē these .iij. but ye chyefe of thē is loue. ¶ The Gospell on the Sōday of .l. The .xviij. Cha. of Luke. A IEsus toke vnto hym the .xij. and sayde vnto them: behold we go vp to Ierusalem / and all shalbe fulfylled yt are wri¦ten by the prophetes, of ye sonne of man, he shalbe deliuered vn∣to the gentyls, and shalbe mocked, and shalbe despytefully en∣treated, and shalbe spettē on, and whē they haue scourged hym they wyll put hym to deth / and the thyrde daye shall he ryse a∣gayne. They vnderstode none of these thynges & thys sayenge was hyd from them and they perceyued not ye thynges which were spokē. It came to passe as he was come nye vnto Ierico / a certayne blynde man sate by the way syde beggyng, & when he herde ye people passe by he asked what it mente. They sayde vnto hym, yt Iesus of Nazareth wente by / & he cryed sayenge.
Iesus the sonne of Dauid haue mercy on me / and they which went before rebuked him, because he shuld holde his peace, & he moche the more cryed. The sonne of Dauid haue mercy on me. Iesus stode styll, and cōmaunded him to be brought vnto him & when he was come nere, he asked him sayenge. What wylt yu that I do vnto the, & he sayde / Lorde that I maye receyue my syght. Iesus sayd vnto him. Receyue thy sight, thy fayth hath saued the, and immediatly he sawe and folowed him praysyng god, and all the people when they sawe it / gaue lande to god. ¶ The Pystle on Asshe wednysdaye. The .ij. Chap. Iohel. D OVr Lorde sayeth turne to me wt all your hertes in fastyng and lamentacyon & teare your hertes, and not youre gar∣mentes, and turne vnto the lorde your God / for he is full of mercy / and compassyon, longe yer he be angry / and great in mercy / and repenteth when he is at ye poynte to punysshe, who can tell whether the Lorde wyll turne and haue compassyon & shall leaue after hym a blessynge sacryfyce and drynke, offryng vnto the lorde your god. Blowe a trōpet in Syon / proclayme fastynge / and call a congregacyon, gather the people togyther brynge thou the elders to one place, gather the yonge chyldren and they that sucke the brestes togyder, let the brydgrome come out of his chamber, and the bryde out of her parloure, let the preestes that mynistre vnto the lorde, wepe betwene ye por∣che and the aulter, and saye: spare lorde thy people and delyuer not thyne inherytaunce vnto rebuke yt the hethen shuld raygne ouer them / why shulde they saye, amonge the nacyons: where is their god. And the lorde enuyed for his landes sake, and had compassyon on hys people and the Lorde answered and sayde vnto hys people / beholde: I sente you corne / newe wyne & oyle that ye shall be satysfyed therwith neyther wyl I delyuer you any more vnto the hethen. ¶ The Gospell on Asshe wednysday. ye .vj. cha. of Mat. B CHrist sayde vnto his dyscyples when ye fast / be not sadde as the ypocrytes are, for they dysfygure theyr faces, that
it myght appere vnto men that they faste. Verely I saye vnto you they haue theyr rewarde. But yu when thou fastest, anoynt thyne heade, and wasshe thy face / that it appere not vnto men how that thou fastest / but vnto thy father that is in secret and thy father which seyth in secrete, shall reward ye opēly. Gather not treasure togyther on earth / where ruste & mothes corrupte and where theues breake through & stele but gather ye treasure togyther in heuen / where nether rust / nor mothes corrupt and where theues neyther breake vp nor yet stele. For whersoeuer you treasure is / there wyll your hertes be also. ¶ The Pystel on the .j. Sondaye in lente / the seconde pystle to the Corynthyans the .vj. chapiter. A. BRethren we exorte you / that ye receyue not the grace of god in vayne / for he sayeth I haue herde the in a tyme ac¦cepted / and in the daye of saluacyon haue I suckered the. Be∣holde now is that well accepted tyme: beholde now is the daye of saluacyon / let vs gyue no man occasyon of euyll / that in our offyce be founde no faute but in all thynges let vs behaue oure selues as the mynisters of god. In moch pacience, in affliccyōs in necessyte / in anguysshe, in strypes, in prysonment, in stryfe, in labour, in watche, in fastyng, in purenes / in knowledge, in lōge sufferynge / in kyndnes / in the holy ghost / in loue vnfayned / in the wordes of trueth / in ye power of god by ye armour of ryght∣wysenes on the ryght hande, and on the lyfte hande / in honour and dishonour in euell reporte & good reporte, as disceyuers, & yet true / as vnknowen / as dienge: and beholde we yet lyue as chastened and not kylled / as sorowynge and yet alwaye merye as poore and yet make many ryche / as hauynge nothyng and yet possessynge in all thynges. ¶ The Gospell on the .j. Sondaye in lent the .iiij. Chapiter of Mathewe. A. WHen Iesus was led awaye of the spirite into wyldernes to be tempted of the deuyl. And when he had fasted forty dayes and forty nyghtes / at the laste was an hungred. Then
came vnto hym the tempter / & sayde, if thou be the sonne of god commaunde that these stones be made breade / He answered & sayde, It is wryten, yt mā shall not lyue onely by breade / but by euerye worde that procedeth out of the mouthe of god Then yt deuyll toke him vp into the holy cyte / and set hym on a pynacle of the tēple / & sayde vnto hym / yf yu be the sonne of god cast thy selfe downe, for it is wrytē, he shal gyue his angels charge ouer the / & wyth theyr handes they shal holde yt vp that yu dasshe not thy fote agaynst a stone Iesus sayd to him, this is written also Thou shalte not tempte thy lorde god / The deuyll toke hym vp agayne & led hȳ in to an exceding hie mountayne & shewed hym al the kyngdomes of the world and al the glory of them, & sayd vnto hym / all these wyl I gyue the / if thou wylt fall doune and woshyp me. Then sayd Iesus vnto hym: auoyde Sathan / for it is wrytten. Thou shalte worshyppe thy lorde God, and hym onely shalte thou serue. ¶ The Pystle on the .ij. Sonday in Lent / the fyrste Pystle to ye Tessalonians / the forth chapiter. A. WE beseche you brethren and exorte you in the lorde Iesus that you encrease more and more / euen as ye haue recey∣ued of vs / howe ye ought to walke and to please god / ye remē∣bre what commaūdementes / we gaue you in ye name of ye lorde Iesu Chryst / for this is ye wyl of god euen that ye shulde be ho∣ly / and that ye shulde abstayne frō fornicacyon, that euery one of you shulde knowe howe to kepe his vessell in holynes & ho∣nour. And not in the lust of cōcupiscens / as do ye hethen which knowe not god that no man go to farre and defraude hys bro¦ther in bargaynyng / because the Lorde is a venger of all suche thynges / as we tolde you before tyme / and testifyeth vnto you for God hathe not called vs vnto vnclennes, but to holynes in Christ Iesus our lorde. ¶ The Gospel on ye .ij. Sonday in. Lent the .xv. cha. of Mat. C IEsus went thence & departed into ye costes of the Tyre, & Sydō And behold a womā which was a Cananite came
out of the same Costes and cryed vnto hym sayeng, haue mer∣cy on me lorde the sonne of Dauyd. My doughter is petyously vexed wt a deuyll. And he gaue her neuer a worde to answere. Then came to hym his disciples & besought him sayenge sende her away, for she foloweth vs cryeng, he answered & sayde. I am not sent, but vnto the loste shepe of ye house of Israel. Thā she came and worshypped hym saynge, Mayster sucker me, he answered and sayde it is not good, to take the chyldrens brede and to cast it to the whelpes, she answered and sayd it is truth neuertheles the whelpes eate of ye crōmes, which fall frō theyr masters table. Then Iesus answered & sayde vnto her. O wo∣man great is thy fayth be it to the euē as thou desyrest, and her doughter was made hole euen at that same houre. ¶ The Pystle on the .iij. Sonday in. Lent to the Ephesyans ye .v. chapiter. A. BRethren be ye folowers of god as dere childrē, and wal∣ke in loue, euen as Christe loued vs, and gaue hym selfe for vs, an offerng & a sacryfice of a swete sauer to god, so yt for∣nicacion and al vnclennes, or couetousnes be not ones named amonge you, as it be cōmeth sayntes neyther filthynes nether folyssh talking nether gestyng, which are not comly, but rather gyuyng of thākes for this ye knowe that no whoremonger ey∣ther vnclene person / or couetous person which is the worshyp∣per of ymages hath any inheritaūce in ye Kyngedom of Christ & of god. Let no mā deceyue you wt vayne wordes for thorowe suche thynges commeth the wrathe of god, vpon the children of vnbeleue, Be not therfore companyons with them / ye were ones darkenesse / but are nowe lyght in ye lorde / walke as chyl∣dren of lyght for ye frute of the spirite, is in al goodnes, right∣wysnes and trueth. ¶ The Gospel on ye .iij. Sonday in Lent ye .xj. chap. of Luke. C IEsus was a castynge out a deuyll, which was domme & it folowed when ye deuyl was gone out / the domme spa∣ke / & the people wondred. Some of them sayde he casteth oute
deuyls / by the power of Belzebub / the chefe of the deuilles and other tempted him sekynge of him a sygne from heuen, he knew theyr thoughtes & sayd vnto them. Euery kyngdome at debate within it selfe shalbe desolate. And one house shall fall vpon an other. So if Satan be deuided wtin hīselfe, how shal his kyng∣dome endure, bycause ye saye that I cast out deuyls by the po∣wer of Belzebub, yf I by ye power of Belzebub cast out deuyls, by whose power / do your chyldren caste them out Therfore shal they be youre iudges. But if I with the fynger of GOD caste out deuyls, no doubte, the kyngdome of god is come vpon you when a stronge man armed watched his house. That he posses¦seth, is in peace, but when a stronger then he cōmeth vpon hym and ouercōmeth hym he taketh frō him his harneys wherin he trusted, & dyuydeth his goodes, he yt is not wyth me is agaynst me, he that gathereth not with me scattereth when the vnclene spirite is gone out of a man, he walked through waterlese pla∣ces sekyng rest, & whē he fynded none, he sayeth I wyll returne agayne vnto my house whense I came out and when he cōmeth he findeth it swept and garnyshed. Then goeth he and taketh seuē other spyrytes wt hym worse then hym selfe & they entre in and dwell there. And the ende of that man is worse then the be∣gynnynge. It fortuned as he thus spake, a certayne woman of the company lift vp here voyce and sayd vnto him happy is the wombe that bare the and the pappos which gaue the sucke, & he sayd / happye are they that heare the worde of god and kepe it. ¶ The Pystle on mydlent Sondaye. The .iiij. chapiter to the / Galathyans. C. BRethren it is wryten, that Abraham had two sonnes the one by a bonde mayd, the other by a fre woman, ye and he which was of the bond woman was borne after ye flesshe, but he whiche was of the free woman was borne, by promise whiche thynges betoken mistery / for these women are two, Testament the one from ye mounte Syna whiche gendreth vnto bondage whiche is Agar, for mounte Sina is called Agar in Arabia, ¦bordreth
vnto the cyte whiche is now Ierusalem, and is in bō∣dage with her children. But Ierusalem whiche is aboue / is fre which is the mother of vs al, for it is wrytten, reioyce thou ba∣reyn that bearest no chyldren, breake forthe and crye thou that traualest not for that desolate hath many mo chyldren then she which hath an husband. Brethren we are after the maner of I∣saac chyldren of promyse, but as them he yt was borne carnally presecuted hym that was borne spiritually. Euen so it is nowe neuerthelesse what sayth the scripture. Cast away ye bond wo∣man and her sonne. for the sonne of ye bond women shal not be heyre with the sonne of the fre woman. So then brethren / we are not chyldren of the bonde woman, but of the free woman. ¶ The Gospell on mydlente Sondaye. The .vj. chapiter of Iohn. A. IEsus went his waye ouer the see of Galyle nye to a citye called Tiberias, and a greate multitude folowed hym be∣cause they had sene the myracles the the dyd on them / whiche were dyseased. Iesus went vp into a mountayne & there he sate with his disciples, & Easter a feast of the Iues was nye Then Iesus lyfte vp his eyes and sawe a great company come vnto hym and sayde vnto Philyp, whense shall we bye breade that these myghte eate. This he sayde to proue hym, for he him selfe knew what he wold do. Phylyp answered hym. Two hōdreth peny worth of breade are not sufficient for them that euery mā myght haue a lytle. Then saide vnto hym one of his disciples, Andrewe Simon Peters brother. There is a lad here, whiche hathe .v. barly loues, and .ij. fyshes but what is that amonge so many, Iesus sayde, make the people to sytt downe there was muche haye in the place. And ye men sat doune, in nombre about fyue thousand, Iesus toke the breade, and gaue thankes. And gaue to the disciples And his dyscyples, to theym that were set downe. And lykewyse of ye fyshes, as much as they wolde, whē they had eaten ynough, he sayde vnto his disciples, gather vp ye broken meate that remayeth, ye nothyng be lost, They gathered
it togyther and fylled .xij. baskettes with the broken meate of ye v. Barlye loues, whiche broken meate remayned vnto theym yt had eaten Then those men when they had sene the myracle that Iesus dyd, sayde. This is of a trueth, the prophet whiche shall come into the worlde ¶ The Pystle on passion Sonday. The .ix. chapiter to the Hebrues. C. BRethren: Christ beyng an hye preest of good thynges to come came by a greter and a more perfite tabernacle nat made with handes, that is to saye not of this maner bilding ne∣ther by the bloude of Gotes / and Calues / but by his owne blo∣de / he entred ones for al in to the holy place and founde eternal redempcion for if the bolde of Oxen & of Gotes / and ye ashes of an Heyfer when it was spryncled / purified the vnclene as tou∣ching the purefyieng of ye flesshe / howe muche more shal ye blo∣de of Christ (which thorowe the eternal spirite, offred hym selfe without spot to god (pourge our conscyences from deade wor∣kes, for to serue the liuyng god / & for this cause is he the media∣toure of the newe Testament, that thorowe death which chaū∣sed for the redempcyon of those transgressyons that were in the fyrst Testament they which were called myght receyue ye pro∣myse of eternal inheritaunce. ¶ The Gospell on Passyon Sondaye. The .viij. chapiter. of Iohan. F. IEsus sayde vnto the company of the Iewes and the hye preestes whyche of you can rebuke me of synne / yf I saye the trueth / why do not ye beleue me / he that is of god / hearth goddes wordes ye therfore heare them not / because ye are not of God. Then answered the Iewes and sayde vnto hym? saye we not well, that thou arte a Samaritayne and hast the deuyll Iesus answered? I haue not ye deuyl, but I honoure my father and ye haue dyshonoured me, I seke not myne owne prayse, but there is one that seketh and iudgeth. Verely verely, I say vnto you, yf a mā kepe my sayenges, he shal neuer se deth. Thā sayd
the Iewes to hȳ now knowe we yt thou hast ye deuyll. Abrahā is dead & also ye prophetes and yet ye sayest, yf a mā do kepe my sayenge he shall neuer taste death: art yu greater then our father Abraham, whiche is dead, and the prophetes are deade, whom makest thou thy selfe? Iesus answered, yf I honoure my selfe, my honoure is nothyng worth, it is my father that honoureth me, which ye saye is your god / & yet haue ye not knowen hym but I knowe him, & yf I shuld say, I knowe him not. I shuld be a lyer, lyke vnto you, but I knowe hym, & kepe hys sayeng: your father Abrahā was glad to se my day, and he sawe it & re¦ioysed. Then sayd ye Iues vnto hȳ. Thou art not yet .l. yere old & hast thou sene Abrahā? Iesus said vnto thē. Verely, verely I say vnto you yer Abraham was, I am. Then toke they vp sto∣nes to cast at hȳ, but Iesus hyd hȳ selfe & wēt out of ye tēple. ¶ The Pystle on Palme Sōday. The .ij. Cha. to ye Philyp. A BRethren let the same mynde be in you, the which was in Christ Iesu. which seinge in the shape of god & thought it not robbery to be equall wt god. Neuerthelesse he made hym selfe of no reputacyon, & toke on hym the shape of a seruaunt & became lyke vnto men, and was foūde in his apparell as a mā he hūbled hym selfe & became obediēt vnto death, euē the death of ye crosse, wherfore god hath exalted hym, & gyuē hym a name aboue al names yt in the name of Iesus shuld euery knee bowe both of thynges in heuen, & thynges in erth, & thynges vnder, earth, and that all tonges shulde confesse, that Iesus Christ is the lorde vnto the prayse of God the father. ¶ The passyon on Palme sonday. The .xxvj. chap. of Math. A IEsus sayde vnto his dyscyples: ye know yt after .ij. dayes shalbe Easter & the sonne of man shall be delyuered for to be crucifyed, then assembled togyther the chefe prestes & the scri¦bes, & the elders of the people into the palays of the hye preest which was called Cayphas, & helde a coūsell, how they myght take Iesus by subtylte & kyll hym, but they sayd not on the ho∣ly daye, lest any trouble aryse agaynst the people, when Iesus
was in Bethany in the house of Symō the lepper, there came vnto him a woman whiche had an alabaster boxe of precyous oyntmē, & powred it on his heade as he sat at ye bourde when his discyples sawe that they had indygnacyon, sayenge: what neded this wast? thys oyntment myght haue ben well solde, & gyuen to the poore, when Iesus vnderstode yt he sayde to them why trouble ye the womā. She hath wrought a good worke vpon me, for ye shall haue poore folke alwayes wt you / but me shall ye not haue alwayes. And in yt she casted this oyntmente on my body, she dyd it to burye me withall. Verely I saye vnto you, where soeuer thys gospell shalbe preached throughout all the worlde, there shall also this that she hath done, be tolde for a memoryall of her. Then one of the twelue, called Iudas ys∣carioth went vnto ye chefe prestes, & sayd, what wyll you gyue me, and I wyll delyuer hym vnto you, & they appoynted vnto hym thyrty peces of syluer, & frō ye tyme he soughte oportunite to betraye hym. The fyrst day of swete bread ye disciples came to Iesus saying vnto hym where wylte thou that we prepare for the to eate the Pascall lambe, and he sayd go into the cytye vnto suche a man, & saye vnto hym, the mayster sayth my tyme is at hande I wyll kepe myn Easter at thy house with my dis∣cyples, and the disciples dyd as Iesus had apoynted them and made redye the Easter lambe, when the euen was come, he sat downe with the .xij. And as they dyd eate he sayd. Verely I say vnto you, that one of you shall betraye me, and they were exce∣dynge sorowful, and began euery one of them to saye vnto him is it I master, he answered and sayd. He that depeth his hand wt me in the dyshe shal betraye me, ye sōne of man goeth as it is wrytten of hym, but wo be to that man by whom the sonne of man shalbe betrayed, it had bene good for that man, yf he had neuer ben borne. Then Iudas which betrayed hym, answered and sayd. Is it I master, he sayd vnto him? thou hast sayd, as they dyde eate Iesus toke breade and gaue thankes, brake it, & gaue it to the dyscyples and sayd, take eate thys is my bodye &
he toke the cup, and thanked, and gaue it them, sayenge drynke of it euery one, for this is my bloude of the newe testament, that shall be shed for many, for the remyssyon of synnes I saye vnto you, I wyll not drynke hensforth of thys frute of the vyne tre, vntyll that daye when I shal drynke it new with you in my fa¦thers kyngdome and when they had sayd grace they went out vnto mount Olyuete. Then sayd Iesus vnto them / all ye shal be offended by me thys nyght for it is wrytten I wyll smyte ye shepherde, and the shepe of the flocke shall be scattered abrode, but after I am rysen agayne / I wyll go before you into Galy∣le. Peter answered and sayd vnto hym, thoughe all men shulde be offēded by ye / yet wold I neuer be offended. Iesus sayd vnto hym. Verely I saye vnto the, that thys same nyght before the cocke crowe yu shalt denye me thryse. Peter sayd vnto hym yf I shuld dye wt the, yet wolde I not deny yt, lykewyse also sayd all the dysciples. Then went Iesus with them into a place which is called Gethsemane and sayde vnto the dysciples, syt ye here whyle I go and pray yonder, and he toke with hym Peter and the two sonnes of zebede, and began to waxe sorowful, & to be in agony. Then sayde Iesus vnto them, my soule is heuy euen vnto the deth, tary ye here and watche with me. And he went a lytell aparte, and fell flat on hys face, and cryed sayinge. O my father yf it be possyble, let this cuppe passe from me: neuerthe∣les not as I wyll, but as thou wylte, and he came vnto the dis∣cyples, and founde them a slepe and sayd to Peter. what could ye not watche with me one houre / watche and pray that ye fal not into tēptacyon, ye spirite is wyllyng, but the flessh is weake He wēt away ones more & prayed saying. O my father yf thys cup can not passe awaye from me, but yt I drynke of it / thy wyl be fulfylled, and he came and found thē a slepe agayne, for theyr eyes were heuy, & he left them & wēt agayne & prayed ye thyrde tyme, sayenge the same wordes. Then came he to hys dyscy∣ples and sayde vnto theym. Slepe hens forthe and take youre rest / take hede the houre is at hande, and the sonne of man shall
be betrayed into the handes of synners. Ryse let vs be goynge beholde he is at hande that shall betraye me. whyle he yet thus spake, lo Iudas one of the twelue came and with hym a greate multytude, with swerdes and staues, sente from the chyef of ye prestes and elders of the people, and he that betrayed hym, had gyuen them a token sayeng who soeuer I kysse that same is he laye handes on hym. And forth with all he came to Iesus and sayde. Hayle master, And kyssed him, and Iesus sayd vnto him Frende wherfore arte thou come. Then came they and layde handes on Iesus and toke hym. And beholde one of thē which were with Iesus stretched out hys hand and drewe his swerd and stroke a seruaunte of the hye preeste and smote of hys eare. Then sayd Iesus vnto hym. Put vp thy swerde into his sheth for all that laye hande on the swerde, shal perysshe wt the swerd eyther thynkest thou that I can not nowe praye to my father / and he shall gyue me mo then .xij. legyons of Angels, but howe then shulde ye scriptures be fulfylled, for so must it be. The same tyme sayde Iesus to the multytude, ye be come oute as it were vnto a thefe with swerdes & staues for to take me / I sat dayly techynge in the temple amōge you, and ye toke me nat. All this was done that the scryptures of the prophetes myght be fulfyl¦led. Then all the discyples forsoke hym / & fledde. And they toke Iesus and led hym to Cayphas the hye preeste, where the scry∣bes ad Elders were assembled / and Peter folowed him a far of vnto the hye preestes place. And wente in / and sat with the ser∣uantes to se the ende. The cheyfe prestes, and the elders, and al the counsel / sought fals wytnes agaynst Iesus for to put him to death, but founde none / in so muche yt when many false wyt¦nesses came, yet founde they none. At the laste came two false witnesses and sayde. This felowe sayde I can destroye the tem¦ple of GOD and buylde it agayne in .iij. dayes. And the chefe preste arose and sayde to hym / answerest thou nothynge / how is it that these bere witnesse agaynste the. But Iesus helde his peace. And the chyfe prest answered and saide to him I charge yt
in the name of the liuynge god, that ye tel vs whether thou be / Chrst ye sonne of god. Iesus sayd to him, thou hast sayd, neuer¦theles I saye vnto you / here after shall ye se ye sonne of mā / syt∣tyng on ye ryght hand of power, & come in the cloudes of ye skye Then ye hye prest rent his clothes sayeng. He hath blasphemed, what nede we of any mo wytnesses, beholde now ye haue herd his blasphemye what thinke ye. They answered & sayde? he is worthy to dye, thā spatt they ī his face, & buffeted him wt tystes & other smote him wt the palme of theyr hādes on ye face, sayeng Tel vs thou Christ, who is he that smote the Peter sat wt out ī ye palas / and a damsell came to him sayinge. Thou also wast wt Iesus of Galyle but he denied before them al sayenge, I wote not what thou sayest. When he was gone out in to the porche, another wenche sawe him, and sayd vnto them that were there This felowe was also with Iesus of Nazareth, and agayne he denied with an othe that he knewe not the man, And after a whyle came vnto hym they that stode by, and said vnto Peter. Surely thou arte euen one of them, for thy speach be wrayeth ye Then be gan he to curse / and to swere that he knewe not ye mā and immediatly the cocke crewe, and Peter remembred ye wor∣des of Iesu whiche said vnto hym, Before the cocke crow thou shalt deny me thryse. And went out at the dores, and wept bit∣terly when the mornyng was come al the cheyf prestes and the elders of ye yeople helde a counsell agaynst Iesu, to put hym to deth and brought hym bound & delyuered hym vnto Poncius Pylate the debyte. Then when Iudas whiche betrayed hym / saw that he was condempned, he repented hym selfe. & brought agayne the .xxx. plates of syluer to ye hye prestes & elders sayeng I haue synned / betrayeng ye innocēt blode And they sayd what is that to vs, se thou to that. And he caste downe the syluer pla∣tes in the temple and departed, and went and honge hym selfe, and the cheyfe preste toke the syluer plates and sayd / It is not lawful for to put them in to the treasury because it is ye pryce of blode, and they toke counsell, and boughte with them a potters
felde to burye straungers in / wherfore ye felde is called ye felde of blode vnto this daye, Then was fulfylled that whiche was spoken by Ieremy ye prophet sayinge, and they toke .xxx. syluer plates / the pryce of hym that was valued, whom they boughte of the chyldren of Israell / and they gaue them for the potters felde, as the lorde apoynted me. Iesus stode before the debyte / & the debyte axed hym sayenge. Arte thou the kynge of the Ie∣wes. Iesus sayde vnto him. Thou sayest, and when he was ac¦cused of ye cheyfe prestes & elders, he answered nothyng. Then sayde Pylate vnto him, hearest yu not howe many thynges they laye agaynste the, and he answered to hym neuer a worde in so much yt the debite maruayled greatly. At ye feast the debite was wonte to delyuer vnto the people a prysoner, whō they wolde desyre. He had thē a notable prysoner called Barrabas, & whē they were gathered togyther, Pylate sayde vnto thē? whether wyll ye that I gyue lose vnto you / Barrabas or Iesus which is called Christ, for he knewe well that for enuy they had dely∣uered hym. Whē he was set downe to gyue iudgemēt his wyfe sent to hym sayenge. Haue thou nothinge to do with that iuste man, for I haue suffered many thynges thys daye in a dreame about hym. But the chyefe prestes and the elders had perswa∣ded the people that they shulde are Barrabas / & shulde destroy Iesus. Then the debyte answered and sayde vnto them? whe∣ther of the twayne wyll ye that I let louse vnto you, and they sayd Barrabas. Pylate sayd vnto thē, what shall I do then wt Iesus which is called Chryst. They all sayd to hym, let hym be crucyfyed. Then sayd the debyte? what euyll hath he done. And they cryed the more, sayeng, let hym be crucifyed. whē Pylate sawe that he preuayled nothynge, but that more busynes was made / he toke water & wasshed hys handes before the people: sayenge. I am innocent of the bloud of this iust person. And ye ye shall see. Then answered all the people and sayd. Hys bloud be on vs, & on our chyldren. Thā let he Barrabas lose vnto thē and scourged Iesus & delyuered him to be crucifyed. Then the
souldyours of the debyte toke Iesus vnto the cōmen hall. And gathered vnto him all the cōpany, & they stryped him, & put on hym a purple robe. And platted a crowne of thornes, & put vpō his heade, & a rede in his ryghte hande. And bowed theyr knees before hym / & mocked hym / sayeng / Hayle kynge of the Iewes, & spytted on hym / & toke the rede & smot hym on the head. And when they had mocked hym / they toke the robe of hym agayne & put his owne rayment on him / & led hȳ away to crucyfye him And as they came out / they founde a mā of Cyren, named Sy∣mon, hym they cōpelled to beare his crosse. And whē they came vnto ye place called Golgotha, yt is to say, a place of deade mens sculles they gaue hym vyneyger to drynke mengled with gall / and when he tasted therof he wolde not drynke, when they had crucifyed hym, they parted his garmentes, & dyd caste lottes to fulfyl yt was spoken by ye prophet. They deuided my garmētes amonge them / & vpon my vesture dyd cast lottes & they sat and watched hym there, & they set vp ouer his head the cause of hys death writen. This is ye kynge of the Iewes, & there were two theues crucyfyed wt hym one on the ryght hande, & another on ye lefte. They yt passed by reuyled hī, wagginge theyr heades, & sayeng. Thou yt destroyest the tēple of god, & buyldest it in thre dayes, saue thy selfe yf yu be the sonne of god, come downe from the crosse, lyke wyse also the hye preestes mockynge hym, wyth the scrybes & elders sayde. He saued other, hym selfe he can not saue, if he be the kynge yf Israel, let hym now come down frō the crosse, & we wyl beleue hym, he trusted in god, let hym dely∣uer hym nowe, if he wyll haue hym / for he sayd I am the sonne of god. That same also the theues which were crucifyed wt hȳ cast in hys teth, frō the syxt houre was there darkenes ouer all the lāde vnto ye nynth houre. And about the nynth houre Iesus cryed wt a loude voyce, sayenge, Ely Ely, Lama Sabathany / that is to say My God, my god, why hast yu forsakē me. Some of thē yt stode there, when they herde yt, sayde. This mā calleth for Helyas. And strayt waye one of them ranne and toke a spō∣ge
& fylled it full of vynegre / and put it on a rede, and gaue hym to drynke. Other sayd let be, let vs se whether Helias wyl come and delyuer hym. Iesus cryed agayne with a loude voyce & yel¦ded vp the ghost. And beholde the vayle of the temple dyd rent in twayne frō the toppe to the bottome. And the erth dyd qua∣ke. And the stones dyd rent, & graues dyd open, and the bodyes of many Sayntes which slepte, arose and came out of the gra∣ues after hys Resurreccyon, and came into the holy cyte, & ap∣pered vnto many. when the Centurion & they that were wyth hym watrhynge Iesus, sawe the earthquake & those thynges, whiche happened they feared greatly sayenge, of a surety this was the sonne of God. And many women were there, behol∣dynge hym a farre of whyche folowed Iesus from Galile, my∣nistryng vnto hym. Among whiche was Mary Magdaleyne, and Mary the mother of Iames & Ioses & the mother of zebe∣des chyldren, when the euen was come there came a ryche man of Aramathya named Ioseph, whyche same also was Iesus disciple He went to Pylate & begged the body of Iesus. Then Pylate cōmaunded the body to be delyuered, & Iosephe toke ye bodye & wrapped it in a clene lynnen clothe, & put it in his newe tōbe / whiche he had hewē out euē in ye rocke. And rolled a great stone at ye dore of ye sepulchre, & departed. And there was Mary Magdalene & the other mary syttyng ouer agaynst ye sepulcre. ¶ The Gospell on Palme sondaye. THe nexte daye that foloweth good frydaye, the hye pre∣stes and pharyses got them selues to Pylate and sayde Syr we remember / that thys deceyuer sayde whyle he was yet alyue. After .iii dayes I wyll aryse agayne. Commaunde ther∣fore the Sepulchre be made sure / vntyll the thyrde daye / leest perauenture his discyples come and steale hym away & say vn∣to the people, he is rysen from death, & the laste errour be worse then the fyrste. Pylate sayde vnto theym. Take watchmen go & make it sure as ye can. And they wente and made the sepulchre sure with watchemen, and sealed the stone.
¶ The passyon on good frydaye. The .xviij. chapiter of Iohn̄. A IEsus went forth with his dysciples ouer ye broke Cedrō where was a gardeyne, into ye which he entred wyth hys dyscyples. Iudas also, whiche betrayed hym knewe ye place for Iesus oftymes resorted thyther with his disciples. Iudas thā after he had receyued a bonde of men, and mynisters of the hye prestes and Pharyses came thyther with lanternes & fyre bron¦des, and wepons. Then Iesu knowynge all thynges yt shulde come on hym, went forth and sayde vnto them. whom seke ye. They answerd hym. Iesus of Nazareth. Iesus sayde vnto thē I am he. Iudas also whiche betraed hym, stode with them, but as sone as he had sayde vnto theym, I am he, they went backe∣wardes and fell to the grounde and he asked them agayn. whō seke ye. They sayd? Iesus of Nazareth. Ies{us} answered? I sayd vnto you I am he, yf ye seke me / let these go theyr waye, that ye sayeng myght be fulfylled which he spake. Of them which thou gauest me, haue I not lost one. Symon Peter had a sworde, & drew it, and smote the hye prestes seruaūt and cut of his ryght eare. The seruauntes name was Malchus. Then sayde Iesus vnto Peter / put vp thy swerde into ye sheath? shal I not drynke of the cuppe whiche my father hath gyuen me. Then the cōpa∣ny and the captayne, and the ministers of the Iewes, toke Ie∣sus and bounde hym, & led hym away to Anna fyrst, for he was father in lawe vnto Cayphas whiche was ye hye preste / ye same yere Cayphas was he that gaue counsell to the Iewes that it was expediente, that one man shulde dye for ye people. And Sy¦mon Peter folowed Iesus & another discyple, ye dyscyple was knowē of ye hye prest, & went in wt Iesus into ye palays of ye hye prest, but Peter stode at ye dore wtout. Thā wēt out ye other dis¦ciple, which was knowen vnto the hye preste, and spake to the damsell that kept the dore and brought in Peter. Then sayd ye damsel that kept the dore, vnto Peter. Art not thou one of this mans disciples, he sayd. I am not. The seruauntes & the mini∣sters
stode there and had made a fyre of coles, for it was colde and they warmed them selues. Peter also stode amonge them, and warmed hym selfe. The hye preste axed Iesus of his disci∣ples and of his doctrine. Iesus answered hym? I spake openly in the worlde I euer taught in the Sinagoge and in the tēple whither al ye Iewes resorted & in secrete haue I sayd nothyng, why axest thou me, axe them which herde me, what I sayd vn∣to them, beholde they can tel what I sayde. when he had thus spoken, one of the ministers whiche stode by smote Iesus on ye face saying, answerest thou the hye prest so, Iesus answered hī Yf I haue euyl spoken beare wytnesse of ye euyl, Yf I haue wel spoken why smytest thou me And Annas sent him bound vnto Cayphas the hye preeste. Symon Peter stode and warmed hī selfe, & they sayde vnto hī, art thou not also one of his discyples He denyed it and sayde. I am not. One of the seruauntes of the hye prest his cosen whose eare Peter smote of, sayde vnto him / dyd not I se the in ye gardeyn with him. Peter denied it agayn, and immediatly ye cocke trewe. Then led they Iesus from Cai∣phas into the hall of Iudgemente. It was in the mornynge, & they thē selues wente not in to ye iudgement hal, lest they shulde be defyled, but that they myght eate the Paschal lambe. Pylate then went out vnto them, and sayd. what accusacion brynge ye agaynste this man. They answered and said vnto hym. Yf he were not an euyll doer, we wolde not haue delyuered hym vn∣to the. Then sayd Pylate vnto them, take ye hym, and iudge hī after your owne law. Then the Iues sayde vnto hym it is not lawfull for vs to any man to deth. That the wordes of Iesus myght be fulfylled, which he spake, sygnifienge what death he shulde dye. Then Pylate entred into ye iudgement hall agayne and called Iesus and said vnto hym. Art thou the kynge of the Iewes Iesus answered? sayest thou that of thy selfe, or dyd / other tel it the of me. Pylate answered. Am I a Iewe / Thyne owne nacyon & hye preestes haue deliuered the vnto me. what hast thou done. Iesus answered. My kyngdome is not of thys
Worlde. Yf my kyngdome were of this worlde, then wolde my mynisters surely fyght that I shulde not be delyuered to the Ie¦wes. But now is my kyngdome not from hense. Pylate sayde vnto hym. Art thou a kyng. Then Iesus answered. Thou say∣est that I am a kyng for this cause was I borne, and for thys cause came I into the worlde, that I shuld bere wytnesse vnto the truth. and all that are of ye truth here my voyce, Pylate saide vnto him. what thynge is trueth, and when he had sayde that, he went out agayne vnto them. I fynde in hym no cause at al. Ye haue a custome that I shuld delyuer you one lose at Easter / wyll ye yt I lose vnto you ye kyng of ye Iewes. Then cryed they al agayn sayng. Not hȳ but Barrabas, yt Barrabas was a rob¦ber. Thā Pylate toke Iesus & scourged hym, & the souldyours wounde a crowne of thornes & put on his heed & they dyd on hī a purple garmēt, & said. Hayle kynge of the Iewes. & they smot him on the face. Pylate went forth agayne, & sayde vnto them. Beholde I brynge hym forth to you, yt ye may knowe yt I fynd no faute in him. Then came Iesus forth wearyng a crowne of thorne & a robe of purple. & Pylate sayd vnto them beholde the man. whan ye hye prestes & ministers sawe hī, they cried sayeng Crucifye him, crucify him. Pylate sayd vnto them. Take ye him & crucifye him. for I fynd no cause in him. The Iues answered hym, we haue a lawe & by oure lawe he ought to dye because he made him selfe ye sonne of god. when Pilate herde ye sayeng, he was ye more afrayde, & went agayne into ye iudgement hal, and sayde vnto Iesus. whense arte thou but Iesus gaue hym none answere. Then Pylate sayde vnto hym, spekest yu not vnto me / knowest yu not, yt I haue power to crucyfye yt, and haue power to lose yt. Iesus answered. Thou couldeste haue no power at al agaynst me, except it were gyuen ye from aboue. Therfore he yt delyuered me vnto ye, is more in synne, & frō thensforth sought Pylate meanes to louse hym, but the Iewes cryed sayenge / Yf thou let hym go, yu arte not Cesars frende. For whosoeuer maketh hym selfe a kynge, is agaynst Cesar. when Pylate herd
that sayenge, he brought Iesus forth and sate downe to gyue sentence in a place called the pauement, but in the Hebrewe ton¦gue, Gabbatho it was ye Sabboth euen which  in the Ea¦ster feaste, and aboute the syxt houre he sayde vnto the Iewes, beholde your kynge. They cryed awaye wt hym, awaye wt him crucifye hym. Pylate sayde vnto theym, shall I crucyfye youre kynge. The hye prestes answered / we haue no kyng but Cesar Then delyuered he hym vnto them to be crucyfyed, & they toke Iesus and led hym away & he bare hys crosse, & went forth in∣to a place called the place of deed mens sculles, which is named in Hebrewe Golgotha, where they crucyfyed hym, & two other with hym, on eyther syde one, & Iesus in the myddes, and Py∣late wrote hys tytle, and put it on ye crosse. The wrytynge was Iesus of Nazareth kynge of the Iewes. This tytle rede ma∣ny of the Iewes, for ye place where Iesus was crucyfyed, was nye to the Cytie. And it was wryten, in Hebrewe, Greke & La∣ten. Then sayde the hye prestes of the Iewes to Pylate. wryte not kynge of the Iewes, but that he sayde. I am Kynge of the Iewes. Pylate answered. what I haue wrytē that I haue wri¦ten. Then the souldyours, when they had crucifyed Iesus toke his garmente & made .iiij. partes, to euery souldyour a parte / & also his cote, ye cote was wtout seme wrought vpō thorow oute & they sayd one to another, let vs not deuyde it, but caste lottes who shal haue it. That the scripture might be fulfylled, which sayeth. They {per}ted my raymēt amōg thē, & on my cote dyd cast lottes & the souldyours dyd such thynges in dede. There stode by ye crosse of Iesus his mother, & his mothers syster, Mary the wyfe of Cleophas & Marye Magdalene. whē Iesus sawe his mother & the dysciple stādynge whō he loued he sayd vnto hys mother. womā beholde thy sonne. Then sayd he vnto ye disciple behold thy mother / & frō ye houre the disciple toke her for hys owne. After that when Iesus perceyued that all thynges were perfurmed yt the scrypture myght be fulfylled, he sayd, I thyrst there stode a vessell full of vyneyger by, and they fylled a spōge
with vyneyger, and wounde it aboute with ysope, and put it to his mouthe, as sone as Iesus had receyued of the vyneyger he sayde it is fynysshed, and bowed his heade & gaue vp the ghost The Iewes then bycause it was the Saboth euen that the bo¦dyes shulde not remayne vpon the crosse on the Saboth daye, for the Saboth day was an hye daye, besought Pylate yt theyr legges myght be broken and that they myght be taken downe. Then came ye souldyours and brake the legges of the fyrst, & of the other whiche was crucifyed wt Iesus, but when they came to Iesus & sawe that he was dead all redy they brake not hys legges, but one of the souldyours with a spere thrust hym into the syde, and forthwith came there out bloude and water, & he yt sawe it bare recorde, & his recorde is true / & he knoweth yt he sayeth true, yt ye myght beleue also. These thynges were done yt the scrypture shuld be fulfylled. Ye shall not breake a bone of him, & agayne another Scripture sayeth. They shal loke on hȳ whom they persed. ¶ The gospell on good frydaye. AFter yt Ioseph of Aromathia, whiche was a dysciple of Iesus / but secretly for fere of ye Iewes, besought Pylat yt he myght take downe ye body of Iesus & Pylate gaue him ly¦cence, & there came also Nicodemus which at the begynnynge came to Iesus by night & brought of Myrre & Aloes myngled togyther about an .C. poūde weyght. Then toke they the body of Iesu & woūd it in lynnyn clothes wt the odours as ye maner of ye Iewes is to bury, & in ye place where Iesus was crucyfied was a gardeyn, & in the gardeyn a new sepulchre wherin was neuer man layde. There layde they Iesus bycause of ye Iewes Sabboth euen for the sepulchre was nye at hande. ¶ The pystle on Easter daye, ye .j. pystle to ye Corynth. ye .v. cha. BRethren pourge the olde leuē, yt ye may be new dowe as ye are swete breade. For Christ our Easter lābe is offred vp for vs. Therfore let vs kepe holy daye, not with olde leuen, neyther with the leuen of maliciousnes, and wyckednes, but wt the swete breade of purenes and truth.
¶ The Gospell on Easter daye. The .xvj. chap, of Marke. A MAry Magdalene, & mary Iacobi & Salome, boughte o∣doures yt they myght come and anoynt Iesus. And erlye in the mornynge the next daye after ye Saboth day / they came vnto ye Sepulchre, when the sonne was rysen & they said one to another. Who shall rolle vs awaye the stone from the dore of ye sepulchre. And when they loked, they sawe howe the stone was rolled awaye, for it was a very great one. And they wente into the sepulchre, & sawe a yonge man syttynge on the ryghte syde clothed in a longe whyte garmēte & they were abasshed. And he sayd vnto thē, be not afrayde, ye seke Iesus of Nazareth which was crucifyed, he is rysen he is not here, beholde ye place where they put him but go your waye & tell his disciples, and namely Peter he wyll go before you into Galyle, there shal ye se hym as he sayde vnto you. ¶ The Pystle on the Mondaye in the Easter weke. The .x. cha. of the Actes of the Apostles. F PEter stode vp amonge the people and sayd vnto them ye knowe well that Iesus Christ was preached throughout all Iury, & began in Galyle, after baptyme whiche Iohn̄ preached, howe god anoynted Iesus of Nazareth with ye holy ghost and with power. Which Iesus wēt about doynge good & healynge all that were oppressed of the deuyls for God was wt hym & we are wytnesses of all thynges whiche he dyd in the lande of the Iewes and at Ierusalem, whō they slewe, & hōge on tree, hym god raysed vp the thyrde daye, & shewed hym only not to all ye people but vnto vs wytnesses chosen before of god / which eate & dranke wt him, after he rose from death. And he cō∣maunded vs to preache vnto the people & testifye yt it is he that is ordeyned of God a iudge of quycke and dead. To hym gyue all the prophetes wytnes, yt thorowe his name shal receyue re∣myssion of synnes all that beleue in hym. ¶ The gospell on the mondaye in the Easter weke. The .xxiiij. chapyter of Luke. B
TWo of the discyples of Iesus went ye same day to a ca∣stell which was from Ierusalem aboute .lx. forlonges, called Emaus, & they talked togyder of all these thynges yt had happened. And it chaunsed as they cōmoned togyther & reaso∣ned, yt Iesus hym selfe drewe nere / and went wt them, but theyr eyes were holden yt they coulde not knowe hym & he sayd vnto thē. What maner of communicacyons are these yt ye haue one to another as ye walke & are sad. And ye one of thē named Cleo¦phas answered & sayd vnto him, arte yu onely a straūger in Ie∣rusalē, & hast not knowē ye thynges whiche haue chaūsed there in these dayes, to whō he sayde what thynges & they sayd vnto hym of Iesus of Nazareth which was a prophete myghtye in¦dede & worde before God & all the people. And how the hye pre∣stes & our rulers delyuered hym to be condēpned to death & ha¦ue crucifyed him, but we trusted yt it shulde haue ben he yt shuld haue delyuered Israell. And as touchynge all these thynges, to daye is euen ye .iij, day yt they were done, ye & certayne womē al∣so of our company made vs astonyed, which came early vnto ye sepulchre & found not his body & came sayenge yt they had sene a vision of angels, which sayd yt he was alyue, and certayne of thē which were wt vs went theyr waye to ye sepulchre, & founde it euen so as the womē had sayd, but him they sawe not. And he sayd vnto thē. O foles & slowe of herre to beleue all yt the {pro}phe∣tes haue spokē, ought not Christ to haue suffred these thynges and to entre into hys glory. And he began at Moses & at all ye prophetes & interpreted vnto thē all the scryptures which were wrytten of hym & they drewe nye vnto the Castell whiche they went to, & he made as though he wolde haue gone further / but they constrayned hym sayenge, abyde with vs for it draweth to¦wardes nyght & the day is far passed, and he wente in. To tary wt thē, & it came to passe as he sat at meate wt thē he toke bread blessed it, brake & gaue vnto thē, & their eyes were opened & they knewe hym, & he vanysshed out of theyr syght, & they sayde be∣twene them selues, dyd not our hertes burne wtin vs, whyle he
talked wt vs by the way and as he opened to vs the scryptures. And they arose vp ye same houre & retourned agayn to Ierusalē and founde the eleuen gathered to gyther and them that were with thē, whiche sayd ye lord is rysen in dede and hath appered to Symon and they tolde what thynges was done in the waye and howe they knewe hym in brekynge of the breade. ¶ The Pystle on ye tewysday in the Easter weke. The .xiiij. cha. of the Actes of the Apostels. C. PAule stode vp and beckened with the hande and sayde. Ye men and brethren chyldren of the generacyon of Abraham and who so euer amonge you feared GOD, to you is thys word of saluacion sent. The inhabiters of Ierusalem and their rulers, because they knewe hym not, nor yet ye voyces of ye pro∣phetes which are red euery saboth daye they haue fulfylled thē in condēpnyng hym. And when they founde no cause of eath in hym, yet desyred they Pylate to kil him, and when they had ful∣fylled al that were w ytten of hym. they toke hym doune from ye tree, and put hym in a Sepulcre. But god raysed hym agayne from dethe, and he was sene many dayes of them which came with hym from Galyle to Ierusalem, which are his witnesses vnto the people, And we declare vnto you, howe yt the promyse made vnto the fathers god hathe fulfylled vnto vs theyr chyl∣dren / in that he raysed vp Iesus agayne. ¶ The Gospel on ye tewysday in ye Easter weke. The .xxiiij. cha. of Luke. F. IEsus him selfe stode in the myddes of his disciples & sayd vnto them, peace be with you And they were abashed & a∣frayde, supposynge yt they had sene a sprite. And he sayd vnto them. Why are ye troubled, and why do thougtes arise in your hertes, beholde my handes and my fete, that it is euen my selfe handle me and se, for spirites haue not flesshe and bones as ye se me haue and when he had thus spoken he shewed them his handes and his fete, and whyle they yet beleued not for ioye / and wondred, he sayde vnto theym / haue ye here anye meate,
and they gaue him a pece of a broyled fyshe, and of an honi cōbe and he toke it & eate it before them and he sayde vnto thē. These are the wordes whiche I spake vnto you, whyle I was yet wt you that all must be fulfylled which were wryten of me in the lawe of Moses, and in the prophetes, & in the Psalmes. Then opened he theyr wyttes, yt they myght vnderstande the scriptu¦res and sayde vnto them, thus is it wryten, & thus it behoueth Chryst to suffre, & to ryse agayne from death the .iij. daye. And the repentaūce & remissyon of synnes shulde be preached in his name amonge all nacyons. ¶ The Pystle on the wednysdaye in the Easter weke. The .iij. chapiter of the Actes of the Apostles. C PEter openynge his mouth saye / ye men of Israell & all ye ye feare god, here the God of Abrahā / Isaac / & Iacob, the god of our fathers hath glorified his sōne Iesus, whō ye betrayed and denyed in the presence of Pylate when he had iud¦ged hym to be losed, but ye denyed the holy and iust, & desyred a murther to be gyuen you, and kylled the lorde of lyfe whō God hath raysed from death, of the whiche we are wytnesses / & now brethren I knowe ye thorowe ignoraunce ye dyd it, as dyd also your heddes, but god which shewed before by the mouth of all prophetes yt Christ shulde suffre, hath thus wyse fulfylled it. Repent therfore and turne yt your synnes maye be done awaye ¶ The Gospel on the wednysdaye in the Easter weke, The .xxj. Chapyter of Iohn̄. A AFter ye Iesus shewed him selfe agayne to his disciples at ye see of Tiberias. And on thys wyse shewed he him selfe There were togyther Symon Peter & Thomas which is cal∣led. And Nathanael of Cana a Cytie of Galyle & the sonnes of zebede, & two other of the discyples. Symon Peter sayde vn∣to them, I go a fysshyng. They sayd vnto him, we also wyl go wt the. They wente theyr way & entred into a shyp strayt way & that nyght caught they nothyng, but when the mornyng was now come Iesus stode on ye shore, neuertheles ye disciples knew
not yt it was Iesus. Ies{us} sayd vnto thē, syrs haue ye any meate They answered hym no & sayde vnto thē. Cast out ye net on the ryght side of ye shyp, & ye shal fynde. They cast out & anone they were not able to drawe it, for ye multytude of fyshes. Then sayd the disciple whome Iesus loued vnto Peter, it is ye lorde. Whā Symon Peter herde that it was ye lorde, he gyrde his mantel to him for he was naked, and sprange into ye see. The other dis∣ciples came by shyp for they were not farre frome lande, but as it were two hondreth cubytes and they drewe ye nette wt fysshes As sone as they were come to lande, they sawe hoote coles and fysshe layde thereon, and breade, Iesus sayd vnto them, brynge of the fyshe which ye haue caught Simon Peter stepped forth & drewe the net to lande full of great fysshes an hondreth & liij. & for all there were so many, yet was not the net broken. Iesus sayde vnto them come and dyne. And none of the disciples durst axe hym, what arte thou, for they knewe that it was the lorde. Iesus then came and toke breade and gaue them / & fysshe lyke∣wyse And thus is nowe the thyrde tyme that Iesus appered to his discyples / after that he was rysen agayne from death. ¶ The Pystle on ye .j. sōdaye after Easter daye called lowe Sō∣daye, The .j. Pystel of Iohn̄ ye .v. cha. E MOste dere beloued brethren all that is borne of god ouer∣commeth the worlde, and this is the victorye that ouer∣commeth the worlde, euen our fayth, who is that ouercōmeth the world, but he which beleueth ye Iesus is the sonne of god. This Iesus Christ is he that came by water and blode not by water only, but by water and blode, & it is the spirite yt beareth wytnes, because ye spryte is trueth, for there are .iij. which beare recorde in heuē, ye father / the worde, & the holy ghost, & these .iij. are one for there are .iij. whiche beare recorde in earth. The spi∣rite, the water / and bloude, and these .iij. are one / if we receyue ye wytnesse of mē, the witnesse of god is greter, for this is ye wyt∣nesse of god, which he testyfyed of his sonne. He ye beleueth on ye sonne of God / hath wytnesse in hym selfe.
¶ The Gospell on the .j. Sonday after Easter day called lowe sonday the .xx chapiter of Iohn̄. E THe same daye at nyght, whiche was ye morowe after the Saboth daye, when the dores were shut, where the dis∣cyples were assembled togyther for feare of ye Iewes came Ie∣sus and stode in the myddes, and sayde to them. Peace be with you, and when he had so sayde, he shewed vnto them his hādes and his syde. Then were the discyples glad when they sawe ye Lorde. Then sayde Iesus to them agayne. Peace be with you, As my father sent me euen so sende I you, & when he had sayde that, he brethed on them and sayd vnto them. Receyue the holy ghost, who soeuers synnes ye remytte, they are remytted vnto them, & who soeuers synnes ye retayne, they are retayned, but Thomas one of the twelue called Didimus, was not with thē when Iesus came, the other discipls sayd vnto hym We haue sene the lorde, and he sayd vnto them, excepte I se in his handes the prynte of the nayles, and put my fynger in the hooles of the nayles, & truste my hande into hys syde I wyll not beleue. And after .viij. dayes agayne, his disciples were within, & Thomas with thē. Then came Iesus when the dores were shut & stode in the myddes, and saide Peace be with you, after that sayde he to Thomas, brynge thy fynger hyther, and se my handes, and brynge thy hande and thruste it into my syde, and be not fayth∣lesse, but beleuyng. Thomas answered and sayd vnto hym my lorde and my god Iesus sayd vnto him. Thomas because thou haste sene me therfore thou beleuest Happy are they ye hath not sene, & yet beleue. And many other sygnes dyd Iesus in the pre∣sence of his discyples, which are not wrytē in this boke. These are wryten yt ye myght beleue yt Iesus is Christ ye sonne of mā, and that in beleuynge, ye myght haue lyfe thorowe hys name. ¶ The Pystle on the .ij. Sondaye after Easter day the .j. pystle of Peter, the .ij. chapiter. C. MOoste dere beloued brethren: Chryste suffered for vs, le∣uynge vs an ensample, that ye shulde folowe his steppes,
which did no synne, neyther was there gyle foūde in his mouth which when he was reuyled, reuyled not agayne, whē he suffe∣red, he threatened not, but commytted the cause to hym ye iud∣geth ryghtouslye, which his owne selfe bare our synnes in his body on the tree, yt we shulde be delyuered from synne, & shulde lyue in right wisnes, by whose strypes ye were healed, for ye we∣re as shepe goynge astraye, but are nowe returned vnto ye shepe∣herde and byshop of youre soules. ¶ The Gospel on ye .ij. Sonday after Easter daye. The .x. cha∣piter of Iohn̄. C. IEsus sayd to his disciples, I am the good shepherde, the good shepherde gyueth his lyfe for his shepe, an hyred ser∣uaunte, which is not the shepherd neyther ye shepe are his owne seyeth the wolfe comming and leueth the shepe and flyeth, and ye wolfe cascheth them & scattereth the shepe. The hyred seruaunt flyeth, because he is an hyred seruaūte, & careth not for ye shepe, I am the good shepherd, and knowe myne, and am knowen of myne. As my father knoweth me euen so knowe I my father. And I giue my lyfe for ye shepe, and other shepe I haue which are not of this folde, them also must I bryng, that they may heare my voyce, & that there maye be one floke, & one shepherde. ¶ The Pystle on the .iij. Sonday after Easter day. The .j. Py∣stle of Peter the .ij. chapiter. C. MOst dere beloued brethren. I beseche you as straungers & pylgrymes, abstayne frome flesshlye lustes, whyche fyght agaynst ye soule, and se that ye haue honest conuersaciō amonge the Gentyles that they whiche backebyte you as euyll doers maye se your good workes and prayse God in the daye of visi∣tacyon, submyt your selues vnto all maner ordynaunce of man for the Lordes sake, whether it be vnto the kynge as vnto the cheyfe heed, eyther vnto the rulers, as vnto theym that are sent of hym, for the punysshemente of euyll doers, but for the lande of theym that doo well, for so is the wyll of GOD, that ye
put to sylence the ignorauncy of the folyshe men, as free, & not as hauyng the libierte for a cloke of malycyousnes, but euen as the seruauntes of god, honour al men, loue brotherly felysshyp feare god & honour ye Kynge, seruauntes obey your masters wt all feare, not onely yf they be good & curteous, but also though they be froward, for it cōmeth of grace in Christ Iesus our lord ¶ The Gospell on the .iij. Sondaye after Easter daye the .xvj. Chapiter. of Iohn̄. D. IEsus sayde to hys dyscyples after a whyle ye shall not se¦me, & agayne after a whyle ye shall se me, for I go to ye fa∣ther, then sayd some of hys discyples betwene thē selues, what is this yt he sayeth vnto vs. After a whyle ye shal not se me, and agayne after a whyle ye shall se me, and that I go to the father They sayd therfore what is thys yt he sayd sayth after a whyle we can not tell what he sayeth. Iesus perceyued yt they wolde axe hym, & sayd vnto them. This is it yt ye enquyre of betwene your selues, yt I said after a whyle ye shal not seme, & agayn af¦ter a whyle ye shal se me. Verelye verelye, I saye vnto you, ye shall wepe and lamēte, and ye worlde shall reioyce, ye shall sorow but your sorowe shall be turned to ioy. A woman when she tra¦uayleth hath sorowe, bycause her houre is come, but as sone as she is delyuered of the chylde remembreth no more the anguys∣she, for ioye ye a man is borne into ye worlde. And ye nowe are in sorowe, but I wyl se you agayne. And your hertes shal reioyce, and your ioye shall no man take from you. ¶ The Pystle on the .iiij. Sondaye after Easter daye. The .j. Chapyter of Iames. C MOst dere beloued brethren: euery good gyfte, & euery per∣fyte gyfte, is frome aboue, & cōmeth downe, from ye father of lyght, wt whom is no variablenes, neyther is he chaūged vn¦to darkenes. Of his owne wyll begat he vs wt the worde of lyfe yt we shulde be ye fyrst fruytes of hys creatures. Wherfore dere brethren let euery man be swyft to here, flowe to speake, & flow to wrath, for the wrathe of man worketh not yt whiche is rygh∣teous
before god. Wherfore lay a parte all fylthynes, all super fluyte of malycyousnes. And receyue with meknes the worde ye is grafted in you, which is able to saue your soules. ¶ The gospell on ye .iiij. Sondaye after Easter daye. The .xvj. chapyter of Iohn̄. B IEsus sayde to his discyples nowe I go my waye to hym that sent me. And none of you axeth me, whyther goest yu but bycause I haue sayde such thynges vnto you, your hertes are full of sorowe. Neuerthelesse I tell you the trueth, it is expe∣dient for you yt I go awaye, For yf I go not away that cōfor∣ter wyll not come vnto you, But yf I departe I wyl sende him vnto you. And when he is come, he wyll rebuke the worlde of synne, & of ryghtwysnes & of iudgemente of synne, because they beleue not on me, of ryghtwysenes, because I go to my father, and ye shall se me no more. And of iudgement, because ye cheyfe ruler of this worlde is iudged all redy. I haue yet many thyn∣ges to saye vnto you, but ye can not beare them awaye nowe. How be it when he is come, I meane ye spiryte of truth, he wyll teache you all trueth. He shall not speake of him selfe, but what soeuer he shall heare that shall he speake, & he wyl shewe you of thīges to come he shal glorifie me, for he shal receyue of myne & shew vnto you. All thynges yt the father hath are myne. Ther∣fore sayd I vnto you, yt he shall take of myne & shewe vnto you. ¶ The Pystle on the .v. sondaye after Easter daye, whiche is ye nexte Sonday before the crosse dayes. The .j. cha. of Iames. D MOost dere beloued brethren se yt ye be doers of ye worde / and not hearers onely, deceyuynge your owne selues wt Sophistrye for yf any heare ye worde & do it not, he is lyke vn∣to a man yt beholdeth his bodely face in a glasse, for as sone as he hath loked on hym selfe he goeth his waye & hath immedia∣tly for gotten what his fassh you was, but who soeuer loketh in the perfyte lawe of lybertye and contynueth therin (yf he be not a forgetfull hearer, but a doer of ye worde) he shall be happye in his dede, yf any man amonge you seme denoute, & refrayne not
his tonge, but deceyue his owne herte, this mānes deuocyon is in vayne. Pure deuocyon and vndefyled before god the father, is thys. To vysyte the frendles & widowes in theyr aduersyte and to kepe hym selfe vnspotted from the worlde. ¶ The Gospell on the .v. sondaye after Easter daye which is ye next sondaye before the crosse dayes, The .xvj. chap of Iohn̄. E IEsus sayde vnto his disciples, verely verely I saye vnto you, what soeuer ye shall aske ye father in my name, he wyl gyue it you, hetherto haue ye asked nothynge in my name aske and ye shal receyue it, that your ioy may be ful. These thynges haue I spokē vnto you in prouerbes, the tyme wyll come whē I shall speake no more to you in prouerbes, but I shall shewe you playnly from my father. It ye daye shal ye aske in my name and I saye not vnto you that I speke vnto my father for you. For the father him selfe loueth you because ye haue loued me, & haue beleued ye I came out frō god. I went out frō the father and came into the worlde. I leaue the worlde agayne, & go to ye father. His discyples sayde vnto hym, beholde nowe speakest yu playnly, and yu vsest no prouerbes. Nowe we know ye thou vn∣derstandest all thynges, & nedest not yt any man shulde aske the any questyon. Therfore beleue we that yu commest from god. ¶ The Pystle on Monday in ye crosse dayes. The .v. Chapyter of Iames. D MOst dere beloued brethren knowledge your fautes one to another, & pray one for another, yt ye maye be healed. The prayer of a ryghteous man auayled much, yf it be feruent. He∣lias was a man in daūger to trybulacion as we are, & he pray∣ed in his prayer, that it myght not rayne. And it rayned not on the earth by the space of thre yeres & syx monthes. And agayne he prayed, and the heuen gaue rayne and ye erth brought forth her fruyte, yf any of you erre from the trueth & another conuert hym, let the same knowe, that he which cōuerted the sinner frō goyng a stray out of his waye, shal saue a soule from deth, and shall hyde the multytude of synnes.
¶ The gospel on ye Mōday in ye crosse dayes. The .xj. chapiter of Luke. B. IEsus sayde vnto his disciples which of you shulde haue a frende, & shulde go to hym at mydnyght, and say vnto hym / frēde lende me thre loues for a frēde of myne is come out of the waye to me, and I haue nothynge to set before hym and he within shulde answere and say trouble me not now / ye dore is now shut / and my seruauntes are with me in ye chamber. I can not aryse and gyue thē vnto the. I saye vnto you thoughe he wyll not aryse and gyue him because he is his frēde / yet be∣cause of hys importunyte he wolde ryse / & gyue thē as many as nedeth / and I saye vnto you, aske / and it shalbe gyuen you Seke and you shall fynde / knocke and it shall be opened vnto you / for euery one that asketh receyued, and he that seketh fyn¦deth, and to him yt knocketh shal it be opened. Yf ye sonne aske breade of any of you, that is a father / wyl he gyue him a stone Or if he aske fysshe / wyll he for a fysshe gyue him a serpēt? Or yf he aske an egge, wyll ye offre hym a Scorpion? Yf ye then whiche are euyll / can gyue good gyftes vnto youre chyldren? How moch more shall your father of heuē gyue the holy ghost to them that desyre it of hym. ¶ The Pystle on the Ascensyon euen. The .iiij. Chapyter of ye Actes of the Apostles. G THe multytude of thē yt beleued were of one herte & of one soule. Also none of them sayde, yt any of ye thynges which he possessed was hys owne / but had all thynges common / and with great power gaue the Apostles wytnes of the Resurrec¦cyon of our Lorde Iesus Christ / and greate grace was with them all. Neyther was there any among them that lacked, for as many as were possessors of landes or houses solde them & brought the pryce of the thynges which were solde and layd it downe at the Apostles fete / and distribucyon was made vnto euery man accordynge as he had nede. ¶ The Gospel on the Ascension euen, ye .xvij. chap. of Iohn̄. A
IEsus lyfted vp his eyes to heuen & sayd, father the houre is come, gloryfye thy sonne ye thy sonne maye glorifye the As yu hast gyuen hym power ouer all flesshe, yt he shulde gyue e∣ternall lyfe to as many as thou haste gyuen hym. Thys is lyfe eternall yt they myghte knowe the, ye onely very god / & whom yu hast sent Iesus Christ. I haue glorifyed the on the erth. I haue fynysshed ye worke whiche thou gauest me to do, & now glorify me yu father with thyne owne selfe, wt the glory whych I had wt the yer the worlde was. I haue declared thy name vnto those / which yu gauest me out of ye world. Thyne they were & thou ga∣uest thē me, & they haue kept thy sayenges. Now haue they kno¦wen yt all thynges what soeuer thou hast gyuen me, are of the. For I haue giuen vnto them the wordes, which yu gauest me, & they haue receyued them, and haue knowen surely that I came out from the, & haue beleued yt thou dyddest sende me. I praye for them. I prayed not for the world, but for them which yu hast gyuē me, for they are thyne, & all myne are thyne, and thyne are myne, and I am glorifyed in them. And nowe am I no more in the worlde, but they are in the worlde and I come to the. ¶ The Pystle on the Ascensyon daye. The fyrst Chapyter of ye Actes of the Apostles. A SAynt Luke which wrote the Actes of the Apostles sayth in the former treatyse (dere frende Theophylus) I haue wryt¦ten of all that Iesus began to do, & teache vntyll the daye in the which he was taken vp after yt he thorowe ye holy ghost had gy¦uen cōmaundemētes vnto the Apostles, whiche he had chosen to whō also he shewed him selfe a lyue after his passyon, by ma¦ny tokēs apperynge vnto thē fortye dayes, & spake vnto them of the kyngdome of god & gathered them togyther, & cōmaun∣ded them yt they shuld not departe frō Ierusalem, but to wayte for the promyse of the father, whereof ye haue herd of me. For Iohn̄ baptysed wt water, but ye shall be baptised with ye holy ghost, and yt wtin this fewe dayes. When they were come togy¦ther. They asked of hym sayeng. Lorde wylt thou at this tyme
restore agayne the kyngdome to Israell? He sayde vnto them / it is not for you to knowe ye tymes or seasons which the father hath put in his owne power, but ye shall receyue power of ye ho¦ly ghost which shall come on you. And ye shal be wytnesses vn∣to me in Ierusalem, and in all Iury, & in Samary, & euen vnto the worldes ende, & whan he had spoken these thynges, whyle they behelde he was taken vp & a cloude receyued hym vp oute of theyr syght, and whyle they loked stedfastely vp to heuen as he went. Beholde two men stode by them in whyte clothynge, whiche also sayd, ye men of Galile? Why stande ye gasynge vp into heuen. This same Iesus whiche is taken vp from you in∣to heuen, shall come, euen as ye haue sene him go into heuen. ¶ The Gospel on the Ascension daye, ye .xvj. Cha. of Marke. C AFter that Iesus appered vnto the eleuen as they sat at meate, & cast in theyr teeth theyr vnbeleue, and hardnes of hert, because they beleued not them, which had sene after his resurreccyon, and he sayde vnto them. Go ye into all the world & preache the Gospell to all creatures: & he that beleueth, and is baptysed shalbe saued, and he yt beleueth not shalbe dampned. And these sygnes shall folowe thē that shal beleue in my name they shall caste out deuylles / and shal speake with newe tonges and shall kyll serpentes, and yf they drynke any deadly thynge, it shall not hurte them, they shall lay theyr handes on the sycke, & they shall recouer. So then when our lorde Iesus had spokē vnto them, he was receyued into heuen, and is set downe on ye ryght hand of God, & they wente forth, & preched euery where, And our Lorde wrought with them, and confyrmed theyr pre∣chynge with myracles folowynge. ¶ The Pystle on the Sonday after the Assencion daye ye fyrste Pystle of Peter and the .iiij. Chapyter. B. MOost dere beloued brethren be ye discrete, and watche in prayers, but aboue all thynges, haue feruent loue amōg you, for loue couereth ye multitude of synnes. Be ye harberous one to another, and that wtout grudgynge, as euery man hath
receyue the gyft, minister ye same one to another as good mini∣sters of the manyfolde grace of god, Yf any man speke, let hym talke as though he spake ye wordes of god if any man minister, let hym do it as of the habilite which god minystreth vnto hym ye God in al thynges may be glorifyed thorowe Iesus Christ. ¶ The Gospell on the Sonday after the Assencyon daye ye .xvj chapiter of Iohn̄. D. IEsus sayde vnto his disciples, when ye conforter is come whome I wyl sende vnto you frome the Father, whiche is the spyryte of veryte whiche procedeth of the Father, he shall testifye of me, and ye shall beare wytnesse also, because ye haue bene with me from the begynnyng. These thynges haue I said vnto you because ye shulde not be hurte in your fayth. They shal excommunycat you, ye the tyme shal come that who soeuer kylleth you, wyl thynke yu he doth god true seruyce, And suche thynges wyl they do vnto you, because they haue not knowen the Father / nether yet me. But these thynges haue I tolde you yt whē ye houre is come, ye might remēbre thē yt I tolde you so. ¶ The Pystle on Wytson Sonday the .ij. Cha, of the actes of the Apostles. A. WHen ye fyftyth day was come which is Wytson Sōday the Apostles with one accorde were gathered to gyther in one place. And sodenly there came a sounde frome heuen / as it had ben the cōmyng of a myghty wynde, and it fylled all ye house where they sate. And there appered vnto thē clouen ton∣ges, as they had bene fyre, and it sate vppon eche of them, and they were all fylled with the holye ghost, and began to speake with other tonges, euen as the spirite gaue them vtteraunce. There were dwellynge at Ierusalem Iewes, deuoute men whiche were of all nations vnder heuē. When this was noy∣sed aboute, the multitude came to gyther, and were astonyed, because that euerye man herde them speke in his owne tonge, They wondered all and meruayled sayeng amonge them sel∣ues, loke are not all these whiche speake of Galyle, and howe
heare we euery man his owne tonge, wherin we were borne? Parthyans / Medes / & Elamites, and the inhabiters of Me∣sopotamia of Iewry, Capadocia. Pōtus / and of Asia, Phrigia Pamphilia, and of Egipte, and of the partyes of Libia, whiche is beside Sirene, and straūgers of Rome, Iewes / and Prose∣lites / Grekes / and Arabians / we haue herde them speake with our owne tonges the greate workes of God. ¶ The Gospell on Wytson sonday the .xiiij. chapi. of Iohn̄. E. IEsus sayd vnto his disciples, yf any man loue me / & wyll kepe my saynges. My father also wyl loue hym & we wyl come vnto hym / & wyl dwel wt him. He yt loueth me not, kepeth not my saynges, & the wordes which ye heare are not mine but ye father which sente me. This haue I spoken vnto you, beyng yet {pre}sent wt you, but ye cōforter whiche is the holy ghost (whom my father wyl gyue in my name) shall teache you all thynges, & brynge all thynges to your remembraunce, what soeuer I ha∣ue told you Peace I leaue with you, my peace I giue vnto you not as the worlde giueth, gyue I vnto you, let not your hertes be greued, neyther feare ye, ye haue herde how I sayd vnto you I go & come agayn vnto you / if ye loued me ye wold verely re∣ioyce, because I sayd, I go vnto ye father, for the father is grea¦ter then I. And now haue I shewed you before it come yt whē it is come to passe ye myghte beleue. Here after wyll I not talke many wordes vnto you, for ye cheyfe ruler of ye worlde cōmeth & hath naught in me, but yt the world may knowe yt I loue the father and as the father gaue me cōmaūdement, euen so do I. ¶ The Pystle on the Monday in the Wytson weke the .x. cha. of the Actes of the Apostles. F. PEter opened hys mouthe and sayde. Iesus commanded vs to preache vnto the people and to testifie, that it is he that is ordeyned of god a iudge of quycke & dead, to him gyueth al ye {pro}¦phetes witnes, yt thorow his name shal receyue remissiō of syn¦nes all yt beleue in him, whyle Peter yet spake these wordes the holy ghost fell on all thē which herde his preachynge And they
of ye circūcision, whiche beleued were astonied as many as came with Peter because that on the gentyls also was shede out the gyfte of the holy ghost, for they herde them speake with tonges and mangnyfy god, Then answered Peter can any man forbyd water that these shulde not be baptysed, whiche haue receyued ye holy ghost as wel as we. And he commaunded thē to be bapti∣sed in the name of oure Lorde Iesus Christe. ¶ The Gospel on the Mondaye in the Wytson weke the ye .iiij. Chapiter of Iohn̄. B. IEsus sayde vnto a ruler amōge ye Pharyses God so loued the worlde, that he gaue his onely sonne for the entente, that none ye beleue in him shulde perysshe, but shulde haue euer∣lastyng lyfe, for god sent not his sonne into ye worlde to cōdēne the worlde, but that the worlde thorowe hym myght be saued, he that beleueth on hym shall not be condempned, but he that beleueth not is condempned al redy, because he beleued not in ye name of the onely sonne of God. And this is the condempnacy∣on. That lyght is come in to the worlde and the men haue loued darkenes more thē light because theyr dedes were euyl for euery man that doth euyl hateth the light, neyther commeth to lyght least hys dedes shuld be reproued but he ye doth the trueth com∣meth to the lyghte / that hys dedes myght be knowen, howe yt they are wrought in god, ¶ The Pystle on the Tewysday in the Wytson weke the .viij. Chapiter. of the Actes of the Apostles. B. WHen the Apostles whiche were at Ierusalem herd saye ye Samaria had receyued ye worde of god / they sente vnto thē Peter & Iohn̄ whiche when they were come prayed for thē, that they might receyue thy holy ghost, for as yet he was come on none of them, but they were baptysed onely in the name of Chryste Iesu. Then layed they theyr handes on them and they receyued the holy ghoste. ¶ The Gospel on the tewysday in the Wytson weke the .x. cha¦piter of Iohn̄. A.
IEsus sayde vnto his discyples. Verely verely I saye vnto you whosoeuer entreth not in by ye dore into ye shepe folde but clymmeth vp some other waye / he is a thefe, & a rob∣ber. He that goeth in by the dore, is the shepeherde of ye shepe. To this man the Porter openeth the dore, & the shepe here his voyce / & he calleth his owne shepe by name, & he ledeth thē out & when he hath sent forth his owne shepe / he goeth before thē & the shepe folowe hym / for they knowe his voyce / A straūger they wyll not folowe / but wyll flye frō hym / for they know not ye voyce of straūgers. This maner of sayeng spake Iesus vnto thē, & they vnderstode not what thīges they were which he spa¦ke vnto them. Thā sayd Iesus vnto thē agayne. Verely I say vnto you, that I am the dore of ye shepe. All euen as many as came before me are theues & robbers, but ye shepe dyd not here them. I am the dore? by me yf any man entre in, he shalbe safe, & shal go in & out, and fynd pasture. The thefe cōmeth not but for to steale / kyll / and destroye I am come that they myghte haue lyfe / and haue it the more habundantly. ¶ The Pystle on the wednysdaye in the Wytson weke. The .ij. Chapyter of the Actes Apostles. C PEter stepte forth with the eleuen, and lyfte vp his voyce & sayde vnto them / ye men of Iewry & all ye yt in habyte Ie∣rusalem, be this knowē vnto you / and wt your eares heare my wordes. These are not drōken as ye wene for it is yet ye thyrde houre of ye day but this is yt which was spokē by the prophet Iohel. It shall be in ye laste dayes (sayth god) of my spyryte I wyll powre out vpō all flessh, & your sonnes, & your doughters shal prophesye, & your yonge men shal se visiōs, & your olde mē shal dreame dreames, & on my seruaūtes / & on my hād maydēs I wyll powre out of my spyrite in those dayes, & they shall pro∣phesy, & I wyll shewe wōders in heuē aboue & tokēs in ye earth byneth bloude & fyre & the vapoure of smoke. The sonne shalbe turned into darknes, & the moue into bloude, before ye great & notable daye of the Lorde shall come, and the tyme shall come /
that whosoeuer shall call on ye name of the Lorde shalbe saued. ¶ The Gospel on the Wednysdaye in Wytson weke. The .vj. Chapiter of Iohn̄. E IEsus sayd vnto his disciples & to ye cōpany of the Iewes No man can come vnto me, excepte my Father whyche hath sente me drawe hym, & I wyll rayse him vp at ye laste day It is wryten in the prophetes, And they shall all be taught of god euery mā which hath herde & lerned of the father cōmeth vnto me, not that any man hath sene the father, saue he which is of GOD the same hathe sene the father. Verelye verelye I saye vnto you he that beleueth on me hath euerlastynge lyfe I am the breade of lyfe, your fathers dyd eate Manna in ye wyl∣dernes, and are deade. This is the breade which cōmeth frō he∣uen, that he which doth eate of it, shuld not dye. I am ye lyuing breade which came downe frō heuen. Yf any man eate of thys breade, he shall lyue for euer. And the breade that I wyll gyue is my flesshe, whych I wyll gyue for the lyfe of the worlde. ¶ The Pystle on Trinite Sondaye. The .iiij. Chapyter of the Reuelacyon of saynt Iohn̄. A. I Loked vp & sawe a dore open in heuen, & the fyrste voyce whiche I herde, as were a trompette talkynge with me, whiche sayde, come vp hyther, and I wyll shewe the thynges, which must be fulfylled here after, & immediately I was in the spyryte, & beholde, a seate was put in heuen and one sate on the seate and he that sate was to loke vpon lyke vnto Iasper stone and a Sardyne stone, and there was a rayne bowe aboute the seate, to loke vpon lyke vnto an Emeralde, and about the seate were .xxiiij. Seates, and I sawe on the seates .xxiiij. elders syt∣tynge clothed in whyte raymēt, and had on theyr hedes Crow¦nes of golde, and out of the seate proceded lyghtenynges, and thōdrynges and voyces, and there were .vij. lāpes of fyre bur∣nynge before the seate / whyche are the seuen spyrytes of God and before the seate there was a See of glasse lyke vnto Cry∣stall, and in the myddes of the seate, and round about the seate
were .iiij. beastes full of eyes before and behynde, and the fyrst beaste was lyke a Lyon, ye secōde beast was lyke a Calfe, & the thyrde beaste had a face as a man, and the fourth beaste was lyke a flyenge Egle, & the .iiij. beastes had eche one of them .vj. wynges about hym, and they were full of eyes within, & they had no rest daye neyther nyght, sayenge, Holy, holy, holy, lorde god almyghty whiche was, & is, & is to come, And when these beastes gaue glory, honoure and thankes to hym that sat on yt seate / which lyueth euermore, the .xxiiij. elders fell downe be∣fore hym that sat on the trone and worshypped hym yt lyueth euer, & cast theyr crownes before the trone sayinge, yu arte wor∣thy Lorde to receyue glory, honoure, & power, for yu haste crea∣ted all thynges & for thy wylles sake they are & were created. ¶ The Gospell on Trynite sonday. The .iij. Chap. of Iohn̄. A THere was a man of ye pharyses named Nichodemus / a ruler among the Iewes. He came to Iesus by nyght and sayde vnto hym. Mayster we knowe that yu arte a teacher which arte come from god, for no man could do such myracles as thou doest, except god were with hym Iesus answered and sayde vnto hym. Verely verely I saye vnto the, excepte yt a man be borne a newe, he can not se the kyngdome of God. Nichode∣mus sayd vnto hym. How can a man be borne whē he is old? Can he entre into his mothers wombe & be borne agayne? Ie∣sus answered. Verely verely I say vnto the, except that a man be borne of water, & of the spyrite, he can not entre into ye kyng¦dome of god. That whych is borne of ye flesshe, is flesshe, & that which is borne of the spirite is spirite. Maruayle not yt I sayd to the ye muste be borne a newe. The wynde bloweth where he lyfteth, and thou heareste hys sounde, but thou canste not tell whēse he cōmeth, and whether he goeth. So is euery man yt is borne of the spyryte. Nichodemus answered & sayd vnto him. How can these thynges be. Iesus answered and sayd vnto him Arte thou a mayster in Israell, and knowest not these thynges Verely verely I saye vnto the, we speake that we knowe, & te∣styfie
yt we haue sene, and ye receyue not our wytnes, yf I haue tolde you erthtly thynges / & ye haue not beleued, howe shuld ye beleue yf I shall tell you heuēly thynges. And no man hath as∣cended vp into heuen, but he yt came downe frome heuen yt is to saye ye sonne of man, which is in heuē. And as Moses lyfted vp ye serpent in wyldernes, euen so muste ye sonne of man be lyfted vp yt no man which beleueth in hȳ peryssh but haue eternal lyfe ¶ The Pystle on Corpus Christi daye the fyrst Pystle to ye Co¦rynthyans, and the .xi. Chapyter. E BRethren that whiche I gaue vnto you I receyued of the Lorde? for the Lord Iesus Christ the same nyght in the which he was betrayed toke breade and thanked / and brake / & sayde: take ye & eate ye this is my body which is broken for you This do ye in the remēbraunce of me / after the same maner he toke the cuppe when Supper was done sayenge. This cup is the newe Testament in my bloude / this do as ofte as ye drynke it, in ye remēbraūce of me / for as often as ye shall eate this bread and drynke of thys cup / ye shall shewe the Lordes death, tyl he come. Wherfore who soeuer shall eate of thys breade, or drynke of the cup vnworthely, shalbe gyltye of the body and bloude of the Lorde. Let a man therfore examyne hym selfe, and so let hȳ eate of the breade and drynke of the cuppe / for he that eateth & drynketh vnworthely eateth and drynketh hys owne dampna¦cyon. Because he maketh no dyfference of the Lordes body. ¶ The Gospel on Corpus Christi day. The .vj. cha. of Iohn̄. F IEsus sayd vnto his dysciples & to the company of the Ie¦wes, my flesshe is meate in dede / & my bloud is drynke in dede. He yt eateth my flessh, & drynketh my bloud dwelleth in me. And I in him as ye lyuing father hath sent me euē so lyue I by my father, & he yt eateth me shall lyue by me. This is the breade which came from heuē, not as your fathers haue eatē Manna, and are deade. He that eateth of thys breade shall lyue euer. ¶ The Pystle on the fyrste Sondaye after Trinite Sondaye. The .iiij. Chapyter of the fyrst Pystle of Iohn̄. B
MOst dere beloued brethren God is loue, in thys apered the loue of god to vs warde because that god sent his onely be¦gotten son into the worlde / that we myght lyue thorowe hym, here in is loue not that we loued God / but that god loued vs. And sente his sonne to make agrement for our synnes. Derely beloued yf god so loued vs, we oughte also to loue one another / no man hath sene god at any tyme. Yf we loue one another god dwelleth in vs and his loue is perfyte in vs. Here by knowe we that we dwell in hym, and he in vs, because he had gyuen vs of his spyryte. And we haue sene and do testyfye that ye father sent his sonne, which is the sauyour of the worlde, whosoeuer con∣fesseth that Iesus is the sonne of God / in hym dwelleth god, & he in god. And we haue knowen and beleued the loue that god hathe to vs. God is loue, and that dwelleth in loue / dwelleth in God & god in hym, here in is ye loue perfyte in vs / ye we shuld haue truste in the daye of iudgemēte / for as he is / euen so are we in this world. There is no feare in loue, but perfyte loue casteth out all feare / for feare hath paynefulnes he yt feareth is not per¦fyte in loue. We loue hym for he loueth vs fyrst. Yf a man sayd I loue god / & yet hateth his brother, he is a lyer. How can he yt loueth not his brother, whom he hath se, loue god whō he hath not sene. And thys commaundemente haue we of hym that he which loueth god shuld loue his brother also ¶ The Gospell on the fyrst Sondaye after Trynite Sondaye. The .xvj. Chapyter of Luke. D IEsus put forth a parable vnto his disciples saying, there was a certayne ryche mā, which was clothed in purple & lyne raynes, & fared delyciously euery day. And ther was a cer∣tayn begger named Lazar{us} which lay at his gate full of sores desyrynge to be refresshed wt the crōmes which fell frō the rych mānes borde. Neuertheles the dogges came & lycked his sores And it fortuned yt the begger dyed, and was caryed by ye angels in Abrahās bosome. The rych man also dyed & was buryed / & being ī hel in tormētes / he lyft vp his eyes & sawe Abrahā a far
of, and Lazarus in hys bosome & cryed and sayd Father Abra¦ham haue mercy on me, & sende Lazarus yt he may dyp ye typpe of his fynger in water and cole my tonge, for I am tormented in thys flambe: but Abraham sayde vnto hym (sonne) remem∣bre that thou in thy lyfe tyme receyuedest thy pleasure, & cōtra∣ryewyse Lazarus payne. Nowe therfore is he comforted and thou art punysshed beyonde all this, betwene you and vs there is a great space set / so that they which wolde go from house to you can not, neyther maye come frō thens to vs. Then he sayd I pray the therfore father / sende hym to my fathers house, for I haue fyue brethren, for to warne them / lest they also come in to this place of tormente. Abraham sayde vnto hym, they haue Moses & the prophetes / let thē heare thē, & he sayd, naye aher Abrahā, but yf one came vnto them from the deade, they wolde repēt. He sayd vnto hym. Yf they here not Moses & the prophe¦tes, nether wyll they beleue, though one rose frō death agayne. ¶ The Pystle on the seconde Sondaye after Trynite sondaye The fyrst Pystle of Iohn̄. and the thyrde Chapyter. C MEruayle not my brethrē though the worlde hate you / we know that we are translated frō death vnto lyfe because we loue ye brethrē. He yt loueth not his brother abideth in death Whosoeuer hateth his brother / is a mansleer and ye knowe yt no māsleer / hath etrrnal lyfe abydynge in. Hereby perceyue we the loue of god in yt he gaue hys lyfe for vs. And therfore ought we also to giue our lyues for our brethrē. Whosoeuer hath this worldes good, & seeth his brother haue nede, & shutteth vp hys compassion from him, how dwelleth ye loue of god in hym, My babes let vs not loue in worde, nether in tonge but in dede and in veryte. ¶ The Gospell on the seconde Sonday after Trynite sondaye The .xiiij. Chapyter of Luke. D IEsus put forthe a symilytude to his disciples sayenge. A certayne mā ordeyned a great supper & bad many, & sente his seruaunte at supper tyme to saye to them that were bydden
to me, for all thynges are nowe redy, and they all at ones began to make excuse the fyrst sayd vnto him / I haue bought a towne and I must nedes go and se it / I praye ye haue me excused. And another sayd. I haue bought fyue yoke of oxen & I go to proue them, I praye the haue me excused. The thyrde sayd. I haue ma¦ryed a wyfe & therfore I can not come. And the seruaunt went and brought his mayster worde therof. Then was ye good man of the house dyspleased, and sayd to his seruaunt. Go out quyc∣kely into the stretes, and quarters, & brynge in hyther ye poore, and the maymed, and the halte / and the blynde. And ye seruaūt sayd / lorde it is done as thou commaūdest & yet there is roume And the lorde sayd to the seruaunte, go out into the hye wayes and hedges / and compell them to come in / that my house maye be fylled / for I saye vnto you, that none of these whiche were bydden shall taste of my supper ¶ The Pystle on the thyrde Sondaye after Trynite Sonday The fyrste pystle of Peter, and the .v. Chapytre. B BRethren submyt youre selues vnder the myghtye hande of god yt he may exalte you, when ye tyme is come cast all youre care to hym, for he careth for you. Be sobre & watche for your aduersary ye deuyll as a rorynge Lyon walketh about se∣kyng whom he may deuoure, whō resyst stedfaste in the fayth remembryng that ye do but fulfyll the same afflyctions, whiche are apoynted to your brethren that are in the worlde, ye god of grace whych called you vnto his eternal glory by Christ Iesus shall his owne selfe after ye haue suffered a litel affliccion make you perfyte, shall setle strengthe, and stablyshe you, to hym be glory & dominion for euer, & whyle ye worlde endureth. Amen ¶ The gospel on ye thyrde sonday after Trinite Sonday. The v. chapiter of Luke. A. THe Publycan & the sinners resorted vnto Iesus to heare hym, and the haryses and Scribes murmured sayeng. He receiued to hi ompany sinners, & eateth with them. Then put he forth thi ymylitude to them sayeng. What man of you
hauynge an hondrethe shepe, yf he lose one of them, dothe not leaue nyntye & nyne in the wyldernes, and go after that whiche is loste vntyl he fynde him. And whē he hath foūde him he put∣teth him on hys shulders with ioy, and as sone as he commeth home, he calleth to gyther hys louers and neygbours sayeng vnto them reioyse with me, for I haue founde my shepe which was loste, I say vnto you, ye lekwyse ioy shall be in heauen more then ouer nynety & nine iust persons, which nede no repētaūce. Eyther what woman hauynge .x. grotes, if she lose one, dothe not lyght a candel and swepe the house, and seke diligently tyl she finde it And when she hath founde it, she calleth her louers & her neyghbouers sayeng. Reioyse with me, for I haue founde the grote which I had loste, lyke wyse I saye vnto you, ioye is made in ye presēce of ye angels of god ouer one sinner yt repēteth. ¶ The Pistle on the .iiij. Sonday after Trinite sonday The .viij. chapiter to the Romayns. D BRethren I suppose yt the afflictions of this lyfe are not worthy of ye glory to come which shal be shewed vpō vs. Also ye feruēt desyre of ye creatures abydeth lokyng whē the son∣ges of god shall appere, because ye creatures are subdued to va∣nyte agaynst theyr wyl but for his wyll whiche subdued thē in hope, for ye very creatures shalbe delyuered frō ye bōdage of cor∣rupcyō, into ye glorious libertie of ye sōnes of god / for we know yt euery creature groneth wt vs also & trauayleth in payne euen vnto this tyme, not they onely, but euen we also which haue ye fyrste fruytes of the spirite mourne in our selues & wayte for ye adopcyon, and loke for the delyueraunce of our bodyes. ¶ The Gospel on ye .iiij. Sonday after Trinite Sonday. The .vj. chapiter of Luke. E. IEsus sayde vnto his disciples be ye merciful as your fa∣ther is merciful. Iudge not and ye shal not be iudged. Cō¦dempne not, & ye shall not be cōdempned. For gyue & ye shal be for gyuen. Gyue, & it shalbe gyuē vnto you good measure pres∣sed downe shaken to gyther & rūnynge ouer shal men gyue vn∣to
your bosomes. For with what measure ye meate wt the same shall mē meate to you agayne. And he put forth a similitude vn∣to them. Can the blynde lede the blynde, do they not bothe then fall into dytche. The discyple is not aboue his Mayster, euery man shalbe perfecte, yf he be as hys mayster is. Why seyste yu a mote in thy brothers eye, & cōsyderest not ye beame yt is in thyne owne eye / eyther howe canste yu say to thy brother, brother / let me pull out ye mote ye is in thyne eye / when thou perceyuest not the beame yt is in thyne owne eye? ypocrite cast out ye beame out of thyne owne eye fyrst, and then shalt yu se perfectly to pull out the mote out of thy brothers eye. ¶ The pystle on the .v. Sondaye after Trinite Sondaye. The fyrst pystle of Peter, and the .iij. Chapyter. A BRethren be ye all of one minde, one suffre wt another, loue as brethren / be petyfull, be courteous, not rēdrynge euyll for euyll, neyther rebuke for rebuke but contrarywyse, blysse, re¦mēbrynge yt ye are therunto called, euen that ye shuld be heyres of blessynge yf any man longe after lyfe, and loueth to se good dayes, let hym refrayne hys tonge from euyll & his lyppes that they speke not gyle. Let hym eschewe euyl & do good, let hȳ seke peace & ensue it, for the eyes of our Lorde are ouer ye rightuous & his eares are opened vnto theyr prayers, but the feare of oure Lorde beholdeth them yt do euyll. More ouer who is he yt wyl harme you, yf ye folowe yt which is good. Not wtstanding hap∣pye are ye, yf ye suffre for ryghtwysnesses sake, ye and feare not thoughe they seme terryble vnto you / neyther be troubled / but but sanctifye our lorde god in your hertes. ¶ The Gospell on the .v. Sondaye after Trinite sonday. The v. Chapyter of Luke. A WHen the people presed vnto Iesus, to heare the worde of god, he stode by ye Lake of Genezareth & sawe two shyp∣pes standynge by the lakes syde, but the fysshermen were gone out of thē, & were wasshynge theyr nettes & he entred into one of the shyppes which pertayned to Symon & prayed him yt he
wolde thruste out of a lytell from the lande, & he sate downe & taught the people out of the shyp when he had left speakynge, he sayde vnto Symon / launche out into the depe / and let slype youre nettes to make a draught & Symon answered and sayde to hym / mayster we haue laboured all nyght & haue taken no∣thynge, neuerthelatter at thy worde, I wyll lose forthe the net, and when they had so done, they inclosed a greate multytude of fysshes and theyr net brake, but they made sygnes to theyr felo¦wes, which were in the other shyppe yt they shuld come & helpe them & they came, & fylled bothe the shyppes that they sonke a∣gayne. When Simon Peter sawe that he fell downe at Iesus knees sayenge. Lorde go from me for I am a synfull mā for he was vtterly astonyed, and al that were with hym, at ye draught of fysshe whiche they toke / & so was also Iames and Iohn̄ the sōnes of zebede, which were partenars wt Symon, Iesus sayd vnto. Symon feare not frō hensforth yu shalte catche mē, & they broughte the to lande, and forsoke all and folowed hym. ¶ The Pystle on the .vj. Sondaye after Trynite Sondaye, ye vj. Chapyter to the Romayns. A BRethren remēbre ye not yt all we whiche are baptysed in the name of Iesus Christ are baptysed to dye wt him, we are buryed wt hym by baptyme, for to dye, yt lykewyse as Christ was raysed vp from death by the glory of ye father euen so we also shulde walke in a new lyfe for yf we be grafte in death lyke vnto him, euen so must we be in the resurreccyō. This we must remēbre yt our olde man is crucyfyed wt hym also, that the body of synne myght vtterly be destroyed yt hēsforth we shuld not be seruaūtes of synne, for he yt is dead, is iustified frō sinne. Wher¦fore yf we be dead wt Christ, we beleue yt we shall lyue with hym remēbryng yt Christ ones raysed frō death dieth no more, death hathe no more power ouer hym, for as touchynge yt he dyed, he dyed cōcernynge synne, ones. And as touchyng yt he lyueth, he lyueth vnto God. Lykewyse Imagē ye also, yt ye are dead cōcer¦nīg synne, but are a lyue vnto god thorow Ies{us} Christ our lord
¶ The Gospel on the .vj. sondaye after Trinite Sonday. The vj. chapiter of Mathew. C IEsus sayd vnto hys dysciples verely I saye vnto you ex∣cept your ryghtwysenes, excede ye ryghtwysenes of ye scri¦bes, & pharyses, ye can not entre into ye kyngdome of heuen, ye haue herde it was sayde vnto thē of olde tyme. Thou shalt not kyll, for whosoeuer kylleth shall be in daunger of iudgemente, but I saye vnto you. who soeuer is angry wt his brother shall be in daunger of iudgement. Who soeuer sayth vnto hys bro∣ther Racha, shall be in daūger of coūcell. But whosoeuer sayth thou foole, shalbe in daunger of hell fyre. Therfore when thou offerest thy gyfte at the Aulter, & there remēbrest yt thy brother hath oughte agaynste the / leue there thyne offerynge before the Aulter, and go thy way fyrst and be reconcyled to thy brother, and then come and offre thy gyfte. ¶ The Pystle on the .vij. sondaye after Trinite sondaye. The vi. Chapyter to the Romaynes. D BRethren I wyll speke grosely because of the Infyrmyte of your flesshe / as ye haue gyuen your membres seruaun¦tes to vnclennes & iniquyte from iniquite vnto iniquite / euē so nowe gyue your mēbres seruauntes vnto ryghtwysenes, yt ye maye be sanctifyed, for when ye were ye seruauntes of synne, ye were not vnder ryghtwysenes. What fruyte had ye thā in two thynges / wherof ye are now ashamed, for the ende of two thin¦ges is death. But now are ye delyuered from synne, and made ye seruaūtes of God, & haue your fruyte yt he shuld be sanctified & the euerlastynge lyfe, for ye rewarde of synne is death but eter∣nal lyfe is the gyfte of God thorow Iesus Christe our Lorde. ¶ The Gospell on the vij. Sondaye after Trynite Sondaye. The .viij. Chapiter of Marke. A WHen there was very gret company with Iesus and they had nothynge to eate Iesus called his disciples to hym / and sayde vnto thē. I haue compassion on this people by cause they haue bene nowe with me thre daies, and haue nothing to
eate, and yf I shulde sende them awaye fastynge to theyr owne houses, they shulde faint by ye way, for diuers of thē came from farre. And his disciples answered him, where shulde a mā haue bread here in ye Wyldernes to satisfye these. And he asked them how many Loues haue ye? They sayde, seuen, And he cōmaun¦ded the people to syt donwe on the ground, and he toke ye, seuē loues, gaue thankes, brake, & gaue it vnto his disciples to set be fore them, and they dyd set thē be fore the people and they had a fewe smale fysshes and he blessed them & cōmanded them also to be set before them, & they dyd eate and were suffysed, & they toke vp of ye broken meate yt was left .vij. baskettes full, & they yt did eate, were in nōbre about foure thousand & he sent thē away ¶ The Pystle on the .viij sonday after Trinite sonday the .viij. chapiter to the Romayns, C. BRethren we are nowe detters, not to the flesshe, to lyue after ye flesshe, for yf ye lyue after ye flesshe ye muste dye, but if ye mortify ye dedes of ye bodye through helpe of ye spirite, ye shall lyue, for as many as are led by ye spirite of god, they are the sonnes of God, for ye haue not receyued the spirite of bon∣dage to fere any more, but ye haue receyued ye spirite of addiciō wherby we crye. Abba father. The same spyryte certifyed oure spiryte yt we are the sonnes of god. If we be sonnes, we are al∣so the heyres, the heyres I meane of God, and heyres annexed and togyther with Christ. ¶ The gospel on the .viij. sondaye after Trynite sondaye. The viij. Chapyter of Mathewe. C IEsus sayd vnto his disciples. Beware of false prophetes whiche come to you in shepes clothynge, but inwardely they are rauenynge wolues, ye shal knowe them by theyr fruy∣tes. Do mē gather grapes of thornes, or fygges of breers euen so euery good tree bryngeth forth good fruyte, but a corrupte tree bringeth forth euyl fruyt, a good tree can not brynge forth bad fruyt / nor yet a bad tree can brynge forth good fruyt euery tree that bryngeth not forth good fruite, shall be hewen downe
and cast into the fyre, wherfore by theyr fruetes ye shall knowe them. Not all they that saye vnto me. Mayster, mayster, shall enter in to ye kyngdome of heuen, but he ye doth my fathers wyl whiche is in heauen he shall entre into ye kyngdome of heuē. ¶ The Pystle on the .ix. Sōday after Trinite sōday, the fyrste Pystle to the Corynthians & the .x. Chapiter. B. BRethren we may not lust after euel thīges, as they lusted Nether be ye worshippers of Idolles as were some of them according as it is writen. The people sat downe eo eate and drinke & rose vp agayne to play. Neyther let vs commyt fornicacion as some of them committed fornicacion, and were destroyed in one day .xxiij. thousād. Nether let vs tēpte Christe as sume of them temptted, & were destroyed of serpentes. Ney∣ther murmure ye as some of thē murmured / & were destroyed of the destroyer. Al these thynges happened vnto them for en∣sanples and were wryten to put vs in remembraunce, whome ye endes of ye worlde are come vpon, Wherfore let him ye thinketh he stādeth, take hede lest he fal. There hath none other tēptaciō taken you, but suche as foloweth ye nature of man but god is faythful, which shall not suffre to be tēpted aboue your strēgth but shal in ye middes of ye tētation make awaye to escape oute. ¶ The Gospel on the .ix sonday after Trinyte sonday the .xvi. Chapiter of Luke. A. IEsus put forth a simylitude vnto his discyples sayeng. There was a certaine ryche mā whiche hade a bayly that was accused vnto him, that he had wasted hys goodes, and he called hym / and sayde vnto him. Howe is it that I here this of the Gyue accomptes of thy baylyshyppe, for thou mayste be no longer bayly, The bayly sayde within him selfe / what shall I do / for my mayster wyll take awaye from me the baylyshyp. I can not dygge, and to beg, I am a shamed I wot what I wyl do, yt when I am put out of the baylyshyp, they maye receyue me in to theyre houses. Then called he at his maysters dettes & sayde vnto ye tyrst howe muche owest thou vnto my mayster
,and he sayde an houndreth tonnes of oyle, and he sayd to him, take the byl, and sit downe quyckly & write .l. Then said the to another, what owest thow? & he sayde an hondreth quarters of wheate: he sayde vnto him, take thy byl & wryte foure score, & the lorde commanded the vniust bayly / be cause he had done wysely, for ye chyldren of this world are in theyr kynde wyser then ye children of lyght. And I saye vnto you, make your fren∣des of ye wycked Mammon, yt when ye shal departe, they may receyue you into euerlasting habytacions. ¶ The Pystle on the .x. Sonday after Trinite sonday the fyrst Pystle to the Corynthyans the .xij. Chapiter. A. BRethren ye know that ye were gentyles, and went your wayes vnto dōme Idoles, euē as you were led, Where¦fore I declare vnto you, yt no man spekynge in ye spirite of god, defyeth Iesus. Also no man can say that Iesus is the lorde, but by the holy ghost. There are dyuersities of gyftes verely, yet but one spirite, & there are dyfferences of admynistracyons, & yet but one Lorde. And there are dyuers maners of operacy∣ons, & yet but one God, whiche worketh al thynges that are wrought in all creatures. The gyftes of the spirite are gyuen to euery man to profete ye cōgregaciō. To one is gyuē thorowe the spirite, the vtteraunce of wysdome, to another is gyuen the vtteraunce of knowledge, by ye same spirite to another is gyuē Faythe, by the same spyrite, to another the gyftes of healynge, by ye same spirite, to another power to do myracles, to another prophesye, to another iudgement of spirites, to another the in∣terpretacyon of tonges, And these all worketh euē ye selfe same spirite, deuydynge to euery man seueral giftes, euen as he wyll. ¶ Th Gospel on the .x. Sonday after Trinite Sonday the .xix chapiter of Luke. F. WHen Iesus came nye vnto Ierusalem, he behelde ye cytye, & wepte on it sayenge, yf thou haddest knowē those thynges which belonge vnto thy peace euen at this tyme, but now are they hyd from thyne eyes, for ye dayes shal come vpō ye that
the enemyes shall caste a banke aboute the, & cōpasse the roūde and kepe the in on euery syde, & make the euen with ye grounde with thy chyldren which are in the, & they shall not leaue in the one stone vpon another / because thou knewest not the tyme of thy vysitacyon / & he went into ye temple & began to cast out thē that solde therein, and them that bought, sayēg vnto thē, It is writtē my house is ye house of prayer, but ye haue made it a den of theues &, he taught dayly in the temple. ¶ The Pystle on the .xj. Sonday after Trinite Sonday, the fyrste Pystle to the Corynthyans the .xv. Chapyter. A. BRethren as pertaynynge to the Gospel which I preached vnto you / which ye haue also accepted, & in ye which ye cō∣tynue / by whiche also ye are saued. I do you to wyte after what maner I preched vnto you yf ye kepe it, excepte ye haue beleued in vanite, for fyrst of al I delyuered vnto you ye which I receyued how ye Christ dyed for our synnes, agreyng to that scryptures, and yt he was buryed / yt he arose agayn the thyrde day / accordyng to the scriptures / & yt he was sene of Ceyphas, than of the .xij. After that he was sene of mo thā fyue hōdreth brethrē at ones of whiche many remayne vnto this daye, and many are fallē a slepe / after ye appered he to Iames, then all ye Apostles / & laste of all he was sene of me as of one that was borne out of due tyme for I am ye least of all ye Apostles, which am not worthye to be called an Appostle, be cause I persecuted the congregacion of god, but by ye grace of god / I am yt I am / & his grace whith is in me was not in vayne. ¶ The Gospel on ye .xj. Sonday after Trinite Sonday. The. .xviij. chapiter of Luke. A. IEsus put forth this symilitude / vnto certayne which tru∣sted in them selues yt they were perfecte & despysed other Two men wente vp into the Temple to praye / the one a Pha¦ryse, and the other a Publycan / The pharyse stode and prayed thus with hym selfe. God I thāke the that I am not as other men are, extorcioners vniust, adulterers / or as this Publycan.
I faste twyse in the weke / I gyue the tyth of all that I possesse. And the Publycan stode a farre of, & wold not lyfte vp his eyes to heuen / but smote hys brest sayenge. God be mercy∣ful to me sinner. I tell you this mā departed home to his house iustifyed more then the other / for euery man that exalteth hym selfe shalbe brought lowe & he yt hūbled him selfe shalbe exalted ¶ The Pystle on the .xij. sondaye after Trinite Sondaye, The ij. Pystle to the Corynthyans the .iij. Chapyter. A BRethren such trust haue we thorow Christ to god ward not yt we are sufficient of our selues to thynke any thyng as it were of our selues / but our ablenes cōmeth of god, which hath made vs able to mynister the newe testament / not of ye let∣ter but of the spirite, for the letter kylleth, but the spirite gyuteh lyfe / yf the ministracyon of deth thorow the letters fygured in stones was glorious, so yt the chyldren of Israell coulde not be holde the face of Moyses for ye glory of his coūtenaunce which glorye neuertheles is done awaye, why shall not the ministra∣cion of the spyrite be moch more glorious, for yf ye ministrynge of condēpnacyon be glorious, moche more dothe the ministra∣cyon of ryghtwesnes excede in glorye. ¶ The Gospell on the .xij. sondaye after Trinite sondaye. The vij. Chapyter of Marke. D IEsus departed from the costes of Tyre, & came by Sydō vnto the see of Galyle thorowe the myddes of the Costes of tenne Cytyes, & they brought vnto hym one that was deafe & domme, & prayed him to laye his hande vpon hym, & he toke hym asyde from the people & put his fyngers in his eares, and dyd spyt & touched his tonge, & loked vp to heuen and syghed & sayde vnto him, Ephara, yt is to saye be opened, & strayt way his eares were opened / & the strynge of his tonge was losed, & he spake playne, & he cōmaunded them yt they shulde tell no mā but ye more he forbade thē in so miche ye more a great deale the publysshed, sayeng. He hath done al thinges wel / & hath made both the deafe to hear, and the domme to speke.
¶ The Pystle on the .xiij. sondaye after Trynyte sondaye. The thyrde chapyter to the Galathyans. C BRethren to Abraham & his sede were ye promyses made he sayth not / in ye sedes as in many, but in thy sede as is in one which is Christ. This I say yt the lawe which began af∣terwardes / beyonde .iiij. hondreth & .xxx. yeres doth not disanul ye testamēt that was cōfyrmed afore of god vnto Christe warde to make ye promyse of none effecte / for yf ye inheritaūce come of the lawe / it commeth not of promyse but god gaue it to Abra∣ham by promyse / wherfore then serueth ye lawe / ye lawe was ad∣ded because of trāsgression (tyl ye sede came to which ye promyse was made) & it was ordened by Angels in ye hande of a media∣tor. A mediator is not a mediator of one / but god is one / is the lawe then agaynst the promyse of god? God fordyd howbeit yf there had ben a lawe gyuen, which coulde haue gyuē lyfe / then no doute ryghtwysenes shulde haue come by the lawe / but the scrypture cōcludeth all thynges vnder synne that ye promys by the fayth of Iesus Christ shulde be gyuen vnto thē that beleue. ¶ The Gospell on the .xiij. sondaye after Trinite sondaye. The x. Chapyter of Luke. D IEsus sayde vnto his disciples, happy are ye eyes / which se yt ye se. For I tell you yt many {pro}phetes & kynges haue de∣syred to se those thīges which ye se, & haue not sene thē & to hear those thīges which you heare & haue not herde thē & beholde a certayne lawer stode vp / & tēpted hī sayeng. Maister what shal I do to inheryte eternal lyfe? He sayd vnto hym what is wryt∣tē in ye lawe? how redest yu and he answered & he sayd. Loue thy lord god wt all thy hert and wt al thy soule, & with al thy strēgth & with al thy mynde, & thy neyghbour as thy selfe. And he sayde vnto hī, yu hast answered ryght this do and yu shalt lyue, he wyl∣lyng to iustifye him selfe sayd vnto Ies{us}, who is then my neygh¦bour. Iesus answered & sayd. A certayne man descēded frō Ie∣rusalē into Ierico, & fell into ye handes of theues which robued hym of his raymēt, & woūded him & departed leuyng hī halfe
dead and by chaūce there came a certayne preste ye same way, & whē he sawe him he passed by, & likewyse a Leuite, whē he was come nye to ye place / went & loked on hym, and passed by. Then a certayne Samarytane as he iornyed came nye vnto hym, & when he sawe hym had cōpassyon on him, & went to him & boū¦de vp his woundes, & powred in oyle and wyne, & put hym on his owne beaste, & brought hym to a comon in, & made prouisiō for hym, & on ye morowe when he departed, he toke out .ij. pens and gaue them to the hoste, & sayde vnto him take cure of hym & what soeuer yu spendest more, when I come agayn, I wyl re∣cōpēce yt. Which now of these thre, thynkest yu, was neyghbour vnto hym yt fell into theues handes. And he sayde he yt sheweth mercy on hym. Then sayd Iesus vnto him go & do yu lykewyse. ¶ The Pystle on the .xiiij. Sonday after Trynite Sonday, ye v. Chapiter to the Galathyans. C BRethrē walke in ye spyrite & fulfyll not ye iustes of ye flesshe for ye flesshe lusteth contrary to the spyrite & the spirite cō∣trary to ye flesshe. These are cōtrary one to ye other, so yt ye can not do ye which ye wolde, but & yf ye be led of ye spirite then are ye not vnder the lawe. The dedes of the flessh are manifest which are these, aduoutrye / fornycacyon / vnclennes / wanton∣nes ydolatry / wytche crafte / hatred / variaūce, zele wrath / strife sedycyon / sectes / enuyenge / murther / dronkēnes / glotony / and such lyke / of the whiche I tell you before / as I haue tolde you in tyme past, yt they which cōmit such thynges shal not inherite the kyngdome of god. But the fruyte of the spyrite / is loue, ioy peace / longe sufferynge / gentylnes, goodnes, faythfulnes / me∣kenes, temperancy. Agaynst such there is no lawe. They yt are Christes, haue crucyfied the flesshe wt the appetytes and lustes. ¶ The Gospell on the .xiiij. sonday after Trinite sonday. The xvj. Chapyter of Luke. A AS Iesus went to Ierusalem he passed thorow Sama∣ria & Galyle, & as he entred into a certayne towne or ca¦stell, there met hym ten men yt were lepers which stode a far of
and put forth theyr voyces & sayd. Iesu maister haue mercy on vs. When he sawe them, he sayde vnto them, go & shewe youre selues to the prestes & it chaunced as they went they were clen¦sed, & one of them, when he sawe yt he was clensed, turned backe agayne & with a loud voyce praysed god, & fel done on his face at hys fete and gaue hym thankes, & the same was a Samari¦tane. And Iesus answered & sayd, are there not ten clensed but where are those. ix. There are not founde that returned agayn to gyue god prayse saue onely thys straunger, & he sayde vnto hym / aryse and go thy waye thy fayth hath made the hole. ¶ The Pystle on the .xv. sondaye after Trinite Sondaye. The v. Chapyter to the Galathians. D BRethren yf we lyue in ye spyrite, let vs walke in ye spirite let vs not be vayne glorious prouokynge one another, & enuyenge one another. Brethrē yf any man be fallen by chaūce into any faute, ye which are spirituall helpe to amende hym / in spirite of mekenes, consyderynge thy selfe, left thou also be tēp∣ted, beare ye one anothers burthen, & so fulfyl ye lawe of Christ yf any mā seme to hym selfe yt he is somwhat / when in dede he is nothyng, ye same deceyueth hym selfe in his ymagynacyō / let euery man proue his owne worke, and then shall he haue reioy∣cynge in his owne selfe, and not in another, for euery man shall beare hys owne burthen, let hym yt is taught in ye worde myni∣ster vnto hym yt teacheth hym in all good thynges, be not de∣ceyued god is not mocked / for whatsoeuer mā soweth / yt shal he repe. He yt soweth in his flessh / shal of ye flesh repe corrupcyō, b he ye soweth in spirite / shal of ye spirite repe lyfe euerlastyng. Let vs not be wery of wel doynge / for whē ye tyme is come we shal pe wtout wrynes. While we haue therfore tyme let vs do good vnto al mē & specially vnto thē which ar of ye houshold of faith. ¶ The gospell on the .xv sonday after Trinite Sondaye. The vj. Chapyter of Mathewe. C IEsus sayd vnto hys disciples yt no mā can serue two ma¦sters for eyther he shall hate the one and loue the other /
or els he shall lene to the one, and despyse the other, ye can not serue god and mammon. Therfore I saye vnto you, benot care¦full for your lyfe / what ye shall eate, nor what ye shall drynke / nor yet for your body, what ye shal put on, is not the lyfe more worth then meate, & the body more of value then rayment? be∣holde ye foules of ye ayre for they sowe not, neyther repe nor yet cary into the barnes & yet your heuenly father fedeth them, are ye not muche better then they? whiche of you thoughe he toke thought therfore / coulde put one cubit vnto his stature? & why care ye then for rayment? Consydre the lylies of the felde, howe they growe. They labour not neyther spynne / & yet for all that I say vnto you, yt euen Salomon in all his royaltye was not arayed lyke vnto one of these, Wherfore yf God so clothed the grasse / which is to daye in ye felde, & to morowe shalbe cast into the furnesse, shal he not much more do ye same vnto you, O ye of lytell fayth? Therfore take no thought sayeng. What shall we eate or what shall we drynke, or wherwt shall we be clothed, af∣ter all these thynge seke the gentyls, for your heuēly father kno¦weth yt ye haue nede of al these thynges, but rather seke ye fyrst the kyngdome of heuen and the ryghtewysenes therof, and all these thynges shalbe mynistred vnto you. ¶ The Gospell on the .xvj. sondaye after Trinite sonday. The thyrde Chapyter to Ephesians. B SAynt Paule wrote vnto ye Ephesians sayeng. I desyre you yt ye faynte not because of my tribulacyons for youre sakes which is your prayse for this cause I bowe my knees vnto the father of our lorde Iesus Christ, whiche is father ouer all yt is called father in heuen & erth, yt he wolde graunt you accordyng to ye ryches of hys glory, yt ye maye be strenghted wt myght by his spyryte in ye inner man / yt Christ maye dwell in your hertes by fayth, yt he beynge roted & groūded in loue, myght be able to cōprehend wt all sayntes, what is yt bredeth, & length, deepth / & heygth, & to knowe what is the loue of Christ / which loue pas∣seth knowledge yt ye myght be fulfylled wt al maner of fulnes /
whiche cōmeth of god, vnto hym yt is able to do excedynge ha∣boūdantly aboue all yt we axe or thynke accordyng to ye power that worketh in vs, be prayse in the congregacyons / by Iesus Christ, thorowout all generacions from tyme to tyme. Amen. ¶ The gospel on the .xvij. sondaye after Trinite sondaye. The vij. Chapiter of Luke. B IEsus went into a cytye called Naim, & many of his disci¦ples went wt him & much people, when he came nye vnto the gate of ye cytye, beholde there was a dead man caryed oute / which was the onely sonne of his mother & she was a wydow and much people was with her, & when Iesus sawe her he had compassyon on her & sayd vnto her wepe not and he went and touched the coffyn, & they yt bare him stode styl, & he sayd yonge man I say vnto the aryse & the dead sat vp and began to speke, and he deliuered him to his mother & there came a feare on thē all, and they gloryfyed God sayenge, a great Prophet is rysen amonge vs and God hath visited hys people. ¶ The Pystle on the .xvij. sondaye after Trynyte sonday. The iiij. Chapyter to the Ephesians. A BRethren I which am in bondes for ye lordes sake exhorte you yt ye walke worthy of the vocacion wherwith ye are called in al humblenes of mynde, & mekenes, & longe sufferyng forbearynge one another, thorow loue / & that ye be dilygent to kepe the vnyte of ye spyrite in the bonde of peace, beynge one bo∣dy & one spirite, euē as ye are called in one hope of your callīge Let there be but one lord, one fayth, one baptyme, one god and father of all, whiche is aboue all / thorowe all. And in you all, which is blessed in the wordes of wordes. Amen. ¶ The Gospell on the .xvij, sondaye after Trinite sonday. The xiiij. Chapyter of Luke. A WHen Iesus wente into the house of one of the chyefe pha¦ryses to eate breade on the Saboth daye / and they wat∣ched hym and beholde there was a man before hym which had the dropsye, and Iesus answered & spake vnto ye lawers & pha∣ryses
& Iesus answered & spake vnto ye lawers / & Pharyses fayeng it is lawful to heale on ye Saboth day & they helde their peace, & he toke him & healed him & let him go, & answered thē sayeng. Whiche of you shall haue an Asse or an oxe fallen in to a pyt / & wyl not strayte way pull hī out on ye Saboth day? & they coul∣de not answere him agayne to yt. He put forth a similitude to ye gestes when he marked howe they preased to ye hyest roumes / & sayde vnto thē, whē yu arte bydden to a weddynge of any mā syt not downe in ye hiest roume, lest a more honourable mā thē thou be bydden of him / & he yt had both him & the / come & saye to ye: giue this mā roume & thou thē begyn with shame to take ye lowest roume / but rather whē yu art biddē, go & syt in ye lowest roume that when he yt had ye cōmeth / he maye say vnto ye: frēde syt vp hyer. Then shalte yu haue worshyp / in ye presence of them yt sit at meate with the, for who soeuer exalteth hī selfe / shalbe broughte lowe / & he yt humbleth him selfe shall be exalted. ¶ The Pystle on ye .xviij. Sonday after Trinite sonday the .j. Pystle to the Corynthyans, and the fyrst Chapyter. A. BRethren I thanke my god alwayes on your behalfe for the grace of god whiche is gyuen you by Iesus Chryste / that in al thinges ye are made ryche by him, in al lernynge & in al knowlege euē as ye testimony of Iesus Christ was cōfyrmed in you / so yt ye are behynde in no gyft, & waite for ye aperyng of our lorde Iesus Christ whiche shall strēgth you vnto ye ende yt ye may be blamelesse in the day of our lorde Iesus Christe. ¶ The Gospel on the .xviij. sonday after Trinite sonday ye .xxi. Chapyter of Mathewe. D. THe Pharises wēte vnto Iesus / & one of thē which was a doctoure of the lawe / asked hym a questyon / temptyng hī and sayeng Mayster whiche is the great cōmaundemente in ye lawe Iesus said vnto him yu shalte loue thy lorde god wt al thine harte, with al thy soule & wt al thy mynde / this is ye fyrst and the gretest cōmaundemēt & there is an other lyke vnto this. Thou shalt loue thy neyghboure as thy selfe. In these two cōmaūde∣mentes
hange all ye lawe and prophetes. Whyle the Pharyses were gathered togyther Iesus asked thē sayeng. What thȳke ye of Christ. Whose sonne is he, they sayd vnto hym ye sonne of Dauyd He sayd vnto them. Howe then doth Dauyd in spirite cal hȳ lorde sayeng, The lorde sayd to my lord / syt on my right hāde tyl I make thyne enemyes thy fote stoles / yf Dauyd cal∣led hī lorde / how is he then hys sonne / & none of thē coulde an∣swere hym agayne one worde. Neyther durste any man frome that daye forth aske hym any mo questyons. ¶ The Pystle on the xix. sōday after Trinite sonday ye .iiij. cha. to the Ephesians. E. BRethren be ye renued in yt spirite of youre myndes & put on ye new man which after ye ymage of god is shaped in rightwysenes, & true holynes. Wherfore put away lyenge and speake euery mā truth vnto his neyghbour, for as moch as we are mēbers one of another be angry, but sīne not, let not ye son go downe vpon your wrath, gyue no place vnto ye backbiter let hȳ ye steale stele no more, but let hī rather labour wt his handes some good thyng yt he may haue to gyue vnto hī that nedeth. ¶ The Gospel on the .xix. sonday after Trinite sonday / the .xix. Chapiter. of Mathewe. A. IEs{us} entred in ye shyp & passed ouer & came into hys owne citye, & beholde they broughte vnto hym a man sycke of ye palsey, lyeng in his bed, & whē Iesus sawe theyr fayth, he sayd to the sicke of ye palsey, sonne be of good chere, thy synnes are forgyuē the, & beholde certayne of ye scrybes sayd in thē selfe he blasphemeth, & whē Iesus sawe theyr thoughtes he sayd wher¦fore thynke you euyll in your hertes? whether is easyer to say thy sinnes are forgyuen the, or to say arise & walke? That ye may knowe, that ye sōne of man hath power to forgyue sīnes in earth, then sayd he vnto the sycke of the palsey aryse, take vp thy bed & go home to thy house. And he arose & departed to his house, and when the people sawe it they meruayled & glorified god, whiche had gyuē suche power to men.
¶ The Pystle on ye .xx. sonday after Trinite sonday. The .v. cha. to the Ephesyans. D. BRethren take hede that ye walke cyrcūspetly, not as foles but as wyse, redeminge the tyme, for the dayes are euyl, wherefore be ye not vnwyse, but vnderstande what the wyl of the lorde is, & be not dronke with wyne, wherin is excesse / but be fulfylled with ye spirite, spekynge vnto your selues in Psalmes & Hymnes, & spirytuall songes, syngynge & makynge melody to ye lorde in your hertes, giuinge thankes alwayes, for al thin∣ges in the name of our Lorde Iesus Christ to god ye father, sub∣myttyng your selues one to a nother in the feare of god. ¶ The Gospel on ye .xx. sonday after Trinite sonday. The .xxij. chapiter. of Mathew. A. IEsus sayed vnto his disciples. The kyngdome of heuē is lyke vnto a certayne kinge, which maryed his sonne and sent forth his seruaūtes to call them yt were byd to ye weddyng, & they wolde not come. Agayn he sent forth other seruauntes, sayeng, tell them whiche are bidden, beholde I haue prepared my dyner, myne oxen and my fatlinges are kylled, & al thinges are redy, come vnto the Maryage. They made lyght of it and wente their waies: one to his ferme place, another aboute his marchaundyse, the remenaunt toke his seruauntes & intreated them vngoodly & slewe them, when ye kyng herde that: he was wroth, & sent forth his warrers & destroyed these murtherers / and brent vp theyr cytye / then sayd he to his seruaūtes / ye wed∣dynge was prepared: but they which were bydden therto were not worthy. Go ye therfore out into ye hygh wayes, & as many as ye fynde byd them to mariage, the seruauntes went out in to ye hygh wayes / & gathered togyther as many as they coulde fynde bothe good and bad / & the weddynge was furnysshed wt gestes. The kynge came in to vysyte his gestes & spyed there a man which had on a weddinge garmēt, & sayd vnto him: frēde how camest yu in hyther / & hast not on a weddynge garmente, & he was euē spechles. Then sayd ye kynge to his mynisters, take
and bynde him hāde & fote & cast him into vtter darknes, there shall be wepynge and gnasshynge of teche, for many are called and fewe be chosen. ¶ The pystle on the .xxj. Sondaye after Trinite sondaye. The vj. Chapyter / to the Ephesyans. B MY brethren be stronge in the lorde, & in the power of his myght, put on the armour of God, yt ye maye stande sted∣fast agaynst the craftye assautes of ye deuyl / for we wrestle not agaynst flessh & bloud, but agaynst rule against power against worldly rulers of the darknes of this world, agaynst spiritual wickednes, for heuēly thinges. For this cause take vnto you ye armour of god, yt ye may be able to resyst in ye euyl day & to stā¦de perfect in all thynges. Stāde therfore & your loynes gyrde about wt veryte hauynge on ye breste plate of ryghtwesenes & shodde wt showes prepared by ye gospell of peace, aboue all take to you the shylde of fayth, wherwith ye may quence al the fyre dartes of the wycked, and take the helmet of saluacyon, & the swerde of the spirite, whiche is the worde of god. ¶ The Gospell on the .xxi. Sonday after Trinite sonday The iiii. Chapiter of Iohan. G. THere was a certayn ruler, whose sonne was sycke at Ca∣pernaum, as he herde yt Iesus was come out of Iewry in to Galile / he wente vnto hym, & besought hym that he wolde descende, & heale his sonne, for he was euen redy to dye. Then sayde Iesus vnto hym, except ye se signes and wounders, ye be∣leue nat, the ruler sayd vnto hym: syr come awaye or euer yt my chyld dye, Iesus sayd vnto hym go thy way thy sonne lyueth, and ye man beleueth the wordes yt Iesus had spokē vnto hym, and wente his way & anone as he went on his waye, his ser∣uauntes met hym & tolde him, saynge. Thy sonne lyueth then enquyred he of thē ye houre when he began to amende, and they sayd vnto hym: yesterday ye seuenth houre, ye feuer lefte hym, and the father knew yt it was that same houre, whē Iesus sayd vnto hym, thy sonne lyueth & he beleued and all his houshold.
¶ The Pystle on the .xxii. sonday after Trinite sondaye, the .i. Chap. to the Phyllyppians. A. BRethren we truste in our lorde Iesus Christe, that he whiche begā a good worke in you shall performe it vntyl the day of Iesus Christ as it becommeth me so to iudge of you all, because I haue you in my hert, & haue you also euery one cōpanyons of grace with me in my bondes as I defende, and stablysshe the Gospell. God beareth me recorde nowe greatlye I longe after you all frō the very herte rote in Iesus Christe and this I pray that our loue may encreace more and more in knowledge, and in all fealyng, that ye myght accepte thinges most excellent that ye myght be pure & suche as shuld hurte no mannes conscyence, vntyl the day of Christ fylled with ye fruy∣tes of ryghtwysnes whiche, fruytes came by Iesus Christe vnto the glory and laude of God. ¶ The Gospell on the .xxii. sondaye after Trinite sondaye the xviii. Chap. of Mathew. C. IEsus put forth a similitude vnto his disciples sayenge. The kyngdome of heauen is lykened vnto a certayn king which wold take accōptes of his seruaūtes & when he had be∣gonth reken one was brought vnto hym whiche oughte hym x. thousand talentes, but when he had nought to paye the lord commaunded hym to be solde & his wyfe and his chyldren and all that he had & payment to be made. The seruaunt fel downe and besought him sayenge: Syr gyue me respyte, and I wyll paye the it euery whyt, then had the lord pyte on the seruaunt and losed hym & forgaue hym the det. The same seruaunt wēt out & found one of his felowes which ought hym an hoūdreth pens, & layd handes on hym and toke hym by the throte saieng Pay me that yu owest, & his felowe fel downe & besoughte hym sayeng. Haue pacyence with me, & I wyl pay the all, & he wold nat, but went & cast hym into pryson tyll he shuld paye the det when his other felowes sawe what was done they were very sory, and came and tolde to theyr lord all that had happened.
Then his lorde called hym, & sayd vnto hym O euyll seruaūte I forgaue the all the dette / because yu prayedst me / was it nat mete also, that yu shuldest haue had cōpassiō on thy felowe euen as I had pity on ye? & his lord was wroth & deliuered him to ye Ialers, tyl he shuld pay all yt was due vnto hym. So lyke∣wyse shall my heuēly father do vnto you, Yf ye wyl nat forgy¦ue with al your hartes, eche one to his brother theyr trespases ¶ The Pystle on the .xxiij. sondaye after Trinite sondaye the iij. Chap. to the Philyppyans. C. BRethren folowe ye me, & loke on thē whiche walke euen, so as ye haue vs for an ensāple / for many walke (of whō I haue tolde you often, & now tell you weping) that they are ye ennemyes of the crosse of Christ, whose ende is dampna∣cyō, whose god is theyr belye, & whose glorie is to theyr shame which are worldy mynded / but our cōuersacion is in heuen, frō whense we loke, for the sauioure euen the lorde Iesus Christe which shall chaūge into an other fasshyon our vyle bodyes, yt they maye be fassioned lyke vnto hys gloryous body accordȳg to the workynge wherby he is able to subdue all thinges vnto hym selfe, in Iesus Christ our lorde. ¶ The Gospel on the .xxiij. Sondaye after Trinite Sondaye The .xxii. Chapyter of Mathewe. B THe Pharyses wēt & toke coūsell, how they myght tan∣gle Christ Ies{us} in his wordes, & sent vnto him their dis∣ciples wt herodes seruaūtes sayeng. Maister we knowe yt thou arte true, & that yu techest the waye of god truly neyther careste for any man, for thou cōsiderest not mēnes estate tell vs ther∣fore how thinkest yu? Is it laweful to gyue tribute vnto Cesar or not? Ies{us} {per}ceyued theyr wylynes, & sayde. Why tēpte ye me ye Ipocrites? Let me se ye trybute money, & they toke hī a peny & he sayd vnto thē? whose is thys Image & su{per}scripciō / They sayd vnto hī Cesars then sayde he vnto thē. Gyue therfore to Cesar yt which is Cesars, & gyue vnto god yt which is goddes ¶ The Pystle on the .xxiiij. Sondaye after Trinite sondaye.
The .j. Chapyter to the Collossyans. B BRethren: we cease not prayenge for you desyrynge yt ye myght be fulfylled wt the knowledge of his wyll in al wy¦sedome & spiritual vnderstādynge, yt ye myght walke worthy of the lorde in all thinges yt please, beyng fruyteful in all good workes & increasynge in ye knowledge of god, strēghted with all myght, thorow his glorious power vnto al pacyēce, & long sufferyng, with ioyfulnes in Iesus Christ our Lorde. ¶ The Gospell on the .xxiiij. Sondaye after Trynite sondaye The .ix. Chapyter of Mathewe. C WHyles Iesus spake vnto ye people, beholde there came a certayne ruler, & worshypped him sayeng, my doughter is euen now deceased but come & lay thy hāde on her, & she shal lyue, & Iesus arose & folowe him wt hys discyples, & beholde a womā which was diseased wt an yssue of bloude twelue yeres came behynde hym, & touched ye heme of his vesture, & she sayd in her selfe. If I may touche but euen his vesture onely, I shal be safe. Iesus turned him about, & behelde her sayenge, dough¦ter be of good cōfort, thy fayth hath made ye safe, and she was made hole euen the same houre. ¶ The Pystle on the nexte Sondaye before Aduent sondaye. Ieremias .xxxiij. BRethrē beholde ye dayes wyl come sayth ye lord yt I wyl stere vp vnto Dauyd a ryghtuouse braūche, and he shall raygne a kynge, & shal be wyse, & shal do equyte & iustyce in the erth, & in his dayes Iuda shalbe safe, & Israel shall dwel wtout feare, & this is ye name yt they shall cal him the lorde our ryght∣ousnes, wherfore ye dayes wyll come sayeth ye lord yt they shal say no more, ye lorde lyueth yt broughte ye chyldrē of Israel oute of the lande of Egypt, but ye lorde lyueth which delyuered and brought ye sede of the house of Israell out of the lande of the north, & from all landes whether I thrust them, and they shall dwell in theyr owne lande sayth the lorde God almyghtye. ¶ The Gospel on the next sondaye before Aduente Sondaye.
The .vj. Chapyter of Iohn̄. A WHē Iesus lyfted vp his eyes & sawe a gret cōpany come vnto him & sayd vnto philip. Whense shall we bye bread yt these myght eate. This he sayd to proue hym, for he him selfe knewe what he wold do. Philip answered hym, two hondreth peny worth of bread are not sufficient for thē, yt euery man ha∣ue a lytell. Then sayd vnto hym one of his discyples Andrewe Simon Peters brother. There is a chylde here, which hath .v. barly loues & .ij. fysshes, but what is yt among so many? Iesus sayde, make the people to syt downe (there was muche haye in the place) & the men sat downe: in nōbre about fyue thousande Iesus toke ye breade & gaue thankes, & gaue to his disciples, & his disciples to them yt were set downe. & lykewyse of ye fysshes as much as they wolde / when they had eaten ynough, he sayd vnto his dysciples, gather vp ye brokē meate yt remayneth, yt no¦thyng be lost. They gathered it togyther, & fylled .xij. baskettes wt the brokē meate / of ye fyue barly loues, & two fysshes which brokē meat remayned vnto them yt had eatē. Then those men, when they had sene ye myracle yt Iesus dyd / sayde. This is of a truth, the same Prophet, which shall come into the worlde. ¶ The Pystle on the dedycacyon daye. The jxxj. Chapyter of the Reuelacion of S. Iohn̄. A IOhn sawe ye holy cyte new Ierusalē come downe frō god out of heuē prepared as a byrden / garnysshed for her hus¦bande, & I berde a great voyce frō ye trone / sayeng, behold the tabernacle of god is wt mē & he wyll dwell wt tē & they shal be his people / & god hym selfe shalbe wt them, & be theyr god, and god shall wype alwaye all teares frō theyr eyes & there shalbe no more death / neyther sorowe / neyther cryenge neyther shall there be any more payne for ye olde thinges are gone & he yt sat vpon the seate sayde / beholde I wyll make all thynges a newe ¶ The gospel on the dedycacyon day. The .xix. Cha. of Luke, A IEsus entred in / & went thorow Ierico / & beholde there was a man named zacheus / and he was a ruler amonge
the Publicans and ryche also & he made meanes to se Iesus / what he shulde be, and he coulde not for the preace / because he was of a lowe stature. Wherfore he ran before, & ascended vp in to a wylde fygge tree, to se hym, for he wolde come ye same waye & when Iesus came to the place he loked vp & sawe him & sayd vnto him, zache, hastely come downe, for to day I must abyde at thy house, & quicly he came downe, & receyued him ioy¦fully & when they sawe yt they all grutched sayenge, he is gone in / to tary wt a man yt is a synner / zache stode forth & sayde vn¦to the lorde. Beholde lorde / ye halfe of my goodes I gyue to the poore / & yf I haue done any man wrōge I wyll restore him .iiij fold. Iesus sayd vnto hī, this day is helth come vnto this hou∣se, for as much as this same house is become ye chyld of Abra∣hā, for ye son of mā is come to seke & to saue yt whiche was lost ¶ Here endeth ye Pystles and gospels of the Sondayes ☞ Here begynneth the Pystles and Gospels of ye Sayntes, ¶ The Pystle on Saynt Andrewes day. The .x. Chapyter to the Romaynes. C BRethren the belefe of the hert iustifyeth, & to knowledge with ye mouth maketh a man safe. For ye scripture sayth who soeuer beleueth on hym, shal not be ashamed. There is no dyfference betwne the Iewe and the Gentyle. For one is lorde of all, which is ryche vnto all that call vnto hym, For whosoe∣uer shall call on ye name of the lorde shalbe safe. How shall they call on him? on whom they beleued not? How shal they beleue on hym, of whō they haue not herd? How shall they hear wtout a precher, and howe shall they preache except they be sente: As it is wrytten howe beutyful are the fete of them which brynge glad tydynges of peace, And brynge gladde tydynges of good thynges, but they haue not all obeyed ye Gospell. For Esaias sayth / Lorde who shal beleue on our sayenges? So then fayth cōmeth by herynge / and hearynge cometh by ye worde of God. But I aske haue they not herde? No doubte their sounde wēte out into all landes, and their wordes in the endes of ye worlde.
¶ The Gospell on saynt Andrewes day. The fourth Chapy∣ter of Mathewe. C AS Iesus walked by the see of Galyle, he sawe two bre∣thren, Symon which was called Peter & Andrewe his brother castynge a net into the see (for they were fysshers) and he sayde vnto them, folowe me, & I wyll make you fysshers of men. And they strayght waye left their nettes, & folowed him And he went forth from thense, & sawe other two brethrē, Ia∣mes the sonne of zebede, & Iohn̄ his brother in the shyp, wt ze∣bede theyr father mendynge theyr nettes. & called them, & they without taryenge lef the nettes, & their father & folowed him. ¶ The Pystle on Saynt Nicolas daye. Eccle. xliiij. BEholde an excellēt prest which in his dayes pleased god and was founde ryghteous, and in tyme of wrath made an atonement: lyke to him there is not founde yt kept the lawe of the most hiest. And he was in the couenaunt wt him, & in his flessh he wrote ye couenaūt, & in tyme of tēptacyō he was foūd faythful. Therfore he made him a couenaūt wt an othe ye naci∣ons shulde be blessed in his syght, and yt he shuld be multiplyed as ye dust of ye erth, he knew him in his blyssynges & gaue him an inheritaūce & he kept hī thorow his mercy, yt he fon̄d grace in ye eies of god. An euerlastyng couenaūt dyd he make him / & gaue him ye office of ye hye prest, he made him happy ī glory, in fayth, & in softnes, he made hī holy, & chose him out of al flessh ¶ The Gospell on Saynt Nicolas daye. The .xxv. Chapyter of Mathewe. B IEsus sayd vnto his disciples. A certain man redy to take his iorney to a straunge countre, called his seruauntes to him, and delyuered to them his goodes, & vnto one he gaue v. talentes, to another .ij. and to another one, to euery man af∣ter hys abylite, & strayght way departed. Then he yt had recey¦ued the .v. talētes went and bestowed them, and wan other .v. lykewyse he that receyued two, gayned other .ij. but he that re∣ceyued one, wente and dygged a pyt in the earthe and hyd his
maysters money. After a longe season, ye lord of those seruaun∣tes came & rekened with thē. Then came he that had receyued v. talentes & brought other fyue sayenge. Mayster yu delyuerest vnto me fyue talentes, lo I haue gayned with thē .v. mo Then his mayster said vnto hym, wel good seruaunt & faithful, thou hast ben faithfull in lytel, I wyll make ye ruler ouer moche. En∣tre into thy maysters ioye, also he that receyued two talentes came & sayde, mayster, thou delyueredst vnto me .ij. talentes, lo I haue wonne. two other with them, & his Mayster sayd vnto hym well good seruaunt & faithful I wyll make the ruler ouer moche go into thy maysters ioye. ¶ The Pystle on the Concepcyon of our Lady. Eccl. xxiiij. AS a vyne, so brought I forth a sauour of swetenes and my floures are ye fruyt of glory and ryches. I am ye mo∣ther of beutyfull loue & of feare, & of greatnes, and of holy hope In me is all grace of lyfe & truth, & in me is al hope of lyfe and vertu. Come vnto me all that desyre me, & be filled with ye fruy∣tes that spryng of me, for my spirit is sweter thā hony or hony combe. The remēbraunce of me is for euer and euer. They that eate me shall honger ye more, & they yt drynke me shall thurst the more he that harkeneth to me shall nat be ashamed, and he that worketh by my counsell, shal nat sinne and they that bring in to lyghte shall haue eternall lyfe. ¶ The Gospell on the Concepcyon of oure Lady the fyrste chapyter of Mathew. A. THis is the boke of the generacyon of Iesus Christ the sonne of Dauid, the sonne also of Abraham, Abraham begate Isaac. Isaac begate Iacob. Iacob begate Iudas, and his bretheren. Iudas begat Phares, and Saram of Thamar. Phares begate Esrom. Esrom begate Aram. Aram begate A∣minadab. Aminadab begate Naasson. Naasson begate Salmō Salmon begat Boos of Rahab. Bohos begat Obed of Ruth Obed begate Iesse. Iesse begat Dauid ye kyng, Dauid the king begate Salomō of her yt was Vries wife. Salomō begat Ro∣boam
begat Abia. Abia begat Asa. Asa begat Io saphat. Iosa∣phat begat Iorā. Iorā begat Ozias. Ozias beg at Ioatham. Ioathā beg at Achas. Achas begat Ezechias. Ezechias begat Manasses. Manasses begat Amō. Amō begat Iosias. Iosias begat Iechonias & his brethrē, aboute ye time they were caried away to Babylō & after they were brought to Babilō Iecho∣nias begate Salachiel. Salachiel begate zorababel. zorababel begate Abiud. Abiud begate Eliachī. Eliachim begate Azor. Azor begat Sadoc. Sadoc begat Achim. Achim begat Eli∣ud. Eliud begat Eleasar. Eleasar begat Mathan. Mathan begat Iacob. Iacob begat Ioseph the husbande of Mary, of whome was borne yt Iesus, whiche is called Christ. ¶ The Pystle on saynt Thomas day ye Apostle. The .ij. chapi∣ter to the Ephesians. D. BRethrē nowe ye are no more straungers, & foreners but Cetezins with ye Sayntes. & of the houssholde of god, & are bilte vpon ye foundacion of the Apostles & Prophetes, Ies{us} Christ beyng ye hed corner stone / in whō euery buyldynge cou∣pled togyther, groweth vnto an holy tēple in the Lorde in whō ye are bylte togyther & made an habytaciō for god in ye spirite. ¶ The Gospel on. s. Thom̄s day ye Apostle, ye .x. cha. of Iohn̄. F THom̄s one of ye twelue called Didim{us} was not wt them whē Ies{us} came. The other disciples said vnto hym we haue sene ye lorde. And he sayde vnto thē: excepte I se in his bā∣des ye prynt of ye nayles, & put my fīger in ye holes of ye nayles, & thrust my hād into his syde, I wil not beleue, & after .viij. day∣es againe, ye disciples were wtin & Thom̄s was with thē. Ies{us} came whē the dores were shut / & stode in the myddes & sayde. Peace be wt you. Thē sayd he to Thom̄s, put in thy finger here & se my hādes, & put forth thy hāde & thrust it into my side, & be not wt out fayth but beleue. Thom̄s answered & sayd vnto him my lorde & my God. Iesus sayd vnto him. Thom̄s because yu haste sene me, therfore haste yu beleued. Happy ar they yt haue not sene, and yet haue beleued.
¶ The Pystle on the conuersion of s. Paule. The .ix. Chapyter of the Actes of the Apostles. A SAul yet brethynge out treatenynges & slaughter agaynst ye disciples of ye lorde, went vnto ye hye prest, & desyred of hȳ letters to Damascō, to ye synagoges ye yf he found any of this way whether they were men or wemē, he might bryng thē boūd vnto Ierusalē. As he wēt on his iornei it fortuned yt he drewnie to Damascō, & sodaynly theyr shyned roūd about him a lyght frō heuen, & he fell to the earth & herde a voyce sayeng to hym. Saul, Saul. Why persecutest yu me? And he sayd, what arte yu lorde. The lorde sayd, I am Iesus whō yu persecutest, it shal be harde for ye to kycke agaynst ye prycke, he both trēblynge & asto¦nied sayd, lorde what wylt yu haue me to do? And ye lorde sayde vnto him, aryse & go into ye cytye, and it shallbe tolde ye what yu shalt do. The men which cōpanyed wt him on his way, stode a∣mased, for they herde a voyce, but sawe no mā. Saul arose frō ye earth, and when he had opened his eyes he sawe no mā. Then led they hȳ by the hand, & brought hȳ into Damascō & he was thre dayes wtout sight, & neyther eate nor dranke. There was a certayne discyple at Damascō named Ananias: to him spake the lorde in a vision, Ananias, And he sayd beholde, I am here lorde. And ye lord sayd vnto him aryse & go into ye strete, which is called strayte, & seke in the house of Iudas, after one saule of the cytye of Thars{us}, for beholde he prayeth & hath sene in a vi∣syon a man named Ananias cōmyng in vnto hym, & puttynge his hādes on him yt he myght receyue his sygh e. Ananias an∣swered / lord I haue herd by many of this mā, how much hurt he hath done to the sayntes at Ierusalē, & in this place he hath auctoryte of the hye prestes to bynde al yt cal on thy name. The lorde sayd vnto him. Go thy wayes, for he is a chosen vessel vn¦to me to bery my name before the gētyls & kynges, & chyldrē of Israel for I wyl shewe him how great thynges he must suf¦fre for me names sake. Ananias wēt his way, & entred into the house, & put his hādes on hym, & sayd: brother Saul the lord,
yt appered vnto the in the way as yu camest sente me vnto the yt ye myghtest receyue thy syght, & be fylled wt the holy ghost And immediatly there fell frō his eyes as it had bene scales, & he re∣ceyued his syght, & arose & was baptysed, & receyued meat and was cōforted. Then was Saul certayn dayes wt the disciples which were at Damascō, & strayt way he preached Christ in ye synagoges, how yt he was the sōne of god. Al yt herde him were amased & said, is not this he yt spoyled thē which called on this name in Ierusalē? & came hyther for the entēt yt he shuld bring thē boūd vnto the hye prestes? Saul encreased in strēgth, & cō¦foūded the Iewes which dwelled at Damascon affyrmynge that this was very Christ. ¶ The gospel on the Cōuersiō of s. Paul. ye .xix. cha. of Mat. D PEter sayd vnto Iesus. Beholde we haue forsaken all & ha¦ue folowed the what shal we haue therfore, Iesus sayd vn¦to thē, verely I saye vnto you, yt ye which haue folowed me in the seconde generacyon (when the sonne of man shall sit in the seate of his maiesty) shal syt also vpon .xij. seate, & iudge the .xij. trybes of Israell, & whosoeuer forsaketh house or brethren or systers, or father or mother, or chyldrē or lyuelode, for my na∣mes sake, the same shal receyue an hundreth folde, & shall inhe¦ryte euerlastynge lyfe. ¶ The Pystle on Candelmas daye. Malachie .iij. BEholde I sende my messenger which shal prepare ye way before me, & sodaynly shall the lorde whō ye seke come vn¦to his temple, & the messenger of the couenaunt whō ye desyre Beholde he commeth sayeth the lorde. Sabothe. Who shal ē∣dure in the daye of his cōmynge, or who shal stande to beholde him? for he is as tryenge fyre, & the herbe yt fullers score wtal, & he shal syt tryenge & purgyng syluer, & shall puryfye the sōnes of Leuy, & shall fyne thē, as golde & syluer & they shall brynge offerynge vnto ye lorde of ryghteousnes, & the sacryfyce of Iu∣da & of Ierusalē shalbe delycyous vnto the lorde as in the old tymes, & in ye yeres that were at the begynnynge.
¶ The gospel on Cādelmas day. The second. Cha. of Luke. D WHen the tyme of Puryfication (after ye lawe of Moises) was come, they brought Iesus to Ierusalem, to present him to the lorde, as it is written in ye lawe of ye lorde? euery mā chylde ye fyrst openeth the matryx, shalbe called holy to ye lorde & to offce as it is sayde in the lawe of ye lorde, a payre of turtle doues, or .ij. yonge Pygyons, and beholde there was a man in Ierusalē, whose name was Simeon and the same man was iuste and feared god and longed for the consolacion of Iraell, and the holy ghost was in hym, and an answere was gyuen hym of the holy ghoste, that he shuld not se death, before he had sene the Lorde Christe. And he came by inspiracion into ye tem¦ple. And when ye father & the mother brought in ye childe Iesus to do for him after the custome of the lawe. Then toke he him vp in his armes & sayd lorde lettest yu thy seruaunte departe in peace acordynge to thy promyse, for myne eyes haue sene ye sa∣uiour sent frō ye, which yu hast prepared before ye face of al ye peo¦ple. A light to lyghtē ye gētils & the glory of thy people Israel. ¶ The Pystle on S. Mathias the Apostle day. the .j. chapyter of the Actes of the Apostle. C PEter stode vp in the myddes of ye disciples & sayd) ye nōbre) of the names were about an hondreth and twenty) ye mē and brethrē, this scripture must nedes be fulfilled, which ye ho∣ly ghost thorowe the mouth of Dauid spake before of Iudas which was guyde to them yt toke Iesus, for he was nōbred wt vs & obtayned felowshyp in this ministracion, & he hath now possessed a plat of grounde wt the rewarde of iniquite / and whē he was hanged, braste a sonder in the middes, & all his bowels gusshed out / & as it is knowen vnto all the inhabyters of Ie∣rusalē. In so muche yt that felde is called in theyr mother tōge. Acheldema, that is to say ye bloudy felde. It is writē in ye boke of Psalmes his habytacyon be voyde, & no man be dwellynge therin, & his bysshopryke let another take. Wherfore of the mē which haue companyed wt vs (all ye tyme yt the lorde Iesus wēt
in and out amonge vs, begynnynge at the baptysme of Iohn̄ vnto the same daye yt he was taken vp frō vs) must one be or∣dened to be a witnes wt vs of his resurreccion. And they apoyn¦ted. Ioseph called Barsabas (whose surname was Iustus) & Mathias, & they prayed sayenge. Thou Lorde which knowest the hertes of all men, shewe whether thou hast chosen of these two, yt the one maye take the roume of this ministracyon, & A∣postleshyp frō ye which Iudas by trāsgression fell, yt he myght go to his owne place, & they gaue forth theyr lottes and ye lot fell on Mathias, and he was counted with ye eleuen Apostles. ¶ The Gospell on S. Mathias the Apostles day. The .xj. Chapiter of Mathew. D THen Ies{us} answered & sayed I prayse ye. O father lorde of heuē & erth because yu hast hyd these thynges frō ye wyse & prudēte, & haste opened thē vnto babes, euen so father for so it pleased yt all thinges are gyuē vnto me of my father / & no man knoweth ye sōne but ye father, nether knoweth any mā ye father saue ye sōne & he to whō ye sōne wyl open him. Come vnto me al ye ye labour & are ladē, & I wyl ease you take my yoke on you & lerne of me, for I am meke & lowely in hert, & ye shal fynde rest vnto your soules / for my yoke is easye / & my burthen is lyght. ¶ The Pystle on ye Annunciacyan of our Lady. Esaye. vij. OVr lorde spake to Achas sayeng. Axe yt a signe of ye Lorde thy god, from a lowe byneth, or from an hye aboue. But Achas answered. I wyl not axe, nether wyl tempte ye lord Wherfore ye lorde sayth herkē ye of ye house of Dauid. It is so smal a thing for you to be greuous to men / but ye ye shuld also be paynfull vnto god neuer the later yet ye lord, he wil gyue you a signe. Behold a virgin shalbe wt childe, & shal beare a sonne, & shal cal his name Emanuel. He shal eat butter & hony yt he may haue vnderstandynge to refuse the euyll & to chose the good. ¶ The Gospel on ye Annūciacion of our lady. The .j. chap. of. Luke .C. ANd in the .vj. moneth the angell Gabriell, was sent frō god
vnto a cytie of Galyle named nazareth to a vyrgin sponsed to a man whose name was Ioseph of the house of Dauyd, & the vyrgyns name was Mary, and the angell went in vnto her & sayde: Hayle full of grace, the lorde is wt the, blessyd art thou a∣monge women. When she sawe hym she was abasshed at hys sayeng, & cast in her mynde what maner of salutaciō yt shuld be And ye Angel sayd vnto her, feare not Mary, for yu hast founde grace with god, lo yu shalt cōceyue in thy wombe, & shalt beare a sonne & shalt call his name Iesus. He shall be great, & shalbe called the sonne of the hyest, & the lorde shal gyue vnto him the seate of his father Dauyd, & he shall raygne ouer the house of Iacob for euer, and of his kyngdome shal be none ende, Then sayde Mary to the Angel / how shal this be, seynge yt I knowe not a man? and the angell answered and sayd vnto her / the ho¦ly ghost shal come vpon the & the power of the hyest shall ouer shadow the. Therfore also that holy thing which shalbe borne & shal be called the sonne of god & marke thy cosyn Elyzabeth / she hath also conceyued a sonne in her old age / & this is the .vj. moneth to her whiche was called barayne for with God shall nothynge be vnpossyble. Mary sayd. Beholde the hande may∣den of the lorde / be it vnto me euen as thou hast sayde. ¶ The Pystle on S. Georges daye. The fyrst Chapyter of Iames. A MY brethren counte it excedynge ioy / when ye fall into dy∣uers teptacions for as much as ye know that the tryeng of your fayth bryngeth pacience haue her perfecte worke, that ye may be perfecte and sound, that nothynge be lackynge vnto you / yf any yt is amōg you lacke wysdome / let him aske of god (which gyueth to all men indyfferētly / & casteth no man in the teeth) & it shal be gyuen him / but let him aske in fayth & wauer nat for he yt doubteth is lyke the waues of the see / toste of the wynde / and caryed with violence. Neyther let that man thyn∣ke that he shall receyue any thynge of God. A wauerynge myn¦ded
man is vnstable in al his wayes / let the brother of lowe de¦gre reioyce in that he is exalted and the rych in that he is made lowe, for euen as the floure of the grasse, shal he vanyssh away The Sonne ryseth with heate and the grasse haboundaunce. Happy is the man that endureth in temptacion for when he is tryed, he shall receyue the Crowne of lyfe, whiche the Lorde hath promysed to them that loue hym. ¶ The gospel on S. Georges day. ye xv. cha. of Iohn̄. A. IEsus sayde vnto discyples I am the true vyne & my fa∣ther is an housbāde man, euery braūche yt beareth fruite in me, he wyl take away euery braunche yt beareth fruyte wyll pourge yt it maye brynge more fruyte. Now are ye cleane by ye meanes of the wordes which I haue spoken vnto you byde in me, & let me byde in you, as ye brauūche can not beare fruyte of it selfe, except it byde in ye vyne? No more can ye except ye a∣byde in me, I am the vyne, & ye are the braunches, he yt abideth in me, & I in him the same bryngeth forth much fruyte / for wt¦out me, cā ye do nothing, yf a mā bide not in me, he is cast forth as a braunche, & is whythered & men gather it, & cast it in to ye fyre, & it burneth, yf ye abyde in me, & my wordes also byde in you, aske what ye wyll, and it shalbe gyueth to you. ¶ The Pystle on s. Marke the Euāgelystes daye. The .iiij. cha¦pyter to the Ephesyans. B BRethren vnto euery one of vs is gyuen grace according to the measure of the gyft of Christ. Wherfore he sayth he is gone vp an hye, & hath led captyuite captiue, & hath gyuē gyftes vnto mē. That he ascēded / what meaneth it / but yt he al¦so dyscēdeth fyrst into ye lowest partyes of the erth. He yt dyscē¦ded / is euen ye same also that ascended vp euē aboue al thinges to fulfyl al thynges, & the very same made some Apostles some prophetes, some Euangelyst, some shepherdes, some teachers
that ye sayntes myght haue all thynges necessary to worke & mynistre wtal, to the edefyeng of ye body of Christ, tyll we euer pchone (in ye vnite of fayth & knowlege of ye sōne of god) grow vp vnto a perfite mā, after ye mesure of age of ye fulnes of christ ¶ The Gospell of S. Marke the Euangelyste daye. The .xv. Chapyter of Iohn̄. A I Am the true vyne, &c. as it is wrytten worde by worde in the Gospell of saynt George daye. ¶ The Pystle on Phylyp & Iames daye. Sapiencie. v. THen shall the ryghteous stande with greate constaunce a∣gaynst them yt vexed them & toke away yt they had labou¦red for. When the wycked shall se that, they shal be troubled wt horryble fere, & shall wonder at the sodayne & vnloked for vyc¦tory, & shall say in them selues, repentyng & sorowynge for an guysshe of herte. These be they whiche we somtyme mocked & iested on. We were out of our wyttes & thought theyr lyuynge madnes & theyr ende to be wtout honur, but beholde how they are counted amonge the chyldren of God / and haue theyr enhe¦rytaunce amonge the Sayntes. ¶ The gospell on S. Philyp and Iames daye. The .xiiij. Chapyter of Iohn̄. A IEs{us} sayd to his disciples let not your hertes be troubled, beleue ī god, & beleue ye ī me. In my fathers house ar ma¦ny mansyons / yf it were not so I wolde haue tolde you. I go to prepare a place for you, & yf I go to prepare a place for you I wyll come agayne, & receyue you euē vnto my selfe, yt where I am, there may ye be also, and whether I go ye knowe, & the way ye knowe. Thomas sayd vnto him. Lorde we knowe not whether thou goest. Also howe is it possible for vs to knowe ye waye Iesus sayd vnto him. I am ye waye, the veryte, & the lyfe No man cōmeth vnto the father / but by me, yf ye had knowen me, ye had knowen my father also. And nowe ye knowe him & ye haue sene hym. Philip sayd vnto him. Lorde shew vs the fa¦ther & it iustifyeth vs. Ies{us} sayd vnto him / haue I ben so long
tyme wt you / & yet hast yu not knowen me. Philip he yt hath sene me hath sene ye father, & how sayest yu then, shew vs ye father? be¦leuest yu not yt I am in ye father, & the father in me. The wordes yt I speake vnto you, I speke not of my selfe but ye father dwel∣lynge in me, is he yt doth ye workes beleue me yt I am ye father, & the father in me, at ye least beleue me for ye very workes sake. Verely verely I saye vnto you whosoeuer beleueth on me, the workes yt I do, ye same shal he do, & greater workes then these shal he do because I go vnto my father, & whatsoeuer ye aske in my name, that wyll I do. ¶ The Pystle on the Inuencyon of the Crosse. The .v. Chapy∣ter to the Galathyans. B BRethren I haue trust towarde you in god: yt ye wyll be none otherwyse mynded. He ye troubleth you shall beare his iudgement, whosoeuer he be, brethrē yf I yet preache circū¦sicion, why do I then yet suffre persecucion, for then had ye of∣fence which ye crosse gyueth ceased. I wolde to god they were sondred from you / which trouble you, as many as desyre with outwarde aperaunce to please carnally, they cōstrayne you to be circumcysed, onely because they wolde not suffre persecucion wt the crosse of Christ / for they thēselues which are circumcised kepe not the lawe, but desyre to haue you circumcised that they myght reioyce in your flesshe. God forbyd that I shulde reioce, but in the crosse of our lorde Iesus Christ wherby the worlde is crucyfyed as touchynge me & I as cōcernynge the worlde. ¶ The gospel on ye inuencyon of ye crosse / ye .iiij. cha. of Iohn̄. A There was a man of ye Pharyses named Nicodemus a ru∣ler amonge the Iewes, he came to Iesus by nyghte and sayde vnto hym. Mayster we knowe that thou art a teacher, which is come frō god, for no man could do suche miracles as thou doest, excepte god were with hym. Iesus answered and sayd vnto hym. Verely verely I say vnto the, except a man be borne a newe he can nat se the kyngdome of God. Nicodemus sayd vnto hym, howe can a man be borne when he is olde, can
he entre into his mothers body & be borne agayne? Ies{us} answe¦red Verely verely I say vnto ye, except yt a mā be borne of water and of ye spirite he can not entre into ye kyngdom of god. That which is borne of ye flesshe, is flesshe, and ye which is borne of ye spyrite, is spirite. Meruayle not yt I sayd to ye, ye must be borne a new. The wynde bloweth where he lysteth, and yu hearest his sounde, but yu cast not tel whense he cōmeth & whether he goeth So is euery man yt is borne of the spirite. Nicodem{us} answered and sayd vnto him. How can these thinges be? Ies{us} answered and sayde vnto him. Arte the a mayster in Israel, and knowest not these thynges? Verely verely I saye vnto the we speake yt we knowe, and testyfie that we haue sene, and receyue not our wytnes, yf I haue tolde you earthlye thynges, and ye haue not beleued howe shuld ye beleue yf I shal tel you of heuenly thyn∣ges? And no m& hath ascēded vp to heuē, but he yt came downe from heuen, that is to saye the sonne of man, which is in heuē. And as Moses lyfted vp ye Serpēt in wyldernes euen so must the sonne of man be lyfted vp, that no man whiche beleueth in hym peryssh / but haue eternall lyfe. ¶ The Pystle on the Natiuite of S. Iohn̄ Baptyst. Esaie. THus sayeth ye Lorde. Herkē ye Iles vnto me, & gyue hede ye people yt are a farre the lorde called me out of the wōbe & made mencyon of my name / when I was in my mothers bo¦wels, & he made my mouth lyke a sherp swerd. In the shadow he led me wt his hande, & he made me as an excellēt arowe, and hyd in his quyuer, & he sayde vnto me yu art my seruaunt, O Is¦rael, in whō I wyl be gloryfyed: & I sayd. I laboure in vayne & spende my strenght for nought & vnprofytably, howbeit my cause I cōmyt to the lorde, & my trauayle vnto my god, & now sayth the lord yt formed me in the wōbe to be seruaūt, & to tur¦ne Iacob vnto hym, beholde I haue made the a lyght, yt thou shuldest be saluacyon vnto the ende of the worlde kynges shal se, & rulers shall stande vp & shall worshyp because of the lorde which is faythful and the holy of Israel hath chosen the.
¶ The Gospel on the Natyuite of Saynt Iohn̄ the Baptyst. The fyrst chapyter of Luke. F ELizabethes tyme was that she shuld be delyuered and she brought forth a sonne and her neyghbours, & her cosyns, herde tell how the lorde had shewed great mercy vpō her they reioysed wt her And it fortuned the eyght daye? they came to cyrcumcyse the chylde and called his name zachary after the name of his father, & his mother answered & said not so, but he shall be called Iohan. And they sayd vnto her. There is none of thy kynd that is named with thys name, and they made syg¦nes to his father how he wolde haue hym called, and he asked for wrytyng tables & wrote sayenge, his name is Iohn̄. And they meruayled all & his mouth was opened immediatly, and his tonge and he spake laudynge god, and feare came on them al ye dwelt nye, & al these thynges were noysed abrode through oute all the hylly countre of Iewry? & all they that herde thē / layd thē vp in theyr hertes, sayeng. What maner of chyld shal this be? And the hande of god was with him, & his father za∣charias was fylled wt the ghost / & prophesyed sayeng. Blessed be the Lord of Israel for he hath visited & redemed his people ¶ The Pystle on S. Peter and Paules daye. The .xij. Cha∣pyter of the Actes of the Apostles. A IN that tyme Herode the kynge layd handes on certayn of the cōgregacyon to vexe thē / he kylled Iames the bro∣ther of Iohan, with a swerde, and because he sawe yt it pleased the Iewes he proceded further / & toke Peter also. Then were the dayes of the swete bread / and when he had caught him / he put hym in Pryson / and delyuered hym to .iiij. quaternyons of souldyours to be kept / entendynge after Easter to brynge him forth to ye people / Then was Peter kept in pryson / but prayer was made withoute ceasynge of the congregacyon vnto God for hym / when Herode wolde haue brought him out vnto the people / the same nyght slept Peter betwene two souldyoures / bounde wt two chaynes / and the kepers before the dore kepte
the Pryson, & beholde ye angell of ye lorde was there presente, & lyght shyned in ye lodge, & smote Peter on ye syde, & styred hym vp sayenge▪ Aryse vp quyckely, & the chaynes fel of frō his hā∣des, & the angell sayd vnto him / gyrde thy selfe, & bynde on thy sandalles, & so he dyd & he sayde vnto him cast on thy mantell about the, & folowe me, & he came & folowed hym, & wyste nat yt it was trueth which was done by the angel, but thought he had sene a vysyon when they were paste the fyrste & the secōde watche, they came vnto the Irongate that ledeth vnto ye cytye which opened to them by his owne accorde. And they wēt out & passed thorow one strete & by & by ye Angel departed frō him. And whē Peter came to hym selfe, he sayd now I knowe of a suertye yt the lord hath sent his Angel & hath delyuered me frō ye hād of Herode & frō al ye waytīg for of ye people of the Iues ¶ The gospel on s. Peter & Paules daye. ye. xvj. cha. of Mat. C WHen Ies{us} came into ye costes of ye ryte which is called Ce¦sarea Philyppy, he asked his discyples sayenge, whō do men say yt I ye son of man am? They sayd some say that yu arte Iohn̄ baptyst some Helias, some Ieremias, or one of ye prophe¦tes. He sayd vnto them, but whō say ye yt I am. Simon Peter answered & sayd. Thou art Christ ye sonne of the lyuynge god. And Iesus answered & sayd vnto hym. Happy art yu Simon ye son of Ionas, for flessh & bloud hath not opened vnto the yt, but my father which is in heuē. And I say vnto ye that yu art Peter & vpō this rocke I wyl buld my cōgragaciō, & the gates of hel shal not preuayle agaynst it, & I wyl gyue vnto the, ye keyes of ye kyngdome of heuē, & whatsoeuer yu byndest vpō earth, shalbe boūd ī heuē, & whatsoeuer yu losed on erth / shalbe losed in heuē. ¶ The Pystle on the cōmemoracion of s. Paul, the .ij. chapiter to the Galathyans, B I Cercyfye you brethren, yt the Gospel which was preched of me, was not after ye maner of men, neyther receyued I it of man, neyther was I taught it, but receyued it by ye reuela¦ciō of Iesus Christ? ye haue herde of my cōuersacion in tymes
past in the Iewes wayes, how yt beyond mesure. I persecuted ye cōgregacion of god, & spoyled it, & preuayled in ye Iewes law aboue many of my cōpaniōs, which were of myne owne naciō, & was as muche more feruent mayntener of the tradicions of the elders, but whē it pleased god which seperated me frō my mothers wōbe, & called me by his grace / for to declare his son by me yt I shuld preache him amonge the hethē / immediatly I cōmened not of ye matter wt flesshe, & bloude / neyther returned to Ierusalem to thē which were Apostles before me / but went my wayes into Arabia, & came agayne vnto Damascō. Then after. iij. yere I returned to Ierusalem to se Peter, & abode wt him .xv. dayes none other of ye Apostles sawe I, saue Iames ye lordes brother, the thynges which I wryte beholde / god kno∣weth I lye not. After yt I went into the costes of Syria & Ci∣licia, & was vnknowen as touchynge my person vnto ye cōgre¦gacyons of Iewry which were in Christ but they herde onely that he which persecuted vs ī tyme past, now precheth ye fayth which before he destroyed / & they gloryfyed god on my behalfe ¶ The gospell on the Commemoracion on saynt Paule. The xix. Chapyter of Mathewe. D PEter sayd vnto Ies{us} / behold we haue forsaken. &c. ye shall fynde this gospell on the conuersion of S. Paule. Folio. l. ¶ The Pistle on the vysitacion of our Lady. Cantic. ii. I Am the floure of ye felde, & Lylyes of ye valeys / & the Ly∣lye amonge thornes, so is my loue amonge ye doughters As the Apple tree amonge the trees of the wode / so is my be∣loued amonge ye sonnes, in his shadow was my desyre to sytte for his fruyte was swete to my mouth. He broughte me vnto his wyne seller / & his behauer to me ward was louely / behold my beloued sayd to me: vp & haste my loue / my done my beuti∣full & come for nowe is wynter gone / & rayne departed & past the floures appere in oure countre & the tyme is come to cut ye vynes. The voyce of ye Turtyl done is herd in our lād ye fygge¦tre hath brought forth her fygges / & the vyne blossomes gyue
a sauour vp haste my loue, my doue in the holes of the rocke, & secrete places of the walles, shew me thy face and let me heare thy voyce for thy voyce is swete, and thy fasshyon beautyfull. ¶ The gospell on ye visitacyon of our lady. ye .j. cha. of Luke. D MAry arose in those dayes and wente into the mountaynes with haste into a Cytye of Iewry, & entred into the house of zachary, & saluted Elyzabeth, and it fortuned as Elyzabeth herde the salutacyon of Mary, the babe spronge in her belly, & Elyzabeth was fylled wt the holy ghoste, and cryed wt a loude voyce, & sayd? Blessed art yu amōge womē & blessed is ye fruyt of thy wōbe, & whense happeneth this to me, yt the mother of my lorde shuld come to me. Lo as sone as ye voyce of this salutaciō soūded in myne eares, ye babe lept in my belly for ioye, & blessed art yu that beleuest for those thinges shalbe perfourmed which were tolde ye frō the Lorde. And Mary sayde. My soule mag∣nyfyeth the Lord, & my spyryte reyioseth in God my sauyour. ¶ The Pystle on relyke Sondaye. Eccle. xliiij. THese are the men of mercy, whose ryghteousnes are not forgotten. Goodnesse abyde with the sede of them / theyr kynsfolke, are an holy inherytaunce, & theyr sede hath stande in witnesses, and the sonnes of them abyde vnto ye worldes ende for them, the generacyon of them, and the glory of them shall not be lefte, theyr bodyes are buryed in peace and theyr names shall lyue in the worldes, all people shall tell the wysedome of them, & all the cōgragacyon of sayntes shall shew yt laud of thē ¶ The gospell on Relyke sondaye, The .v. cha. of Mathew. A WHen Ies{us} sawe ye people he went vp into a mountayne & when he was set his dysciples came vnto him, & he ope∣neth his mouth & taught thē sayeng. Blessed are ye poore in spi¦rite. For theyrs is ye kyngdom of heuē. Blessed ar they yt morne for they shalbe cōforted. Blessed are yt meke, for they shall inhe∣rite the erth. Blessed are they whiche hōgre & thrust for ryght∣uousnes, for they shalbe fylled. Blessed are ye mercyful, for they shal obtayne mercy. Blessed are ye pure in hert, for they shall se
god. Blessed are ye maynteners of peace, for they shalbe called ye chyldrē of god. Blessed are they which suffre {per}secuciō for right¦uousnes sake, for theyrs is the kyngdome of heuen. Blessed are ye whē men shall reuyle you, and persecute you, and shal fastly say all maner of euyll sayenges agaynste you for my sake. Re∣ioyce and be glad for great is your rewarde in heuen. ¶ The Pystle on Saynt Margaretes daye. O Lorde my god thou haste exalted my habytacyon vpō ye erth, & I haue prayed for death to come. I haue called ye lorde, ye father of my lord yt he forsake me not in the day of my tribulacyon. And in ye tyme of proude men wtout helpe, I shall laude thy name diligētly, & shal prayse it in cōfessiō, & my pray∣er is hero yu hast delyuered me frō perdiciō & frō a wicked tyme therfore lord my god, I shal cōfesse & giue lande vnto thy name ¶ The gospell on S. Margaretes day, ye .xiij. cha. of Mat. G IEsus sayde vnto his disciples. The kyngdom of heuē is lyke vnto treasure hyd in ye felde, ye which a man founde & hyd it, & for ioy therof, goeth & selleth all yt he hath, & byeth yt felde. Agayne ye kyngdom of heuē is lyke vnto a marchaūt se∣kȳge after good peerles which whē he hath foūd one precious perle, wēt & solde all yt he had & bought it. Agayne ye kyngdom of heuē is lyke vnto a net cast into ye see / ye gathereth of all kyn¦des of fisshes which whē it is ful, mē draw to lāde & sit & gathe¦reth ye good into theyr vessels & cast ye bad away, So shal it be at ye ende of ye world. The Angels shal come & seuer ye bad frō ye good, & shal cast thē īto a furneys of fyre, there shalbe waylȳge & gnasshȳg of teth. Ies{us} sayd vnto thē, haue ye vnderstāde dal these thynges they sayd ye syr. Then sayd he vnto them, ther∣fore euery scrybe which is taught vnto the kyngdome, is lyke an housholder, which bryngeth forth out of his treasure thyn∣ges bothe newe and olde. ¶ The Pystle on Mary magdaleyn daye. Prouerbi. xxxi. A Womā of power & veryte yf a mā coulde fynde ye value of her were farre aboue perles. The herte of her husbād
trusteth in her that he nedeth not spoyles. She rendereth him good & not euyll all ye dayes of her lyfe. She sought wolle and flaxe & did as her hādes serued her. She is lyke a marchaūtes shyp yt bryngeth her vytayles from far. She ryseth yer day / & gyueth meate to her housholde & fode to her maydens. She cō¦sydered a grounde & bought it, & of the fruyt of her hādes plā∣ted a vyne. She gyrde her loynes wt strength / & couraged her armes. She perceyued yt her huswyfry was profitable / & ther¦fore dyd not put out her cādell by nyght. She set her fyngers to the spendell, & her handes caughte holde on ye dystaffe. She openeth her hande to the poore / stretched out her handes to ye nedy. She feared not least ye cold of snow shuld hurt her hous for all her housholde were double clothed. She made her gay ornamentes of byce / & purple was her apparel. Her husbande was had in honour in the gates, as he sate wt the elders of the lande. She made lynnen & solde it, & delyuered to ye marchaūt Strenth & glory were her rayment, & she laughed in the latter dayes. She opened her mouth wt wysdom & the lawe of right¦uousnes was on her tōg. She had an eye to her houshold & eat not breade ydely. Her chyldrē arose & blessed her, & her husbād cōmēded her. Many doughters haue done excellētly but thou hast passed thē all. Fauour is a deceauable thynge, & beaute in vanite, but a womā yt feareth god / she shalbe praised. Gyue her of ye fruyt of her hādes / & let her workes prayse her in ye gates. ¶ The gospell on Mary magdaleyns day. ye .vi. cha. of Lu. E ONe of the Pharyses desyred Iesus that he wolde eate wt him / & he came in to ye Pharyses house, and sat downe to meat. And beholde a woman in yt cyte / which was a synner as sone as she knewe yu Iesus sat at meat in ye Pharyses hous she brought an Alabaster boxe of oyntmente / & she stode at his fete behynde hym wepyng & began to wasshe his fete wt teares and dyd wype them wt the heares of her hed / & kyssed his fete / anoynted them with oyntment. When the Pharyse which had him to his house sawe that he spake within hym selfe sayenge
Yf this mā were a Prophete, he wolde surely haue knowē who & what maner woman this is, which touched him, for she is a synner. And Iesus answered & sayde vnto him, Symō I haue some what to say vnto ye, and he sayde: Mayster say on. Ther was a certayn lēder which had two detters, ye one ought .v. hō¦dreth pens, & the other fyfty. When they had nothynge to pay, he forgaue thē bothe. Whiche of thē tel me wyl loue hī moste? Symō answered & said, I suppose yt he to whome he forgaue moste / & he sayede vnto hym Thou haste truly iudged. And he turned to ye womā / & sayed vnto Simō. Seest thou this wo∣man, I ētred into thy house / & thou gauest me no water to my ete? but she hath wasshte my fete with teres, & wyped them wt the heares of her heed. Thou gauest me no kisse: but she sence ye tyme I came in hath not ceased to kysse my fete. My heed with oyle yu dydest not anoynt, & she hath anoynted my fete wt oynt∣mēt. Wherfore I say vnto ye many synnes are forgyuē her, be∣cause she loued moch. To whō lesse is forgyuē ye same doth lesse loue. And he sayd vnto her, thy synnes are forgyuē ye. And they that sate at meate with him, began to saye within them selues. Who is this which forgyueth euen synnes, and he sayd to the woman. Thy fayth hath saued the go in pece. ¶ The pystle on S. Iames daye the Apostle. The .ij. Chapy∣ter to the Ephesyans. D BRethren nowe ye are no more straūgers & foreners, but cytesens with ye sayntes, & of ye housholde of god and are bylte vpon ye foūdacion of ye Apostles, & {pro}phetes. Ies{us} Christe beyng ye heed corner stone, in whō euery buyldynge coupled to∣gyther / groweth vnto an holy tēple in ye lord, in whom ye also are buylte to gyther & made an habitacion for god in ye spirite ¶ The gospell on S. Iames daye the Apostle. The .xx. chapy∣ter of Mathewe. C THere came to Ies{us} ye moher of zebedes childrē wt her son∣nes, worshyppynge him, & desyrynge a certayne thyng of him, he sayd vnto her, what wilt yu haue she sayd vnto hī. graūt
yt these my two sonnes, may syt one on ye right hand, & the other on thy left hande, in thy kyngdome. Iesus answered & sayde, ye wotte not what ye aske. Are ye able to drynke of ye cup yt I shall drynke of? & to be baptysed wt the baptime yt I shalbe baptysed wt? They answered to him. That we are. He sayde vnto them? ye shal drynke of my cup, & shalbe baptysed wt the baptyme yt I shalbe baptised wt, but to syt on my ryghthād / & on my left hād is not myne to giue but to thē for whō it is {pre}pared of my fader ¶ The Pystle on saynte Annes daye. A Womā of power & veryte. &c. Ye shal fynde this Pystle on saynt Mary Magdaleyn daye. Folio. lij. ¶ The Gospel on S. Annes daye. The .j. cha. of Mathewe. A. THis is the boke of ye generacion. Ye shal fynde this gos∣pel on the concepcion of our Lady. Folio. xliiij. ¶ The Pystle on. S. Peters daye ad vincula. The .xij. Chapi-of the Actes of the Apostles. C WHen Peter came out of preson, he came to ye house of ma¦ry ye mother of one Iohn̄ which was called marke, wher many were gathered togyther in prayer / as Peter knocked at the entre dore, A damosell came forth to herken named Rhoda & whē she knew Peters voyce, she opened not ye entre for glad∣nes, but ran in, and tolde howe Peter stode before the entrey, & they sayd vnto her, yu art mad, & she bore thē downe yt it was euen so. Then sayd they, it is his angell. Peter cōtinued knoc∣kynge, whē they had opened ye dore, & sawe him they were asto¦nyed, he beckened vnto them wt the hande to holde theyr peace & tolde thē by what meanes ye lord brought him out of pryson ¶ The gospel on s. Peters day ad vīcula, ye .xvj. cha. of Mat. B WHen Iesus came into ye costes. &c. ye shal fynde this gos∣pel on S. Peters and Paules daye. Folio. l. ¶ The Pystle on the transfyguracyon of our lorde, The secōde Pystle of Peter and the fyrst chapyter. D Most dere beloued brethrē we folowed not deceyuable fables whē we opened vnto you ye power & cōmyng of our lorde
Iesus Christ but wt our eyes we saw his maiestye. Euen then / verely, whē he receyued of god ye father honour & glory, & whē there came such a voyce to hym frō ye excellēt glory. This is my dere beloued sonne, in whō I haue delyte, heare him this voyce we herde whan it came frō heuē, beynge wt him in ye holy moūt we haue also a right sure word of {pro}phesy wherunto if we take hyde, as vnto a light yt shyneth in a darke place, ye do well vn∣tyll the daye daune & the daye starre aryse in your hertes. ¶ The Gospel on the transfyguracyon of our lorde. The xvij. Chapyter of Mathewe. A IEs{us} toke Peter & Iames, & Iohn̄ his brother & brought thē vp into an hye moūtayne out of ye way & was transfi∣gured before thē & his face dyd shyne as ye sonne, & hys clothes were as whyte as ye lyghte. And behold there appered vnto thē moses & Helias, talking wt hī. Then answered Peter & sayd to Ies{us}. Master here is good beyng for vs, yf y• wylt / let vs make here .iij. tabernacles, one for the, & one for Moses, & one for He∣lias Whyle he yet spake / behold a bryght cloude shadowed thē & beholde there came a voyce out of the cloude & sayd. This is my dere sōne, in whō I delyte / here him And whā the dicsiples herde yt they fell flat on theyr faces, & were sore affrayd And Ie∣sus came & touched thē & sayd aryse & be not affrayde. Thē lyf∣ted they vp theyre eyes & sawe no man but Ies{us} onely. And as they came downe from the Mountayne. Iesus charged them sayēg / se that ye shewe the Vysyon to no man tyll the sonne of man be rysen agayne frome deaehe. ¶ The Pystle in the feast of name of Ies{us}. The .iiij. chapiter of the Actes of the Apostles. A. PEter ful of ye holy ghost saide. ye rulers of ye people & elders of Israel, if we this day be examyned of ye good dede done to the sycke man / by what meanes he is made hole be it knowē vnto you all, and to al the people of Israel that in the name of Iesus Christe of Nazareth, whome ye crucyfyed, and whome God raysed from deth againe, this man standeth here present before
you whole, this is ye stone cast a syde of you buylders, whiche is set in ye chyefe place of ye corner, neyther is there saluacyō in any other, nor yet also is there any other name gyuen to men, wherein we muste be saued. ¶ The Gospell in the feaste of the name of Iesus. The fyrste Chapyter of Mathew. C THe Angel of god appered to Ioseph in slepe sayeng. Io¦seph ye sonne of Dauid, feare not to take vnto ye Mary thy wyfe, for yt which is cōceyued in her, is of ye holy ghost. she shall brynge forth a sonne, & thou shalt call his name Ies{us}, for he shall saue his people frō theyr synnes. All this was done to fulfyll yt which was spokē of our lorde by ye {pro}phete sayeng. Be∣holde a mayde shalbe wt chylde, & shal brynge forth a son, & they shal cal his name Emanuel, which is by inter{pre}taciō god wt vs ¶ The Pystle on S. Laurence daye, the .ij. Pystle to the Co∣rynthyans. The .ix. Chapyter. B BRethren, he which soweth lytel, shal repe lytell, & he yt so∣weth plēteously shal repe plēteously, & let euery man do accordynge as he hath purposed in his hert, not grudgelynge or of necessyte, for God loued a cherefull gyuer. God is able to make you ryche in all grace yt ye in al thinges hauyng sufficiēt vnto ye vttermost may be rych vnto al maner good workes, as it is wrytten. He hathe sparsed abrode, and hath gyuen to the poore his ryghteousnes remayneth for euer. He that findeth ye sower sed shal mynister breade for fode, & shal multyplye your sede, and encrease the fruytes of your ryghteousnes. ¶ The gospel on S. Laurence day. The .xij. Cha. of Iohn̄. D IEsus sayd vnto his dysciples. Verely verely I say vnto you, except yt wheat corne fal īto ye groūd & dye, it bydeth alone, yf it dye it bryngeth forth muche fruyte. He ye loueth his lyfe shal destroy it, & he yt hateth his lyfe ī this world, shal kepe it vnto ye life eternal yf any mā ministre vnto me let him foolw me, & where I am, there shal also my mynister be, & yf any man minister vnto me, him wyl my father honour which is in heuē
¶ The Pystle on the Assumption of our Lady. Eccle. xxiiij. IN all those thynges I sought rest, & in some mannes en¦heritaūce wolde haue dwelt. Then ye creatour of al thing cōmaūded & sayd vnto me, & he yt created me dyd set my taber∣nacle at reste, & sayd vnto me. Dwel in Iacob, & haue thyne en¦herytaunce in Israell, & cote thy selfe amonge myne electe. Frō the begynnynge, & before the worlde was I created, & vnto ye world to come wyl I not cease / & before him haue I ministred in ye holy habytacyō & so in Syon was I setled, & in ye holy cy∣tye lykewyse I rested and in Ierusalem was my power. And I roted my selfe in an honourable people, whiche are ye lordes parte / & he theyr inheritaūce, & amonge the multitude of sayn∣tes I helde my faste. As a Cedar tree was I lyft vp in Lyba∣non & as Cypres tree in moūt Hermō. As a Palme tre was I exalted in Caoes, & as Rose plantes in Ierico. As a beautyful Olyue tre in ye feldes & as a plantayne tre was I exalted vpō ye waters. In ye stretes. I gaue an odour as Sinamō & Balme ye smelleth wel & gaue an odour of swetnes as perfect Myrre. ¶ The gospell on ye assumpcion of our Lady. ye .x. cha. of Lu. G IEsus entred into a certayne Castle. And a certayne womā named Martha, receyued hȳ into her house / And this wo¦man had a syster called Mary, whiche sat at Iesus fete, & herde Iesus preachynge. Martha was cōbred about much ser¦uyng, & stode & sayd? Master doest yu not care, yt my syster hath lefte me to ministre alone, byd her therfore yt she helpe me. And Ies{us} answered & said vnto her. Martha Martha. Thou carest & art troubled about many thīges, verely one is nedful. Mary hath chosen ye best parte which shall nat be takē away frō her. ¶ The pystle on Saynt Bartylmewes daye. the seconde Cha. to the Ephesians. D NOwe ye are no more straungers. &c. Ye shal fynde this Py∣stle on S. Iames day the Apostle. Folio. liij. ¶ The Gospell on Saynt Bartylmewes daye. The .xxij. Cha∣pyter of Luke. C
THere was a stryfe amonge the disciples of Ies{us} which of them shulde be taken for the greatest, & he sayd vnto them the kynges of the Gentyls raygne ouer them and they yt beare rule ouer them, are called gracyous Lordes / but ye shal nat be so / but he that is greatest amonge you shall be as the yongest, & he that is chyefe shall be as the mynistre, for whether is grea¦ter / he that sytteth eate meate? or he that serueth: is not he that sytteth at meate? And I am amonge you as he that myny∣streth / ye are they whiche haue bydden with me in my tempta∣cyons, & I appoynte vnto you a kyngdome as my father hath apoynted to me that ye may eate and drynke at my table in my kyngdom, & syt on seates, & iudge the twelue trybes of Israell ¶ The Pystle on the decollacion of Saynt Iohn̄. Prouerb. x. THe lokynge of iuste men is gladnes / & the hope of wyc¦ked men shall perysshe. The strength of a simple man is the wayes of the lorde, & feare to them ye worke euyll. The iust shall not dwell vpon the earth. The mouth of a iust man brin∣geth forth wysdome, & the tonge of euyll mē shal perysshe. The lyppes of a iust man considereth pleasaūt thinges, & the mouth of wycked men, froward thynges. The symplycyte of iust men shall dyrecte them and the supplantacyon of euyll men shal de∣stroye them. The ryghteousnes of ryghteouse men shal delyuer them, and the wycked men shalbe taken in theyr awaytes. The iust man is delyuered from heuynes / & the wycked man shalbe taken frō him. A dyssembler deceyueth his frende wt the mouth and the iust men shall shalbe delyuered wt scyence. A cytye shall be exalted in the goodes of iust men / & laude shall be in the losse of wycked men. A cytye shalbe exalted in ye blyssynge of iust mē ¶ The Gospell on the decolacyon of saynt Iohn̄. The .vj. cha∣pyter of Marke, C HErode the kinge him selfe sent forth & toke Iohn̄, & boūd him & caste him in preson, for Herodias sake, which was his brother Philippes wife. For he had maried her. Iohn̄ sayd vnto Herode. It is not lawful for the to haue thy brothers wy∣fe.
Herodias layd wayte for hym, & wolde haue kylled him but she coulde not, For Herode feared Iohn̄ knowinge yt he was a iuste man, & an holy, and gaue him reuerence & when he herd he dyd many thynges & herde him gladly. And when conueniēt day was come. Herode on his byrth day made a supper to the lordes. Capteynes, & chyefe estates of Galyle. And ye daughter of the same Hecodias, came in, & daunted, and pleased Herode, & them yt sat at the bourde also. Then the kynge sayd vnto the maydē, aske of me what yu wilt, & I wyl gyue it ye, and h sware vnto her. What soeuer yu shalt aske of me, I wyl gyue it the, euē vnto the one half of my kyngdome. And she wente forthe: and sayd to her mother. What shal I axe & she sayd Iohn̄ baptistes heade. And she came in strayt waye with haste vnto the kynge & asked sayeng / I wyl that yu gyuest me by & by in a dysshe the head of Iohn̄ Baptist. And the kyng was sory. yet for his othe sake, & for their sakes which sat at supper also, he wold not put her besyde her purpose. And immediatly the kyng sent the hāg man, & cōmaūded his head to be brought ī, & he wēt & beheded hym in ye pryson & brought his head in a dysshe, & gaue it to ye mayden, & the mayden gaue it to her mother. When his discy∣ples heard of it / they came & toke vp his body & put in a tōbe. ¶ The Pystle on the Natiuite of our Lady. AS A vyne so brought I forth a. &c. ye shal fynd this py∣stle in the Concepcyon of our Lady. xliiij. ¶ The gospel on ye Natiuite of our lady. The .j. cha of Mat. A. THis is ye boke of the generacion of Iesus. &c. ye shall fynd this gospell on the Cōcepcyon of our Lady. Folio. xliiij. ¶ The Pystle on the Exaltacyō of the Crosse the .v. cha. to the Galathyans. B. I Haue truste towarde you in god. &c. Ye shall fynde this Pystle on the Inuencyon of the Crosse. Fo. xlix. ¶ The Gospel on ye Exaltaciō of ye Crosse ye .xij. cha. of Iohn̄. E IEsus sayd vnto ye people of ye Iewes, now is ye iudgemēt of this world now shal ye prince of this world be cast out
And I (yf I were lyft vp frō ye erth) wyl drawe al mē vnto me. This sayd Ies{us} sygnyfiēg what death he shuld dye. The pople answered him. We haue herde of ye lawe yt Christ bydeth euer? And howe sayest yu then yt the sōne of mā must be lifte vp. Who is ye sōne of mā? Ies{us} sayd vnto thē, yet a lytel whyle is ye lyght wt you: walke whyle ye haue lyght lest ye darknes com on you. He that walketh in ye darke woteth not whither he goeth. But whyle ye haue lyghte, beleue on the lyghte that ye maye be the chyldren of lyghte. ¶ The Pystle on saynt Mathewes day the Apostle. THe similitude of ye faces of ye foure beastes, The face of a man & the face of a Lyon, on ye ryght hād of ye foure of thē And ye face of an Egle aboue them foure And theyr faces / and theyr wynges stretched out aboue an hye. Eche had two wyn∣ges coupled togyther, & two yt couered theyr bodyes, and they went al strayt forward, & whether they had lust to go / thyther they wente / & turned not backe agayne in theyr gong. And ye symilytude of the beastes, & the fasshyon of them was as bur∣nyng coles of fyre & as fyre brandes, walkynge betwene ye be∣stes & the fyre dyd shyne, & out of ye fyre proceded lyghtnyng, & the bestes ranne and returned after the fasshyon of lyghtnyng ¶ The Gospel on Saynte Mathewes daye the Apostīe. The ix. Chapyter of Mathewe. B WHen Iesus wente forth, he sawe a man syt receyuynge of a coustome named Mathewe, & sayde to him Folow me, and he arose & folowed hȳ. And it came to passe / yt Ies{us} sat ate meat in ye house behold many Publycans & synners came and sate downe also wt Iesus, & his discyples. When the Pharyses had {per}ceyued yt they sayd to his disciples. Why eateth your ma∣ster wt Publycans & synners? When Iesu herde yt: he sayd to thē Te whole nede no Phisiciā but they yt are sicke. Go & lerne what yt meaneth? I haue pleasure in mercy, & not ī offering for I am not come to call ye rightwyse, but ye synners to repētaūce. ¶ The Pystle on S. Myghels day. The fyrst Chapyter of the
Reuelacion of saynt Iohn̄. A IEsus sent & shewed by his angel vnto his seruaūt Iohn̄ which bore recorde of ye worde of god, & of ye testimony of Ies{us} Christ, & of al thynges yt he sawe. Happy is he yt hereth & redeth ye wordes of ye prophesye, & kepe those thinges which are wrytē therin, for ye tyme is at hāde. Iohn̄ to ye vij. cōgregaciōs in Asia. Grace be wt you & peace frō him which is, & which was & the which is to come & frō ye vij. spirites, which are present be¦fore his trone, & frō Iesus Christ which is a faythfull wytnes & fyrst begottē of ye deed, & lorde ouer ye kynges of the erth vnto him yt loueth vs, & wasshed vs frō our sȳnes, in his owne bloud ¶ The Gospell on s. Myghels daye. the .xviij. cha, of Math. A THe disciples came vnto Iesus sayeng. Who is ye gretest in ye kyngdome of heuen? Ies{us} called a chylde vnto him & set him in the myddes of thē & said, verely I say vnto you ex∣cepte ye turne & become as childrē, ye can not entre into ye king¦dom of heuē. Whosoeuer therfore shal submit him selfe as this chyld he is ye greatest in ye kyngdome of heuen. & whosoeuer re∣ceyued such a chylde in my name, receyueth me, but whosoeuer offende one of these litel ones, which beleueth in me / it were bet¦ter for hī yt a mylstone were hāged about his necke, & yt he were drowned in ye depth of ye see. Wo be vnto ye world because of of∣fēces / howbeit, it can not bē auoyded neuertheles wo be to the mā by whō ye offence cōmeth. Wherfore yf thy hāde or thy fote gyueth the an occusacyon of euyll, cut him of, & caste hym frō ye it is better for yt to entre into lyfe halte or maymed, rather then yu shuldest hauyng two handes, or two fete be caste into euerla∣stinge fyre. And yf also thyne eye offende y• plucke him out and cast hym frō ye. It is better for ye to entre into lyfe wt one eye, thā hauynge two eyes to be caste into hell fyre. Se that ye despyse not one of these lytell ones. For I saye vnto you, that in heuen angels, beholde the face of my father which is in heuen. ¶ The pystle on ye Trāsfiguraciō of s. Edward kīge & cōfessour THe iust man wyll gyue his herte & watche in ye mornynge to ye lord which made him, & wyl pray in ye syght of ye most
hyest. He wyl opē his mouth ī prayer, & wil pray for his sinnes And yf ye great lorde wyl, he wyl fulfyl him wt the spirite of vn¦derstandynge & he wyl shew forth y• eloquēce of his wysdome of swete shoures, & wyl knowedge to ye lord in prayer, & he wyl dyrecte his coūsayle & discyplyne, & wyll haue coūsel in secrete thīges. & he shal speake opēly, ye discipline of his doctrine & shal glory in the Tstamēt of y• ord Many mē shal prayse his wys∣dome, & it shal not be done awaye vnto ye worldes ende. His re¦membraunce shall not go awy, and hys name shalbe requyrd from generacyon into generaion. ¶ The gospel on the Translacion of s. Edward kynge and con¦fessour. The, xj. chapyter of Luke. E IEs{us} vnto his disciples. No mā lighted a cādel & put¦teth it in a preuye plae, neyther vnder a busshell but on a cādelstycke yt they yt come in, may se lyght. The yght of thy bo∣dye is thyne eye. Therfore when thyne eye is syngle, then is all th body ful of lyght, but yf thye eye be euyll, then shal al thy body be ful of darknes. Take hede therfore yt the light which i in the, be not darknes, for yf all thy boy shalbe syght hauynge no parte darke then shall all be full of lyght euen as when a cā¦dell doth lyght the with his bryghtnes. ¶ The Pystle on Saynt Luke the Euangelystes day THe similitude of the faces. Ye shall fynde this Pyste on Saynt Mathewes daye the Apostle. Folio lvi. ¶ The gospell on s. Luke ye Euāgelistes day. ye .x. cha. of Lu. A OVr lorde apoynted other seuentye also, & sente thē two, & two before his face, into euery cytye & place, whether he him selfe wolde come. And sayd vnto the, ye haruest is gret, but the labourers are fewe, pray therfore the lord of the haruest to sende forth his labourers into his haruest. Go your wayes be∣holde I sende you forth as Lābes amōg wolues, beare no wal¦let neither scrippe, nor shoes, & salute no mā y ye way In what soeuer house ye entre in fyrst, say, peace be to this house. And y ye son of peace be ther, your peace shal rest on him. yf not it shal returne to you agayne & in the same house ary styll eatynge &
drynkynge such as they haue, for ye labourer is worthy of his rewarde ¶ The Pystle on the .xj. thousand Vyrgyns day. O How fayre is a chast generacyon wt charite, ye memory of it is immortal, for it is knowē to god & man & when it is present they folow it: & desire it whē it ledeth thē, & it triūpheth crowned euerlastyngly, ouer cōmynge of batayles vndefyled, a great multitude of wycked mē shall not be {pro}fytable & euyl plā∣tes shal not bringe forth hye trees, neyther shal set a sure groūd & yf they spryng in tyme in bowes, they shalbe vnsure put they shalbe moued wt the wynde, & shalbe plucked vp wt vehemency of ye wynde, ye vnperfyte bowes shalbe brokē, & the fruyt of thē shalbe vnprofytable & bytter to eate, & profytable to nothynge and al the chyldrē which shalbe borne to wycked men / are wit∣nes of wyckednes agaynst theyr parētes in theyr interrogacyō the iust man shalbe in rest, yf he be occupyed with death. ¶ The gospel on the .xi. M. vyrgyns day. ye .xxv. cha. of Mat. A IEsus sayd vnto his discyples. The kyngdome of heuē is lykened to .x vyrgīs which toke their lāpes & wēt to mete the brydegrome, & fyne of them were folyshe, & fyue were wyse. The foles toke they lāpes, but toke none oyle wt thē but ye wise toke oyle wth thē in theyr vessels wt their lāpes. Whyle ye bryd∣grome taryed, al slōbred & slept, & euē at my dayght there was a crīe made / behold ye brydgom cōmeth: Go & mete him: Then al those vyrgyns arose & {pre}pared theyr lāpes. And ye folyssh sayd vnto ye wyse gyue vs of youre oyle for our lāpes go out. but ye wyse answered sayenge not so lest there be not ynough for vs & you, but rather go to thē yt sel, & bye for your selues, in cōclusyō whyle they wēt to bye, the brydgrome came, & they yt were redy wēt in wt him to ye wedding, & the gate was shut vp. Afterwar¦des came also the other vyrgyns sayeng, Mayster, mayster opē to vs / but he answered & sayd. Verely I say vnto you I know you not, loke yt you watche therfore, for ye knowe neyther the daye nor yet the houre when the sonne of man shall come. ¶ The Pystle on Symon and Iudas daye. The .viij. chapyter to the Romaynes. E
BRethren we knowe wel yt all thynges workes for ye best vnto thē ye louethe God which also are called of purpose for those which he knewe before, he also ordayned before ye they shuld be like fassioned vnto ye shape of his sōne, yt he might be ye fyrste begotē sōne amonge many brethrē. More ouer which he apoynted before, thē also he called, & which he ald, thē also he iustified, which he iustifyed / thē he also glorified. What shal we then saye vnto these thynges, if God be on our side who cā be a gaynst vs, which spared not his owne sōne but gaue him for vs al, how shal he not with him gyue vs al thynges also, Who shal say any thing to ye charge of godes chosē? it is god yt iustifieth, who then shall cōdēpne It is christe which is deed ye tather which is rysen agayn which is also on ye ryght hande of god, & maketh intercessyon for vs. Who shal seperate vs frō goddes lone. Shal trybuiacyon? or anguyshe, or persecucion? eyther hōger, eyther nakednes? eyther parel eyther swerde? as it is wrytten, for thy sake are we killed al day long & are coūred as shepe apointed to be slayne. Neuertheles in al these thȳges we euer come, strongely thorowe his helpe ye loued vs. Ye & I am sure ye neyther deth neyther lyfe, nor Angel, nor rule, nether power, neither thynges present, nor thynges to come / neyther heeth, neyther loweth neyther ani other creature shalbe able to departe vs frō goddes loue, which is in Christ Ies{us} our Lorde ¶ The Gospel on Symon & Iudes day ye .xv. cha. of Iohn̄. C. IEsus sayed vnto his disciples. This I cēmaunde you, yt ye loue togyther, if ye world hate you, ye know yt it hated me / before it hated you, if ye were of ye worlde, ye worlde wolde loue you / hys owne, because ye are not of ye worlde, but I haue thosen you out of ye world, therfore hateth you ye woild, Remē∣bre my sayeng that I sayed vnto you ye seruaūt is not greater thē his lorde, if they haue persecuted me, so wylthey persecute you, if they haue kepte my sayēge, so wyl they kepe yours / but all these thynges wyl they do vnto you, for my names sake be∣cause thy haue not knowen him yt sent me. Yf I had not com & spoken vnto them / they shulde haue had sinne / but nowe haue
they nothinge to cloke theyr sinne wt al. He ye hateth me, hateth my Father, yf I had not done workes among thē which none other mā dyd, they had not sene, but nowe haue they sene, & yet haue hated bothe me & my father, euen yt the sayenge myght be fulfylled yt is writē in their lawe, They hated me wtout a cause. ¶ The Pystle on ye al Halowes daye. The .viij. cha. of ye Reue∣lacyon of saynt Iohn̄. A. IOhan sawe an angel ascendyng frō ye rysynge of ye sonne which had ye seale of ye lyuynge god, & he cryed wt a loude voyce to the .iiij. angels (to whō power was gyuen to hurt the erth, & the see) sayeng hurt not the earth, neither ye see, neither ye trees tyl we haue sealed the seruaūtes of our god in theyr fore∣hedes, & I herde ye nōbre of thē which were sealed, & there were sealed .C. & .xliiij.M. of al ye trybes of ye childrē of Israell. Of ye tribe of Iuda were sealed .xij.M. of ye tribe of Rubē were sealed .xij.M. of ye trybe of Gad were sealed .xij.M. of ye trybe of Asser were sealed .xij.M. of the trybe of Neptalī were sealed .xij.M. of the tribe Manasses were sealed .xij.M. of ye tribe of Symeō were sealed .xij.M of ye tribe of Leuy were sealed .xij.M. of the trybe of Isacar were sealed .xij.M. of the trybe of zabulō were sealed .xij.M. of the tribe of Ioseph were sealed .xij.M. of ye try¦be of Beniamyn were sealed .xij.M. After this I behelde & lo a great multitude (which no mā coulde nōbre) of al naciōs & peo∣ple & tonges, stode before the seate, & before the lābe, clothed wt longe whyte garmētes / & Palmes in theyr hādes, & cryed wt a loude voyce sayeng saluaciō be ascribed to hym yt sytteth vpō ye seate of our god, & vnto the lambe & all the angels stode in ye cō place of the seate & of ye Elders, & of the foure beastes, & fell be∣fore the seate on theyr faces & worshypped god sayenge. Amen Blessynge and glory, wysedome and thankes, and honour, and power, and myght be vnto our god for euermore. Amen. ¶ The Gospell on all Halowes daye. The .v, chap. of Math. A WHen Iesus sawe the people. &c. ye shall fynde this gospel on Relyke Sondaye. Folio. lj. ¶ The Pystle on al soules daye. The .iiij. chap. of the fyrst Pystle to the Tessa. C
I Wolde not brethrē haue you ignoraūt, as cōcerrynge thē which are fallē a slepe, yt ye sorow not as other do which haue no hope, for yf we beleue ye Ies{us} dyed & rose agayn, euē so thē also which slepe by Ies{us}, wyll god bryng agayne wt hȳ. And this say we vnto you in ye word of ye lord, yt we which lyue & are remaynyng in ye cōmyng of ye lord shal not come ere they which slepe, for ye lord hȳ selfe shal descēde frō heuē wt shut & the voyce of the archangel & trōpe of god, & the dead in Christ shal aryse fyrst, then shal we lyue & remayne be caught vp wt them, also in the cloudes to mete ye lorde in ye ayre, & so shall we euer be wt the lord. Wherfore cōfort your selues one another wt these wordes ¶ The gospell on all soules daye. The .xj. chapyter of Iohn̄. C MArtha sayd vnto Iesus, lord yf yu haddest ben here my bro¦ther had not bene deed, but neuerthelesse I knowe yt what soeuer yu askest of god, god wyl gyue it the. Ies{us} sayd vnto her, thy brother shall ryse agayn. Martha sayd vnto him, I knowe well he shal ryse agayne in ye last day. Ies{us} sayd vnto her. I am the resurreccyō & the lyfe. Whosoeuer beleueth ī me ye though he were dead / yet shal he lyue, & whosoeuer liueth & beleueth on we shal neuer dye, beleuest yu this. She sayd vnto him ye lord I beleue ye thou act Christ ye sonne of god, which hast come into ye worlde. ¶ The Pystle on saynt Martyns day. Eccle. xliiij. BEholde an excellent preste. &c. ye shall fynde thys Pystle on saynt Nicholas daye. Folio. xliiij. ¶ The gospel on s. Martyns daye. The .xxv, chap. of Math. B A Certayne man redy to take his iourney. &c. ye shal fynde this gospel on Saynt Nycholas daye. Folio. xiiij. ¶ The on saynt Katheryns daye. WOrde I dyd lyft vp my prayer vpō ye erth & besought to be delyuered frō death, I called vpō the lorde, ye father of my lorde, yt he shal not leue me helpelesse in ye day of my tribu∣laciō, & in ye day of ye proude mā I praysed thy {per}petually & ho∣noured it wt cōfess ō & my prayer was herd, & thou sauedst me yt I {per}isshed not & delyuered me out of ye tyme of vnrighteousnes Therfore wil I cōfesse & prayse ye, & wil blysse ye name of ye lord.
¶ The gospell on saynt Katheryns day. the .xiij. cha. of Mat. F THe kyngdome of heuen is lyke vnto treasure. &c. Ye shall fynde this Gospel on Saynte Margaretes daye. Fo. lij. ¶ The Pystle on the daye of weddyng. The .vj. chapiter of the .j. Pystle to the Corynthyans. C. BRethren remēbre ye not yt your bodyes are the mēbres of Christ / shal I now take the mēbres of Christ, & make thē mēbres of an harlot? God forbyd. Do ye not vnderstande yt he whiche coupled himselfe with an harlot, is becom one body for two (sayeth he) shal be one fleshe, but he that is ioyned vnto the lorde, is one spirite, flee fornicaciō. All synnes yt a man doth are wt out the body but he that is a fornicator, synneth agaynst hys owne body. Knowe ye not howe that your bodyes are the tēple of the holy ghost, which is in you whō ye haue of God, & how yt ye are not your owne, for ye are dereli bought Therfore glorify ye in god in your bodies & in your spirites, for they are goddes. ¶ The gospel on the day of weddyng the .xix. cha. of. Math. A. THe Pharyses cam vnto Iesus to tempte him & sayed to him, is it lawful for a man to put awaye his wyfe for al maner of causes. He answered & sayde vnto thē, haue ye not redde howe yt he which made man at the begynnynge made thē man & woman, & sayde for this thyng shal a man leue father & mother, & cleue vnto his wyfe, & they twayne shalbe one fleshe, wherfore nowe are they not twayne, but one fleshe. Let no mā therefore put a sondre ye which god hath coupled to gyther. ¶ The Pystle at buryenges, ye fyrst pystle to the Tessalonyans and the .iij. chapiter. C. I Wolde not brethrē haue you ignoraūt. &c. ye shal fynde this pystle on al soules daye. Folio. lv. ¶ The Gospel at buryenges. The .xij. chapiter of Iohan. C. MArtha sayde vnto Iesus lorde yf yu. &c. ye shall fynde thys Gospell on all soules day. Folio. lv. ☞ Here endeth the Pystles & Gospels of the Sayntes. And here after foloweth the Table of this presente boke. Finis.
☞ This is the table wherin ye shall vnderstande in what lefe ye shall fynde the Pystles and gospels after the vse of Salys∣bury of euery sondaye and holy day in the yere. THe Pystle on the fyrst sondaye in Aduent. Folio. i. The gospell on the same daye. Folio eodem. ¶ The pystle on the seconde sondaye in Aduent. Folio eodem The gospell on the same daye. Folio eodem ¶ The pystle on the .iii. sondaye in Aduent. Folio. ii. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem ¶ The Pystle on the .iiii. sondaye in Aduent. Folio eodem the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem ¶ The pystle at hye Masse on Christmas daye. Folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. Folio. ii. ¶ The Pystle on saynt Steuens daye. Folio eodem. the pystle on the same daye. folio eodem. ¶ The Pystle on saynt Iohannes day the Euangelyst. Folio. iiii. the gospel on the same daye. folio eodem. The pystle on Chyldermas daye. Folio eodem. the gospel on the same daye. folio eodem The Pystle on the sondaye after Chrystmas daye. Folio eodem the gospell on the same daye. Folio. v. ¶ The pystle on new yeares daye. Folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem The pystle on twelfe daye. Folio eodem the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. The pystle on the sondaye within the vtas of the Epyphanye. Folio. vi. the gopel on the same daye. folio eodem. The pystle on the fyrst sondaye after the vtas of the Epyphanye. folio eodem the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem The pystle on the seconde sondaye after the vtas of the Epiphanye. Folio. vii. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. The pystle on the .iii. sondaye after the vtas of the Epiphanye. folio eodem. the gospel on the same daye. folio eodem. The pystle on the .iiii. sondaye after the vtas of the Epiphanye. Folio. viii. the gospell on the same Sondaye. folio eodem. The pystle on the .v. sondaye after the vtas of the Epyphanye. Folio eodem. the gospell on the same sonday. folio eodem. The pystle on the sonday after wedding goeth out called septuagelima. fo. eo. the gospell on the same daye. Folio. ix. The Pystle on the sondaye of .lx. to the Corynthyans. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye Folio. x. The pystle on the sondaye of .l. folio eo. the gospell on the same daye. folio eo. The pystle on asshe wednysdaye. Folio. xi. the gospel on the same daye. folio. eo. The Pystle on the fyrst sondaye in Lente. folio eodem the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem.
The Pystle on the seconde sonday in Lente. Folio. iii. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. The Pystle on the thyrde sondaye in Lent. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. The pystle on mydlent Sondaye. Folio. xiii. the gospell on the same day. folio eodem. The pystle on Passyon Sondaye. Folio. xiiii. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. the pistle on Palme sondaye Folio eodem the Passyon on the same Sondaye. folio eodem the gospell on the same day. Folio. xviii. The Passyon on good frydaye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. Folio. xx. The Pystle on Easter daye. folio eodem. the gospell on Easter day. Folio. xxi. The pystle on the Mondaye in the Easter weke. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. The Pystle on the Tewysdaye in the Easter weke. Folio. xxii. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. The Pystle on the wednysdaye in the Easter weke. folio eodem the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem The Pystle on the fyrst sonday after Easter day called lowe sonday. fo. xxiii the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. The pystle on the seconde Sonday after Easter daye. folio eodem the gospell on the same daye. Folio. xxiiii. The pystle on the thyrde Sondaye after Easter daye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. The pystle on the .iiii. sondaye after Easter daye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same day. Folio. xxv. The pystle on the .v. Sōdaye after Easter day / which is the next sonday be∣fore the crosse dayes. folio eo. the gospell of the same daye. folio eo. The pystle on the Mondaye in the Crosse dayes. Folio eodem. the gospell of the same daye. Folio. xxvi. The pystle on the Ascension euen. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. The pystle on the Ascensyon daye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. Folio xxvii. The pystle on the sondaye after ascensyon daye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. The pystle on the Wytson sondaye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. Folio. xxviii. The pystle on the Mondaye in Wytson weke. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. The pystle on the tewysdaye in the Wytson weke. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. Folio. xxix.
The pystle on the wednysdaye in the wylson weke. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. The pystle on Trinite Sōday. folio eo. the gospel on the same day. fo. xxx The pystle on Corpus Christi day. fo. eo. the gospel on the same day. fo. eo. The pystle on the fyrst sondaye after trinite sondaye. Folio. xcxi. the gospell on the same Sondaye. folio eodem. the pystle on the seconde sonday after trinite Sondaye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same Sondaye. folio eodem. the pystle on the .iii. sondaye after trinite Sondaye. Folio. xxxii the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem the pystle on the .iiii. Sondaye after trynite Sondaye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. the pystle on the .v. sondaye after trynite Sondaye. Folio. xxxiii. the gospell on the same Sondaye. folio eodem the pystle on the .vi. Sondaye after trinite sondaye. Folio eodem the gospel on the same daye. Folio. xxxiiii. the pystle on the .vii. Sondaye after trynite sondaye. folio eodem. the Gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. the pystle on the .viii. Sondaye after tryuyle sondaye. folio eodem the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem the pystle on the .ix. Sondaye after trinite sondaye folio xxxv. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. the pystle on the .x. sondaye after trynite sondaye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. Folio eodem. the pystle on the .xi. Sondaye after trinite sondaye. Folio xxxvi the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. the pystle on .xii. sondaye after trinite Sondaye. folio eodem the gospell on the same Sondaye. folio eodem. the pystle on the .xiii. Sondaye after trinite sondaye. Folio. xxxvii. the gospell on the same dayde. folio eodem the pystle on the .xiiii. Sondaye after trinite sondaye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same Sonday. folio eodem the pystle on the .xv. sondaye after trinite sondaye. Folio. xxxviii the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. the pystle on the xvi. sondaye after trinite sondaye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. Folio. xxxix. the pystle on the .xvii. Sondaye after trinite sondaye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. the pystle on the .xviii. Sondaye after trinite Sondaye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. Folio eodem. the pystle on the .xix. Sondaye after trinite Sondaye. Folio. xl. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem the pystle on the .xx Sondaye after trinite Sandaye. folio eodem the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem
the pystle on the .xxi. sondaye after trinite sondaye. Folio. xii. the gospell on the same sondaye. folio eodem. the pystle on the .xxii. sondaye after trynite sondaye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. the pystle on the .xxiii. Sondaye after trinite sondaye. Folio. xlii. the gospell on the same daye. Folio eodem. the pystle on the .xxiiii. Sondaye after trinite sondaye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. the pystle on the nexte sondaye before Aduent Sondaye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio xliii. the pystle on the dedicacion daye. fo. eo. the gospell on the same day. fo. eo. ¶ Here endeth the table of the Pystles and gospels of the sondayes. ¶ Here after foloweth the table of the Pystles & gospels of the Sayntes. THe pystle on saynt Andrewes daye. folio. xliii. the gospel on the same daye. folio. xliiii. The Pystle on s. Nicholas daye. fo. eo. the gospell on the same day. fo. eo. ¶ The pystle on the Concepcion of our Lady. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem The pystle on s. Thomas the Apostle daye. folio. xiv. the gospell on the same daye. Folio eodem. The pystle on the Conuersyon of saynt Paule. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio. xlvi. the pystle on Candelmas day. fo. eo. the gospell on the same daye. fo eo. the pystle on saynt Mathias the Apostle daye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio. xlvii the pystle on the Annunciacian of our Lady. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem the pystle on s. Georges daye / folio eo. the gospel on the same day. fo. xlviii the pystle on s. Marke the Euangelistes daye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. the pystle on Philip and Iames daye. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem. the pistle on the Inuēciō of the crosse. fo. xlix. the gospel on the same day. fo. eo the pystle on the Natyue of saynt Iohn̄ the babtyst. folio eodem the gospell on the same daye. folio. l. the pystle on s. Peter & Paules day. fo. eo. the gospell on the same day. fo. eo. the pystle on the cōmemoracyon of saynt Paule. folio eodē. the gospell on the same daye. folio. li. the pystle on the Visitacion of our Lady. folio eodem the gospell on the same daye. folio eodem the pystle on Relyke sondaye. fo. eo. the gospel on the same daye. fo. eo. the pystle on s. Margaretes day. fo. iii. the gospel on i. Margarets day. fo. eo. the pystle on Mary magdaleyn day. fo. eo. the gospel on the same day / fo. eo. the pystle on s. Iames daye. fo. liii. the gospel on the same daye. fo. eo.
the pystle on s. Annes daye. folio. eo. the gospell on s. Annes daye. folio eo. the pystle on s. Peters day advincula. fo. eo. the gospel on the same day. fo. eo. the pystle on the transfyguracion of our lorde. folio eodem. the gospell on the same daye. folio liiii. the pystle on the feaste of the name of Iesus. folio eodem the gospell on the same daye of Iesus feaste. folio eodem. the pystle on saynt Laurence. folio. eo. the gospell on the same daye. folio eo. the pystle on the Assumpcibu of our Lady Folio lv. the gospel on the same daye. folio eodem the pystle on s. Bartylmewes daye. fo. eo. the gospell on the same day. fo. eo. the pystle on the decollacion of saynt Iohan baptist. folio eodem the gospell on the same daye folio eodem the pystle on the Natiuite of our lady. folio. lvi. the gospell on the same daye folio eodem the pystle on the Exaltacion of the Crosse. folio eodem the gospel on the same daye folio eodem the pystle on s. Mathewes daye the Apostle folio eodem the gospel on the same daye. folio eodem the pystle on saynt Myghels day. fo. lvii. the gospel on the same day. folio eo. the pystle on the trans. of saynt Edwarde the Kynge and confessour. folio eo. the gospell on the same daye folio eodem the pystle on saynt Luke the euangelyst. folio eodem the gospell on the same daye folio eodem the pystle on the Xi. thousande vyrgyns daye folio. lviii. the gospel on the same daye. folio eodem the pystle on s. Symon & Iudas day. fo. eo. the gospel on the same day fo. eo. the pystle on al halowen daye. fo. lix. the gospell on the same daye. fo. eodem the pystle on al Soules day. folio lx. the gospel on the same day. folio eodem the pystle on s. Martyn daye. folio eo. the gospell on the same day. fo eodem the pystle on s. Katheryns day. fo. eo. the gospel on the same day. folio lx. the pystle on the same day of weddynge folio eodem the gospel on the same daye folio eodem the pystle at buryenges / folio eodem the gospel on the same daye / folio eo. FINIS TABVLAE. ¶ Imprynted at London in Pater noster rowe, by my Iohn̄ Redman.
