3138.5 33143335 28390
❧ The seuerall Engines that Nichols Bloy Enginer pro∣fesseth, be Nyne in number; These as followeth. THE first, is the perpetuall motion, commonly called the continuall Wheele, which Wheele goeth without Wind, Water, Man, or Horse, or anything that breaths. The seuerall vses be these. It will grinde all kind of Corne, or oraine, as sufficiently as euer was or can be either by Wind-mill, or Water-mill. It will serue for the drayning of Fends or Marish grounds. It serueth for drayning of Cole pits, Lead-mines, Cynne-mines, and all o∣ther Mynes of Mettals. It serueth for Oyle-milles, Iron milles, Smeltin of Lead, Sawing of Tymber, beating of Hempe, and many other good purposes. The Second, is the wheele Pro & Contra, which Wheele goeth by the labour of one man, by which wheele more stuffe may bee drawne out of the ground as Cole, Lead, Stone, Earth, Water, or any other mettal, then euer was yet done by the labour of Ten men. The Third, is the Attractiue Pegasus, it serueth for the drayning of Cole pits, Lead-mines, Tynne-mynes, and all other Mynes of Mettals. The Fourth, is the High periticall Assistant, a very necessary Engine at the foot of Pegasus, to send home the water to him, that he may raise it out at the day. The Fift, is the Lacune Rampant, it serueth to draine Fends & Marish groūds it will raise 300. Tons of water in an houre with the labour of one man, it will raise water out of a standing poole to driue any Water-mill, and that with the labour of one man, besides a very necessary Engine for ships at Sea. The Sixt, is the Ignipotent Carpim, for if there be a Seare-fire in a Towne, one man with that Engine shall doe more good for the staking of the said Fire, then can be done by Forty men any other way; it serueth also to water Gardens as raine from Heauen, it will beat Catterpillers from fruit trees and Arbours, and that in an excellent manner. The Seaueth, is the Saxipotent Engine, it serueth to pierce the stony Rockes for speedy getting to the Cole, Lead, Tynne, or any other mettals. The Eight, is the Dampe Engine, for it driueth the dampe out of the groūd for the preseruation of al that shal worke therin, & that with the labour of one man. The Nynth, is the Engine Triangula, it bringeth the water out of the very top of a pit, and it runneth in Pipes down the Hill side naturally after it be once set a worke, much after the maner of a perpetuall motion, for it neuer can stand (ex∣cept it be stopped or stayed) so long as there is any water in the pit. All these Nyne Engines haue beene studyed and practised by me Nicholas Bloy Enginer.
