3372 S106525 99842240 6881
A NECESSARIE AND BRIEFE TREATISE OF THE Contagious disease of the Pestilence, with the Causes, Signes, and Cures of the same. COLLECTED And newly Composed for the benefit and comfort of the vulgar sort. BY W. BORASTON of Salop, Practitioner in Physicke and Chyrurgerie. LONDON. Printed by B. ALSOP and T. FAVVCET. dwelling in Grubstreet. 1630.
TO THE RIGHT VVor: THO: HIGGONS, Doctor of Divinitie, an ear∣nest Favourer of all good and law∣full Intentions: W. BORASTON wisheth all Prosperitie both now and euer here∣after. THe most Mighty ELOHIM, Creator of all things, by rea∣son of our grievous Sinnes, and haynous transgressions against his Precepts and di∣vine Ordinances, haue threatned his peo∣ple to inflict vpon them, the plague of Pesti∣lence and divers other Sicknesses, as Holy and Divine writ testifieth. Notwithstan∣ding the foresaid Afflictions and manifold Diseases wherewith for our sinnes, from
time, to time wee haue beene often pu∣nished; Wee haue not perceived (by reason of the custome of sinning) how horrible the rust and Canker of Sinne is, vntill GOD out of his wrath powreth againe his punish∣ment vpon the offenders, and thereupon haue not onely inflicted man which princi∣pally haue transgressed, but also all other creatures which were created and ordai∣ned for mans vse, and haue caused the Starres to cast downe there venomous influ∣ence vpon his creatures, in regard we would not repent and acknowledge the wic∣kednesse of our corrupt nature, but ra∣ther haue farther in the middest of all our inflictions of the Plague of Pestilence ei∣ther through want of Charitie or diaboli∣call hate haue sought to infect others, for which I would wish all so euill disposed, to preuent the punishments ordained for them which are so presumptuous, for as CRATO saith, Qui malitiosè pestifera diffundit, homicida est proximi sui, & paenas non modo aeternas sibi luendas sciat, Sed in
hoc etiam seculo Magistratus seueritatem experietur. And euen as this wickednesse and des∣perate blindnesse is of all men to bee abhor∣red; So the vnmeasurable Mercy of GOD purchased through Contrition, Penance and Satisfaction is to be imbraced, Seeing that he in the middest of all our abhominations and deseruings of extreame punishments, haue euer remembred them which are con∣trite of heart, and sorrowfull for the ha∣zard and losse of GODS fauour, and to∣wards them hee haue yeelded compassion, and haue infuded blessing vnto Hearbes, Stones, and Metals, for their recouerie and cure of all their Malladies, as well also for nutriment as preseruation. So that wee may plainly see that GOD taketh not any delight in punishing his creatures, but rather to make vs know how detestable a thing sinne is, for by it wee often loose his diuine Fauour and Grace, So we ought with all diligence by Humility and Obedience to obtaine the same againe,
and to frame our course of life thereafter, that we may returne to him as fathfull and obedient Children. Now euen as they which with study and trauaile haue sought out the wonderfull Workes of God in the Firmament, are to be commended; So deserue they not the least praise, which haue indeauoured to find out the properties and vertues of such things which may comfort and succour the neces∣sities of their distressed Neighbours, And in regard the Plague of Pestilence is so ter∣rible vnto humaine Nature, that it often∣times separateth the Father from the Child, the Husband from the Wife yea the Physi∣tian from his Patient, and one friend from another, for their owne safety, as is suppo∣sed, I therefore receiuing my Talent at the last houre, would not negligently bury it in a Muckhill. But for the reasons aboue-specified, I thought it not amisse (let busie speakers ra∣ther then dooers babble what they please) to bestow sme paines in setting forth som
directions and Remedies for them that are subiect to the foresaid contagi∣ous Sicknesse; especially, for them which are not able to fee the Physitians and Chyrurgians. And in regard I haue al∣wayes found loue and receiued friendship, at your Worships hands; I now farther pre∣sume vpon your fauor, and right godly iudg∣ment, with desire to accept of this my poore Dedication in good part. And pardon the boldnesse of your poore Neighbour in this attempt, and he shall euer rest, At your Worships command, W: B.
To the Courteous and louing READER. I Find by Common experi∣ence (Gentle Reader,) and the effects are to much seene and prooued amongst vs; That amongst many dangerous Diseases which happeneth to Mans body, there are none so Contagious and venemous as the Plague or Pest. And forasmuch, as the Curing of this Disease consisteth in remouing the cause, I therefore wish all men, to hate and abhorre Sin, and to vse penance for the same. The chiefest cause being thus removed, I doubt not, but by GOD his Assistance with the Re∣medies, and Instruction hereafter no∣ted you shall receiue benefit. Thus
expecting the fauourable acceptation of these my Labours, I shall bee willing to consecrate the residue of my studies to thy Com∣moditie. W. B.
A TREATISE OF THE PESTILENCE: Wherein is shewed the Causes, with most certaine Preseruatiues against the Infection thereof. THis contagious Sicknesse cal∣led the Pestilence, is no o∣ther thing then a pressure, Contagion and whip, which GOD out of his indigna∣tion vseth to chastice men for their trans∣gressions, as it is written in the 28. of Deut. saying; If thou wilt not obey the voyce of the Lord thy GOD, and keepe and doe his Commandements; the Lord shall make the Pestilence to cleane vnto thee. For God the Creator of all things is the chiefe and
principall moouer of all things created, and vseth them as secondary meanes to execute punishment against the offenders. So that the Pestilence is either Supernaturall, and immediatly commeth from GOD to Man; or Naturall, as when God punish∣eth man hée performeth it by his creatures. Also, the Pestilence supernaturall is to be vnderstood two manner of wayes, that is to say; either when God doth it wholly from himselfe, or else permissiuely hée suffereth Sathan to punish Man for the reasons a∣foresaid; Hée being the most cruell enemy both of God and man, who grieueth and repineth at mans felicitie, and enuiously séeketh to extirpate and roote out all Man∣kind. Euen as the Historie of Iob testifi∣eth. So that his power is also two-fold, viz. Hée either doth this office of himselfe, or else by Inchanters and Witches, (Exod. 7, and 8.) of whom Christ spake, Act. 8. Math. 7. The Pestilence naturall, is also taken two manner of wayes: The one genera∣ted from an astrall Impression, the other from the microcosmus or little wolds I∣magination. The Pestilence of Impressi∣on proceedeth from the firmament of Hea∣uen,
when God punisheth man by second causes, hée vseth the coniunction of Saturne and Mrs, and other Starres, Eclipses for correction, euen as a Father chastiseth his Child with the rod. The arsenicall Sul∣phurious, Antimoniall, Napellosous, Ci∣cutosons beames of the Starres, infects the nutriment both Spirituall and Corporall. This is the generation of Pestilence of the influence Astrall. Lastly, Paracelsus in his Booke De occul∣ta Philosophia, saith; that Of imagination springeth the Pestilence, as is there in∣stanced betwéene two Brothers. Also it is reported, that a man hauing the Hemerhodes and the Pestilence together, aspecting another being sound, infecteth him also; yea, very many much more, by the intuition and earnest beholding of women, Quae simul menstruorum & Peste laborant. Moreouer by the breath, heat, sweat, smell, habitation, and garments from the steke, the Pestilence is propagated, and créepeth from one house vnto another and infecteth the Inhabitants thereof, so that it procée∣deth of an inuisible essence, Spirituell and Astrall, and not of any humour or liquor onely.
Presages and judgements taken from the Superiour bodies and Constellations of the Heauens. AMongst all other bodyes Celestiall, there are two called euill and malici∣ous, which are Saturne and Mars, as afore∣said; by whose bad influence manifold infir∣mities, especially of the Pestilence ari∣seth: For Saturne through Cold, causeth Rheumes, Elephantia, &c. Mars by reason of Heat, bringeth forth Feauers pestilentiall, spitting of Blood, Plurifies and such like. Consider well the tring of the Sunne into Aries by true Equation of the houses and Planet, for that influence hath more domi∣nation, then haue all other influences of the whole yéere beside, (xcept the superiou Coniunctions of the Planets, or some great Eclipses.) And this entring of the Sunn into Aries passeth all entrings of the ua into any other Signe. Therefore consider how the Lord of the sixt house in the figur is disposed for hée is the Lord of the Sick∣nesse, v z. You must consider, whether hée be impedite or no. An f hée be impedite there shall be many Sknesses according to
his nature and his house, that is the sixt house. As for example, be it in case that Saturne is Lord of the sixt house, and some earthy signe is in the same house, then most comon∣ly the sicknesse of that yéere, shall be of like nature, that is cold and dry. And ouer this thou must consider, whether the Lord of the sixt house hath any aspect with the Lord of the house of Death; to him, then most commonly the end of those sicknesses that are cold and dry, shall be death. And likewise, as it is declared of the en∣tring of the Sunne into Aries, So must it be said of the coniunction of the Sunne and Moone through all the yéere, marking euery nature of the Planet being in the sixt house, If there be any, and the aspects to those two houses aforesaid. Also consider, whether this entring of the Sun into Aries or any of the coniunctions of the Luminaries, be in the eight house or no, for then it shall be much worse. Note also, that if the Eclipse of the Sun or Moone be in any angles of the Natiuitie of any per∣son, or in any of the angles of the reuolusion of his natiuitie, then hée shall suffer sicknes according to the nature of the same angles.
And if the Eclipse be in Medio Coeli, he shall suffer hurt in his honour & same. And if it be in the Ascendent, hée shall be gréeued in his body, and so forth of the other houses. But it shall be the worser in case the Eclipse be in the ascendent, especially, if it be the E∣clipse of the Sn, for that is the more dan∣gerous of the two. Forasmuch as the effect of the Eclipses of the Moone is alwayes fini∣shed in the space of one yéere at the most, sometime in lesse, and for the most part in thrée Moneths. But the effects of the Eclipse of the Sun is very long or it come to passe. Sometimes twelue yéeres, as Ptolome in his Centiloquio witnesseth. The Astrologians take the judgement of the yéere, by the entring of the Sunne in∣to Aries in the first minute. And if it then happen, that all the ill Planets be in the eight house, which is the house of Death, they say; that yéere shall arise a Pestilence and diuers other siknesses, according to the nature and conditions of those Planets. And if the Moone in the same entring bée néere vnto the coniunction of the Sun, that is to say, within two or 3. or 4. degrées; That yéere shall be a death of Pestilence v∣niuersall, and that shortly after that Con∣junction;
especially, at the comming of the Moone and euill Planets to infortunes: and as the infortunes be, the effects shall so appeare, be they more or lesse. Furthermore, you must consider the great coniunction of Saturne and Iupiter in the 13. degrée of Scorpio as it was in the yéere 1625. in the last of August, which coniunction changed from an ayrie triplici∣tie into a waterie, and it was in a waterie Signe, whereof there chanced very much raine, and thereupon followed excessiue hu∣mectation and moystening of Mans body, which by and by turned to putrifaction and thereupon ensued many perillous and cor∣rupt Feauers, Pestilence and Agues as Phaierus and many others haue related, specially, because the coniunction of Sa∣turne was exalted in the North aboue Iupi∣ter, which Saturne is of ill influence. Furthermore, there are assigned seauen prognosticks, presages or signes of the Pe∣stilence, more common and vsually obserued as hereafter follow: viz. First, when in a Summer day, the We∣ther is often changed, as in the morning like to raine, and after standeth still clou∣dy, and at last, the wind turneth into the South.
The second is, when often in the time of Summer, the dayes sheweth wholly obscu∣red, as if it would raine and yet not raine, and then if it doe so continue long, it is to be feared, a great Pestilence will after ensue. The third Signe is, when there are ma∣ny Flyes vpon the Earth, for this signifieth that the ayre may be venemous and infected. The fourth signe is, when the Stars doe séeme often to fall, for it is a token that the ayre is corrupted by many venemous va∣pours which ascendeth. The fift signe is when Come to do séeme to flye in the ayre an it appeareth in Meteors, and that those happeneth, when the Comet appeareth, it signifieth bloudshed, warres, &c. Ʋnde versus. Mors furit, vrbs rapitur, Seuit mare, Sol operitur. Regnum mutatur plebs peste faeme cruciatur. The sixt signe is, when many thunders and lightnings happeneth, and especially from the South part. The seuenth is, when many Winds pro∣céedeth from the South part, for they bée foule and vncleane, when these signes ap∣peare, a great Pestilence is much to bée
feared, except our Lord omnipotent a∣uere it. Meanes to preuent Infection, the Causes and Prognosticks be∣ing already dclared. NOw shall it bée directed by what meanes euery man ought to preserue himselfe from this infection, And according to the spéech of Dauid saying, that a man ought Diuertere a malo, ad bonum, to turne from euill and doe good, And most humbly Pecatasua confiteri, to confesse his sinnes, for in the time of Pestilence, Penitencie and Confession are to be preferred before all o∣ther Medicaments, and withall to change the place for a more pure ayre. But if it cannot bée done conueniently, in as much as possible may be, let all causes of corrup∣tion be uitated and uoyded, and conse∣quently Venerie. Also the Wind procée∣ing frō ye Meridian or South point, is con∣agious & infectiue naturally: Therefore in  time of the Pestilence, the Windowes on he same side the house ought to bée shut vn∣ill one of the clocke afternoone, and let the indowes be open towards the North part.
For the same cause, let there bée no euill sents or smels as from stables, stréets, fields where dead carkasses corrupted and putrified may annoy you, and chiefly putri∣fied Waters, as from sincks and houses of Office, for Paracelsus saith; Omne putrifa∣ctum mré est venenum. And most common∣ly we find they dye in greatest number, where the ayre is corrupted with these a∣nyances; For, Sicut per odorem, aromati∣cam cor & spus recreantur, ita ex nocino feto∣re debilitantur. Therefore the house is to be kept, that no infectiue ayre enter there∣in, especially that which is humide and moist, which naturally causeth putrifaction in the house and place where one sléepeth: For preuention thereof the same house or places ought to be ayred with fires of wood yéelding cléere flame, and withall to fumi∣gate the roomes with these hearbes and séeds subscribed, Bayberies, Iuniper, Vbery, Ogany, Wormswood, Hysop, Rue, Mag∣wort, and of Lign ees, let these me be inspred and akn at the mouth and nos¦thrils, so that it may pentrate into the interior and inward pars. Let all superfluity and ouermuch reple¦tions be refrained, for Auincen in 4. Cano∣nis
saith; that Illi qui repletionem semper cu∣rant periodum & sinem vitae suae abreuiant Likewise, the common Bath is to bée a∣uoyded, for Modicum fermentum totam massm corrumpit. Finally, communities and concurfes of people are also to be left off, as much as possible may be, least the breach of the infected be receiued. But in case they cannot be shunned, let these remedies bée vsed which follow. When one ariseth in the morning, by and by let him eate a little Rue washt in cleane water, and sprinkled with salt, with one or two Walnuts well clensed, If that cannot be had, let him eate some bread or a toast intincted with Vini∣ger, especially in a turbid or cloudy day. Also in the time of Pestilence, it is better to stay within doores, then to goe abroad into any Towne or Citie, and l the house especially in the Summer be sprinkled with Viniger, Roses and Vine-leaues, also it shall be good oftentimes in the ay, to wash the hands with water and vinger, and a∣terward to clense the face, and to smell vnto the hands washed as aforesaid. It shall be also a wholsome course as well in Summer as winter to smell vnto sower things. And
for those that are visitors  the sicke, to take a spunge or piece of bread stéeped in viniger, and to hold it to the Nose or Mth, for all acetosus and sower things e so close the powers, and passages of the humours, that no venemous ayre can enter therin as by experience I haue often found. Also if you take Rue, Wormewood, Sage, Marigolds of each thrée handfuls, ruse them wholly in a gallon of Ale newly n∣ued vp, and paste it close that no ayre breath out, and after that it is fined for . houres take sixe or seuen spoonefuls thereof mixed with the best Venice-triacle in quan∣tity of a Beane, and moderately walke thereon, and doe thus euery morning be∣fore yonges forth of your house, as long as the Sicknesse continueth, and rew your  s occasion requireth to preuent the imprsion of the contagious ayre. Another Preseruatiue. TAke Aloes cleane washed i Rose-wa∣ter halfe an ounce, of good Myrrhe, of sse o arh two dragmes, of Bale Ar∣onie epared one scruple, of séed Pearle and scruple, of the sirup of Lemons as much as will make it in forme of pae, made in pills, and e thereof euery ing the
weight of a great, fasting, and within one houre after, to take a little thin broth, Ale∣bery or white Wine, and fast thereon thrée houres after, and then to vse your accusto∣med dyet. Another. BVt if the body hée very costine and di∣stempered therewith, then may yee vse these pils in quantity as aforesaid; Euery morning for foure or fiue dayes together if néed require, and prepared as thus: Take of Rheubarb, Myrrhe, of each one dragme, Aloes two dragmes, Zorie roo e, Saf∣fron of each one scruple, sirup of Roses su∣ltine as much as will suffice to make it in forme of pilles, and to take them in manner as afore directed. Another Preseruative. TAke of Methridate, conserne of Roses of each halfe an ounce, Bole Armoni∣acke prepared two dragmes, mixe them to∣gether, and take thereof as much as a  at once, and fast thereon two or thrée houres after. Or else you may take of Triacle of An¦rochus, and of Michridate of either tw dragmes, of conserue of Rose 3. dragme
Bole Aemoniack prepared two scruple, of the séeds or roses of Angelica two scruples, of the seeds of Citrons halfe a dragme, of the sirup of Lemons halfe an ounce, mixe all together and take thereof the quantity of a hassell nt, in the morning or at any time of the day else (if you goe into any throug of people) and fas a while after it. There are also many other preseruatiues more costly, yet farre more powerfull in their effects, which may be had at the hands of the Chymists, as Potus Pestilentialis Pa∣racelsi, whereof one dragme being taken in the morning fasting, and to sweat there∣on, is a preseruatiue from the Pestilence for sixe dayes. The second preseruatiue is, Sulphur sub∣limed with Myrrhe and Aloes. Halfe a dragme with Suger thereof being taken in the morning, preserueth a man that ay from all astral impression. The third preseruatiue is, Zenechthon, Paracelli, which being hanged about the necke, hindereth the attractiue power of the Microcismus or little world, which is man. The fourth, against the intuition or ve∣nemous aspe of women, and men as a∣foresaid.
Is Chelidonia gathered in the full of the Moone, and caried aboue one. The fift for them which are visitors of the sicke, let them hold in their mouth fra∣kensence, and withall let the infected a the same instant hold also in their mouth of the rootes of Imperitoria. The sixt, is the essence of Harts and Storkes bloud. The seuenth, which is most potent and powerfull, is Alexipharmacum Spagin, whereof being taken in a morning, the quantity of a Beane or lesse, with sugar, or in any other conuenient liquor, hath a mar∣ueilous effect. Also for correcting of the ayre, R. Sul∣phuris lib. ss. Thuris zij. Mirrhae zj. ss. assae se∣tidae z. ss. uluriztur & misceantur. To this powder adde a double quantiti of the ortex or shells of Bayberies, of white Amber halfe a part. Take of this powder two dragmes, and cast it vpon coales, and make a perfume thereof dayly wise or thrice. For want of this powder you may take the wood of Iuniper, and vse it in like man∣ner, but it is nothing so good as the pow∣der.
Rules to bee obserued in Common communities. SVch things as doe rarifie and subtile the spirit interior, are Saffron, Cassia, Fi∣stula, Plannton, with mirth in measure, those doe specially serue in common com∣munities, and Companies, where quickly one is infected of another. The eyes are obscured and darkned by an infectiue ayre, if a man carry not the foresaid things or such like in his hand. Therefore it shall be a safe course to wash the eyes, mouth and hands oftentimes in the day, with Rose∣water mixt with Viniger as aforesaid, but if both cannot bée had, let Viniger a∣lone he vsed. This being obserued, thou mayest with more securitie enter into any company. To kéepe the body soluble is thought to be an effectuall remedie, if it bée not laxa∣tiue naturally, let it bée prouoked artificial∣ly by suppositors, for which purpose also ser∣ueth the Pillulae Pestlentiales which may bée had at the Apothecaries. Let there bée also fire made in the House, because it much hin∣dereth Celestiall impression, and clarifieth the ayre,
To take Triacle is also profitable and good, as well for the sicke as while I meane the right Venice-triacle, or Treacle of Andromochus (or Iene-triacle) if it bee ad∣ministred twice in a day with pure and cléere wine, Béere or Rose-water, in quan∣tity of a small Beane or Pease at each time, mixt with two spoonefuls of any of the fore∣said Liquors: Let Dinner bée defer∣red, vntill midday, whereby the Tri∣acle, may haue its operation in the Bo∣dy. Then chuse a good messe of meate with pure wine, Drinke is to bée taken oft in the day, but not much at once, because, Ni∣mia Superabundantia putrifactionem humorum inducit. Beware of all hot things in meates, as Pepper and Garlicke; for although Pepper purgeth the braine of Flegme and likewise the Spirituall members from viscous and clammy humours, yee it heateth ouermuch, and Calefaction and heat causeth putrifaction. Bitternesse is more wholesome then hot Odours or Sauours: Garlicke, although it purgeth also Flegme and casteth forth euill humours, prouoketh appetite to Meate, and permitteth not
any dry ayre to enter; because it perturba∣teth and vexeth the eyes, and heateth the head of euery one which often vseth the same; therefore it cannot proue agréeable: For the Pestilence through the vse of hot things is oftentimes augmented and increa∣sed. All kind of meates by so much easie they are of digestion, so much better they are. In the morning boyled meates are more to be commended, but in the euening roasted. Brothes and Pulps are to be es∣chewed, except they haue some pleasant sowernesse; for sower meats in time of Pe∣stilence serueth to all medicines. In like manner all fruites must be refrained, ex∣cept those of a sower tast, as Cheries, Pom∣granuts, or a little quantity of a Peare or Apple in place of medicine, for most fruits commonly induceth putrifaction. As for Spices which are commonly vsed, and con∣uenient, are Ginger, Cinamon, Cumine, Mace and Saffron, with these are made sauces for the richer sort. The poorer folkes may eate Rue, Sage, Walnuts, Parcely minced and mixed together with Vineger. These doe hinder putrifaction. Likewise, beware yée dread not Death ouermuch, but thinke well to liue: For
hée that dreads ouermuch, shall imagine hée féeles pricking and moouing thereof at the cleansing places in his owne conceit, when hée féeles nothing. Hauing set downe sundry meanes for preuention, It shall be conuenient to speake of some signes and tokens, whereby a man may judge whether hée be insected with the Pestilence or no, and are these that fol∣low. The first is, great paine and heauinesse in the Head. The second, when the body is inwardly affected with heate, and the outward parts cold and ready to shake, and is thirsty and dry withall. The third is, difficulty of breathing and that with paine. The fourth signe is, hée hath a great de∣sire to sléepe and can hardly refraine it, Sometime want of sléepe and cannot ob∣taine it. The fift is, paine and swelling in the sto∣mack, breaking forthwith stinking sweats. The sixt signe is, diuers and heauy lookes of the Eyes, séeing all things of one colour, s gréene or yellow, and the colour of the eyes are also changed.
The seauenth signe is, losse of appetite, vnsauoury ast, bitternesse of the mouth sower and stinking. The eight is, wambling of the stomacke and a desire to vomit, and sometime vomi∣ting humours bitter and of diuers colours. The ninth is, the Pulse beateth swift and déepe. The tenth signe is, heauinesse and dul∣nes in all the body, and saint, and weake limbes. The eleuenth is, the Vrine most com∣monly is troubled, thicke like beasts wa∣ter, and stinketh, but smell it not if you loue your health; but oftentimes the water doth not shew at all, especially in the beginning of the Sicknesse. The twelfth and last signe and surest of all other is. There ariseth in the necke, vnder the arme, or in the flanke a tumour or swelling, or in some other part of the body there appeareth a red, gréenish, or blackish coloured sore: this is an apparent Signe of infection with the Pestilence. Assoone as by the signes and tokens afore∣said, any one perceiueth himselfe to bée in∣fected with the venemous quality of the Pestilence: Let him take of the foresaid
Potus Pestilentialis Paracelsi, in quantity agréeable vnto the age of the Patient, that is to say; If hée be aboue Fouretéene, he may take thereof at a time, halfe an ounce or a good spoonefull; But if hée be of youn∣ger yéeres, two dragmes, or more or lesse according to the condition and respect of the patient, and let him bée well couered in his bed with cloathes, and sweat there∣on for foure or fiue houres after. Within sixe houres after that, let him take the like dosse and againe let him sweat. Af∣ter sixe houres are past, let him take the third dosse; especially, If the patient fée∣leth and perceiueth any punctions or pric∣kings remaining: For with the third dosse (God willing) all the venome will bée expelled and driuen forth. For thrée dayes following (the venome expulsed,) Euery morning the Patient shall take one dosse of the sayd liquor or drinke, whereby Nature may bée corrobo∣rated and comforted. Alexipharmacum Spagiricum will performe the same, of which you may giue vnto them that are aboue Fouretéene yeeres one dragme, but vnto them that are younger halfe a dragme, and that thrice in foure and
twenty houres space. And for thrée dayes one dosse euery Morning, either in Wine, Rose-vineger, or other appropriate wa∣ters. And when the Apostumation of the Pe∣stilence commeth foorth, a Cataplasme of Figges and of the fruit of Alkakengie, of each a like quantity bruissed together, shall bée applyed thereon, and it will breake it presently; For Venenum, venonum at∣wahit And this you must remember, that if the Botch arise néere vnto the heart be∣fore you sweate, that then you apply this defensatiue vnto the heart vpon a fine lin∣nen cloath thinly spread, as broad as will couer the heart, which medicine is thus prepared. Take of good Triacle of Andromachus, halfe a dragme, of Methridate one dragme, red Sanders, of Torralemnia halfe a scru∣ple, Rose-water and of Vineger, of each as much as will suffice to make an Vn∣guent, and let it bée applyed as aboue di∣rected. When the Apostume first appeareth, you may (if you please) take Walnuts, or Filberd nuts, Figges and Rue beaten
together, and apply it thereto. Also, when the sayd Apostume brea∣keth and the venome penetrateth the heart, whose signe is perceiued by the liue from the Center or middest point of the apo∣stume leading to the heart: Bruise then some of the gréene plant called Vna inuer∣sa, or Leopards haue, and apply thereto; but if it cannot bée gotten gréene but wi∣thered, then macerate it in Wine, or Vi∣neger, and apply it after the same sort, and let it bée repeated twice or thrice ouer: For this doth extract and draw out the venome mightily, the Patient being in an agonie; and doe reuoke and call him backe as from the Graue, and dri∣ueth many into admiration thereof.
Against the Symptomes of the Pestilence. IN Constipations and Costiuenesse of the belly, the patient may vse some pur∣gatiue medicine; except it bée at such time when the Botch or Carbuncle appeareth, any other sores of the Pestilence growing towards ripenesse: For if it bée done then, it will contrary to nature proue her intentiō. But the second day after Sweating, If no Botch or sore appeareth, then may hée vse either Sena or Rhewharb, or the ex∣tract of either. They that haue any of the Fluxes of the bowels, called Diarrhea or Diseteria, joyned with the Pestilence; Morning, Noone and at night, they may take halfe a scruple of Crocus Martis, in the extract of Acorus Luteus, to the full effecting of the cure. They that are dexed with burning heates, let them dip linnen cloathes in Rose-water vitriol, and with the juice of Semper viue, and apply to the pulfes, and when the same cloathes are dryed, let them bée we againe in the same liquor and applyed in like man∣ner.
And if the Patient be very dry and thir∣stie, giue him of this Iulip thrée or foure spoonefuls at once, viz. Take of Rose-wa∣ter, of the waters of Endiue, Buglasse, Sorrell, sharpe Viniger, and of the juice of Lemmons of each foure Ounces, of Su∣gar one pound, boyle them a little with a gentle fire, and when it is cold, giue there∣of to drinke thrée or foure spoonefuls at once. Or else, take of the waters of Roses and of Buglasse of each thrée Ounces, of ye Sirrp of Endine and Lemmons of each two oun∣ces, of the Oyle of Vitriol one scruple, mixe them, and take them as aforesaid. If the Patient cannot sléepe, if after vomiting Bezoardicks, and other meanes fit to eua∣te grosse humours, a man may giue the Patient Landanum Paracelsi, thrée graines thereof in Carduus benedictus water, or for want thereof the Temples of the Pati∣ent may bée anoynted with this oyntment. Take of Vnguentum Populionis, of Vn∣guentum Rosarum, of Vnguentum Alaba∣strinum, of each half an ounce, of the oyles of Violets and of water Lillies, of eyther two dragmes, of Opium one scruple, or two, first dissolued in Rose-water, and then together mixed; anointing the Temples therewith,
will both cause sléepe, and stay raging. Or if you will you may vse this. Take of the sirrup of Violets, of the sir∣rup of of Lemmons, of the sirrup of Popple of each one ounce, of Diascordium, thrée dragmes, let them be mingled together, and giue therof sometime to the patient to driue for the foresaid purposes. If through the heate of the stomake, the Mouth, Throate and Tongue be hot, dry and furred. Take French Barly, Suck∣folly, Violet and Strawbery leaues, of each one handfull, of Woodbind and Co∣lbind halfe an handfull, Boile all these in a Quart of faire water, and to the same Liquor strained out, put thereto of Dia∣moum and of Mel osarum, o eyther two ounces, of the oyle of Sulphur as much as will a little sharpen it, and let the Patient with some of the same liquor warmed, gargarize and wash his Mouth, Tongue and Throat.
Of Fleubotomie. FLeubotomie may be vsed once in a Mo∣neth, except age or any other cause prohibite it, as in women with child, or on them that are brought low by sicknesse, or on them that are subiect to any fluxe of the Belly, or on them which are alrea∣dy infected with the Pestilence, and the Botch or Sore groweth towards ripe∣nesse. Let bloud-letting be done vpon the veine Basilica, whether it be in the right or left arme, before he eate or drinke, and af∣ter the opening of the same let the Pa∣tient bée jocund, merry and cheerefull, and to drinke good Wine or Béere, but al∣wayes temperately. Neither is it lawfull nor conuenient to sléepe the same day that the veine is opened, if any féeleth him∣selfe infected with an Apostume, then let him altogether refraine sléepe, and preuent it by walking, for in sléepe, heate inwardly induceth the Venome vnto the Heart, and other Spirituall Members, in such sort, that scarce any Hearbe may
reuoke the same venome, vnto its former state, which thing happeneth not, as long as a man is in motion. But it may bée, some men will aske, of whom is sléepe to be auoyded? What if hée should haue a continuall sléepe? To this I briefly answere, that in the time of Pesti∣lence; if any haue an appetite to sléepe pre∣sently after he haue eaten any thing, thou such desires ought to be hindered for a space, either in ye Garden or Fields for one houre, & then with naturall sléep, the body may haue for one houre its naturall refection & rest. Therefore Auincen saith; That if a man will sléepe, he ought to drinke a good draught before his sléeping, because in sléepe hée at∣tracteth and draweth many humors and those euill humors are repelled by the hu∣mour of a good draught; But againe, if a man shall aske, when a man is infected how he ought to know it. To this I say & answer, that a man that is infected; the same day he shall not eate much, because he is repleate with euill humours, and presently after Dinner he hath a desire to sléepe, and per∣ceiueth a great heat with coldnesse, hée hath great paine in the former part of the head, but all these are reuoked and put away by
mouing hither & thither, & for to walke he is not able by reason of ouermuch vnweldines and sluggishnesse of body, for a man infected hath alwayes a desire to sléepe, because the venome iniernall doth perturbate and trou∣ble the spirits vitall, so that it alwayes ten∣deth to rest, by these signes and all others be∣fore related, a man may alwayes perceiue himselfe to bée infected. If hée will not giue credit vnto it, let him make tryall for halfe a dayes space, and presently hée shall féele the Apostume vnder his Armes, or a∣bout the groine, or else about the Eares. Therefore the chiefest remedie is, if a man perceiue all these tokens in time of the Pe∣stilence, that he shake off sléepe as I haue said before, for as by the reasons before al∣so alledged it is manifest, that in sléepe the Spirits vitall doth rest, but the venome is scattered, through the membrands from one place vnto another, as I haue often obser∣ued. This being truely marked, when a man findeth himself infected, as soone as pos∣sible may be, let him let bloud in as ample manner that he almost saint thereon, for the taking of small quantity of bloud stirreth vp the venemous quality more forcibly. If a man will not cut many veines at once,
then hée shall suffer to goe ouer the same veyne incided as aforesaid, euen vnto the retardation and staying of the Blood. Also he that is let blood, whether hée be infected or not, he must also shunne sléepe the whole day euen to midnight. And al∣wayes in the same part of the body that the Apostume shall appeare, shall be made the incision of a veyne. As for Example. If the Apostume shall appeare vnder the right Arme, Phlebotomie shall bée made in the middle part of the same arms, from the veyne Mediana; but if vnder the left arme the apostume sheweth it selfe, then must you open the Media∣na, as aforesaid, in the same arme, or the Hepatien, that is to say; in the veyne about the middle finger. If the apostume be a∣bout the Groyne, let a veyne be opened in the Foote, about the héele on the same side. If the apostume bée in the Necke, Phlebo∣tomize the Cephalica, about the Thumbe in the hand of the same side, or the Mediana of the same arme, or in the hand on the same side about the lesser finger. If it shall appeare about the Eare, incide the Cephalica on the same side, or the veyne
which is betweene the fore-finger and the thumbe, least many venemous vapours in∣uade the braine. Or the vayne which is a∣bout the lesse finger, or about the article, which of Phisitians is called Basilica. If the tumour shall appeare about the shoul∣der blades, heart and throat: Vse scarifi∣cations with application of Ventosis: And first let blood on the Median. If the Apostume appeare on the backe, open the veyne called Pedia Magna. And all these may bée let blood, If a man haue not slept before the knowledge of the Apostumati∣on: But if hée féele such Apostumations after sléeping; then bléeding ought to be made on the contrary part. As if the Apostume appeared in the right arme, the Basilica or Liuer veyne; or Me∣diana in the lest arme, shall bée ope∣ned. And if the Apostume sheweth vnder the right arme, let it bée as it is spoken of the left arme; and so of other places in which the Apostumation appeareth. And when∣soeuer Blood-letting is to bée vsed, let it bée alwayes done in opposite manner: And if hée that haue béene let blood be very weake, then may hée sléepe after the midst
of the day. And before the middest of the day hée ought to be in continuall motion, either riding or moderately walking. And if afterward, the Botch increaseth feare not: For it is a token, that Nature putteth out the venemous quality, and re∣storeth a man to soundnesse, then may you apply such remedies thereto as is aboue∣mentioned. And if any there bée, that shall receiue benefit and recouery by these Directions▪ First, let him thanke GOD, that ha created Medicine of the Earth to heale his people: and secondly, pray for mée Sinner the writer of this little Treatise, for to that intent I tooke the paines. FINIS.
