3732 S106547 99842261 6902
The true Souldiers Convoy. A Sermon preached upon the xvjth. day of May 1640, vpon a prayer day, for the Prin∣ces good successe in going forth to warre. By WILLIAM BRIDGE. Thou hast broken Rahab in pie∣ces as one that is slaine, thou hast scattered thine enemies with thy strong arme. Psal. 19. 10. IN ROTTERDAM. Printed for Thomas Lippagde and are to be sold at his house on the Iron Bridge, 1646.
To the Reader. REader; out of desire to the good of Gods people, and in respect of these trouble-some times, it was thought not alto∣gether unfit by some friends, to print these few notes, in reading of which thou art desired not to expect much compleatnes of de∣pendency or stile, as not being or∣dered to the presse by the author himselfe, but by a very weake hand: whatsoeuer therfore thou shalt find herein profitable, that improue: if any thing o∣therwise, that couer by Christian loue and the God of loue be with thee Amen.
Numbers cha: 10. the middle of the 35 verse. Rise up O Lord and let thine enemies be scattered. THis chap. delive∣reth it selfe into foure parts. In the First part the Author speaketh of the silver Trumpets and of the matter and use of them. Secondly he sheweth the march of the children of Israel under their seuerall standards. Thirdly he speaketh of a
conference had betweene Moses and Hobab vers. 29. Fourthly you haue Moses prayer: And they departed from the mount vers. 33. and the Arke of the couenant of the Lord went before them in the three dayes iourney, &c: And it came to passe when the Arke set forward, that Moses saide, Rise up O Lord and let thine enemies be scattered, when they remoued still they prayed, when they sett forth with their army, they used those words: Arise O Lord & let thine enemies be scattered: when they returned with their army at the latter end of the yeere, or at any time, they saide, Returne O Lord unto the many thousands of Israel. You haue here their going forth, arise O Lord &c & it is as
if hee had sayd thus: O Lord thou hast promised thy pre∣sence to thy people and there∣fore thou hast giuen them thine Arke, the outward signe of thy presence, now we are to goe forth to warre, and that is a dangerous worke, oh let us not goe alone without thee, but let us haue thy pre∣sence, wherefore arise O Lord and let thine enemies be scat∣tered; He doth not say thus, O Lord we entreate thee, giue us good munition or good prouision, or (that which the world calleth the nerues of ware) giue us money, but as if he would shew that Gods presence is most desireable to an army, & that Gods presēce is their munition and provision and containeth all things, he saith Arise O Lord &c.
These words containe some thing implyed, and something expressed: implied two things. First that God hath ene∣mies, that seems to be granted. Secondly that God sleepeth to his enemies, therefore hee saith arise, these implied: ex∣pressed three things. First the matter of the peti∣tion, and that is that God would arise. Secondly the effect of Gods rising, that his enemies may be scattered. Thirdly the occasion of this petition, that is their going forth to warre: from these wordes, then Moses said Accordingly there are fue notes or obserua∣tions that I intend (God wil∣ling) to run through at thi time.
First that God himselfe hath many enemies. Secondly as God hath ene∣mies, soe sometime he sleepeth to all their enmitie. Thirdly though God sleepeth and they worke, yet there is a time when they shall be scatte∣red, and when God ariseth, they are scattered. Fourthly our prayers awaken God. Fiftly, when the people of the land goe forth to warre, Gods people should go forth to prayer First, God himselfe hath ma∣ny enemies, Let none wonder at this, nay rather wonder that God hath any friendes in the world it is so wicked, the Scripture is full for it, in that Psal. 8: vers. 2. Out of the mouthes of babes and suck∣lings hast thou ordained strength
because of thine enemies. Psal 37. 20. But the wicked shall perish and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat of lambes. Psal. 74. 4. Thine ene∣mies roare, &c. Ye know the Psal. For loe thine nemies O Lord, for loe thine enemies. Ps. 9. 9 Rea 1. Those that ae in league and covenant one with ano∣ther, haue common friends & common enemies. Gods chil∣dren are in covenant with God, and therefore they having ene∣mies, God hath enemies, 2 There is a special contrariety betweene God & the world, the flesh lusteth against the spirit and the spirit against th Gal. 5. 17. flesh, for they are contrarie: take but this one instance in this matter of contrariety, to see how contrary God and the godly are to the Deuill and
the wicked. Let a thing be ne∣ver so bad, God and the godly will turne it to good and Gods honour: Let a thing be never soe good, the Deuill and wic∣ked men will turne it to bad and Gods dishonour: now en∣mity being nothing els but en∣livened contrariety, and there being such a contrariety be∣tweene God and the world, it cannot be but that God should haue many enemies,  3. That which maketh a thing so, is more so, if a man loath a bea∣ker or vessell because phisick hath been in it, he loatheth the phisick much more, and if the world hate the godly because they are godly, then they hate God much more, now the god∣ly haue many enemies and that for this reason because they are godly, therefore God himselfe
hath more. Further when two are at a great distance and neither doe yeeld, buckle nor comply to, or with one another, there must needes be a greate enmity: now saith our Sauiour Christ you cannot loue God and Mammon, you must loue the one and hate the other, God will haue no complying: and for this reason the Senate of Rome, as the Historians giue it, would not acknowledg Jesus Christ to be a God, because he is such a one, (said they) as if we acknowledg him to be God, he will not let us acknowledge other Gods, other Gods will comply & be content we shall acknowledg others also, but for this Christ, if we acknowledge him we must acknowledge none other, now God is very
incomplying in all his wayes therefore certainly God him∣selfe must needs haue many e∣nemies; & very deadly:  Hence we may see that it is no strange and new thing for us that are the people of God to meete with enemies: why should we be discouraged though we meete with enemies? Are we better then our Lord and Mai∣ster? shall God himselfe haue many enemies, and shall we thinke to haue none? It was Inimi∣ces ha∣beo the complainte of a heathen man, I haue enemies, his friend standing by gaue him this answere, but that s worse that thou hast no friēds, though sed pejus est quod a∣micos non ha∣bes. a man haue many enemies, yet if he hath some faithfull friends he may comfort himselfe thus, though I haue most bitter and vile enemies, yet I haue as
fast & sure friends: so that here is a further argument to shore up our unbeleeuing harts God himselfe hath many enemies. But my enemies are such as doe pretend friendship: And truely soe are Gods enemies such as doe pretend loue. I pray you tell mee, I put it to your owne hearts: who are those that doe pretend more loue to God then the breakers of the second commandement, that doe make images? and wherefore doe they soe: Say they we will haue an image of Christ, wheresoeuer we become, that we may always be put in mind of Christ, what a mighty pre∣tence of loue is here, & yet the breakers of the second com∣mandement are saide to be ha∣ters of God: it is not saide soe
of the breakers of any of the other commandements that they are haters of God, but of those that breake the second commandement: visiting the iniquity of the fathers vpon the children unto the third & fourth generation of them that hate mee: soe that though they pretend most loue yet they are the most haters. But for my enemies the Lord knoweth I haue done them no wrong but good: Ans. I pray you hath not God done good unto his ene∣mies? God hath many ene∣mies? and what hurt hath God done them? Haue you ene∣mies? God hath soe: Haue you many enemies? God hath soe: Haue you many false e∣nemies God hath soe: remember this doctrine, God
himselfe hath many enemies: the second obseruation is, As the Lord hath many ene∣mies, soe he is pleased for a time to sleepe un his enemies: he sleepeth, therefore it is saide here arise: arising is opposed to sleeping, Lord why slee∣pest Ps. 44. 23. thou? but what is that? not that we should understand it literally, for so the Prophet derided Baals Priests; cry aloud it may be your God 1. King 1. 27. sleepeth: but understand it metaphorically: A man is saide to be a sleepe when he is so intense about one busines that hee doth not regard another, that busines which hee doth not meddle with he is saide to be a sleepe to: soe now when God shall haue many enemies, and they shall blas∣pheme his name and reuile his
people, and hinder his ordi∣nances: and God shall be deafe to all their blasphemies reui∣lings, and all their wickednesse when they shall persist in evill and bring their cked devises to passe, and yet God shalbe as it were blinde to all their dealings, then God sleepeth to the enmi∣ty of his enemies: would you know the reasons? First of all, it may be the enemies are not yet great e∣nough for God to contend with: the Eagle doth not hunt after flies, and a lyon doth not harnesse himselfe to bat∣taile against a poore worme: it may be the malice of the enemy is not yet great enough, & soe is not a sitt ob∣ject for the greate indignation of the greate God, and there∣fore
God suffereth them, to go on that it might be a greater and a more full object to beare his indignation. Againe, therefore God suf∣fereth this and seemeth to sleepe for a time: because his people are not provoked e∣nough against their enemies, as it was with the childrē of Is∣rael that went against Beniamin & fell before thē twice, if Israel had overcome them the first time, they would not haue beene soe provoked against them, to haue cutt them all of as they were, but being beaten by them twice: thereby they were provoked to their destruction, so God suffereth his enemies to pre∣vaile and sleepeth to the case of his people for a time, because the harts of his people are not
stirred enough against their enemies to cutt them of fully when that is done then God a∣waketh. Again somtimes God slee∣peth because his people sleep to him, and say arise to some∣thing els, They sleep to him, It was the speech of an Empe∣rour when he was in prison, Oh (saide he) when I was in my pallace, I hoped soe much in men that I neglected trust∣ing in God: but now I am in prison, I may hope lesse in mē and trust more in God: so it may bee there is a time when Gods people doe fall a sleepe to God: hope to much in men, and not enough in God: Now saith the Prophet, Woe to him that Hab. 2. 19. saith to the stone arise, shall God arise to his people when
they say to the stone, arise? Shall God arise for his people when they sit downe, and rise not up themselues? Brethren faith is prayer in the coales, & prayer is faith in the flāe: now it may be mens faith doth not burne out enough, it burneth dark, they pray, but are not hot in prayer, they liue, but they do not liue out of themselues in God enough, wherefore that God may awaken his people, he sleepeth himselfe. Fourthly, somtimes it is for this end, because the pit of his enemies is not yet digged: consider that 94. Psal. 12. 13. Blessed is the man whome thou chastenest O Lord, and teachest him out of thy law that thou mayest giue him rest from the dayes of adversity, untill the pitt be digged for the wicked,
there is a time when the pitt of the wicked is digging, and all that time Gods people may be in suffering, God suffereth the wicked to run away with the baite, and doth not yet draw them, because they are not full on the hooke, but when they haue swallowed the hooke, then he will draw them. Hence we may see what the reason is many times why there is so much evill in the Churches, and why the ene∣mies preuaile so much, so long God is the strength of the Churches, and our strength sleepeth somtimes upon all the afflictions of the Churches, we are apt to be much discouraged like the disciples who whilest our Saviour was in the storme  sleep: they came running in all hast to him, saying, carest
thou not that we perish? so it is many times when a storm ari∣seth upon the Church, God se∣meth to sleepe, and wee run in hast to God, and are apt to charge God: Lord carest thou not that we perish, but peace peace, he sleepeth only, he will awake shortly, you shall see it, and they shall feele it, for the third point tels us that. Though God seem to sleep, & his enemies prevaile, yet there s a time when they shall be scat¦tered, and when God ariseth they are scattered: there are twop arts in this doctrine, J will handle them severally. First. Though the enemies of the Lord do prevaile, and God seemeth to sleepe, yet there is atime when they shallbe scat∣tered: In that 68. Psal. 1. You haue the same words tha are
here: Let God arise, let his ene∣mies be scattered, in the follo∣wing part of the Psalme, 12. vers. it is said, King sofarmies did flee apace, in the Hebrew it is they fled they fled, fled is twice, why soe? That is, they did flee very hastily, and they fled most confusedly, they fled alwaies, they fled, they fled, noting the greatnesse of the flight. Reasons: First If it were not so how should God be honoured in the world: God is resolved to recover his honour, his truth, and his justice out of the hands of the world: saith the Psalmist He will wash his feet in the blood of the wicked, so that a Psal. 58 10. man shall say verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth: But did they not know
it before that God ruleth in the earth? True, But men will not say al that for God alwaies which their hearts know; and the glut of prosperity often doth quench their knowledge, but when Gods judgements are abroad then men shall say (he doth not say godly men; but then men shall say) though they be but bare mē they shall say &c. Oh it is a sweete time when ungodly men shall own their owne principles, and if you look into the Psalme, you Ps 68. 11 shall find when the enemies of the Church are destroyed, that God hath many prechers made that doe teach his praises, saith the Psalmist ver. 12. The Lord gaue the word greate was the company of those that published it: Kings of armies did flee a∣pace, and she that tarried at
home devided the spoile. The words in the originall are very significant and doe note two things:  First the word which you read company; in the He∣brew it is Army: great was the army of preachers; an ar∣my of Preachers is a greate matter, nay it is a great matter to haue seven or eight good preachers in a great army, but to haue a whole army of prea∣chers, that is glorious:  Secon. It doth note out the heartines of this preaching Army, for the word (Nephesh soule) is to be understood as in that place of Ecclesiastes, it is said there The wordes or book of the Prea∣cher. Eccl. 11, which being in the femi∣nine gender doth suppose Ne∣phesh and as if hee should say (as Vatablus hath it) the words or booke of him that hath a preaching soule or hart, or the words
of a preaching soule or hart, so here where it is said great is the the army of preachers, the word being in the feminine gender, it is as if he should say, great is the army of preaching soules, whose very heats with in them shall preach of the Lords workes, now my bre∣thren it is much to haue a prea¦ching army, but if this army shall with hart & soule preach of Gods praise, O that is a bles∣sed thing: yet thus shall it bee when the enemies of God shall be destroyed, and there∣fore seeing God will not loose all those sermons of his owne prayses, in due time the ene∣miēs of the Church shalbe scattered. All the plots and projects of Gods enemies ly under a
curse, now the curse scattereth, and the bleffing gathereth, when God blessed, then the people were gathered, when God curseth, then they are scat∣tered: you know when Jacob was to blesse his children, in steade of blessing Levi, he see∣meth Ge. 49. 7 to pronounce a curse u∣pon them, that they should be scattered in Ifrael, surely it is a part of the curse to be scatte∣red, and the enemies of God and of his people are alwayes under the curse, and (as a lear∣ned holy divine of your owne hath it) they are never prayed for, but looke as it is with some grasse that groweth upon the house toppe, though it bee higher then that which growes in the field, yet noe man prayes for it, or
noe man saith, the Lord blesse it, but the grasse and corne that growes in the field, the men that come by say; there is a good crop of corne the Lord blesse it, soe though wicked men and the enemies of the Church doe perke up higher then the rest; yet they are ne∣ver under prayer, but alwayes under the curse; and therefore no wonder though they bee scattered: God will lay mens wayes upon their owne heades; the fish shall be boyled in the wa∣ter it lived in, and men de∣stroyed by the same way they walked in, therefore Psal. 59. Psa. 59. you shall see how sin is answe∣red with the like punishment, the Psalmist speaking con∣cerning his enemies ver. 6. 7. They returne at evening they
make a noise like a dog and goe round about the city, behold they belch out with their mouth, swordes are in their lippes, that is, they revile, they jeare and scorn at the godly there is their sin, now looke into the latter end of the Psalme at the 14. vers. you shall see their answe∣rable punishment, And at evening they shall returne and make a noise like a dog, and go about the citie, let them wander up and downe for meate and grudge if they be not satisfyed as they went about the citie barking and making a nois like dogs so shall they go about the city howling like dogs, thus God will answer men in their owne kind: was not Adoni∣bezek punished in his owne Jud. 1. 7 kind? Egipt in its own kinde? And the Iewes of old in their owne
now kind? this is Gods method still, and therefore if you com∣pare the 8 Rev. and 9. cha. with the 16 of the Rev. You shall see that the trumpets and the vialls are alike, & some take them to be all one; but the trumpets note out the time when the sins are commited, and the vialls the time when the punishments are inflicted, but the evils mentioned in both are much alike, because God proportioneth mens pu∣nishment to their owne sins, now the enēies of the Church haue scatterd themselves up & down to do mischiefe, how are the Jesuits & the locusts of our time scattered up and downe in all places? they haue scatte∣red Gods people and they scat∣ter their owne sinnes where∣soever they become, there∣fore
there must come a scatte∣ring time for themselues also for that is equall. You will say doe wee not see the contrary? our eyes are witnesses of the contrary, wee se the people of God are scattered, but wee doe not see the enemies are scattered. It is true: Gods people are scattered, and truely it is the remainder of the curse upon them, for which wee are to be humbled, though God provi∣des a place for us in the world yet certainly it is some part of the curse to haue our names changed from Israel to Jezreel: this is Gods way, that what uill hee doth afterward bring upon his enemies, hee doth many times, first bring it upon his owne friendes, by his and their enemies, he first slee∣peth
to them, then hee awa∣keth for them; but to answer; Gods people are often scatte∣red but though they be scatte∣red, yet there is much dif∣ference between their and the worlds scattering: The scatte∣ring of Gods children is tur∣ned into a blessing to them, the scattering of his enemies is a curse and so it endeth, a plaine instance for it you haue in Le∣vi, sayeth Iacob Let them be de∣vided Gen 29. 7. in Iacob and scattered in Israel, yet that prooued a great blessing, for the tribe of Levi being scattered among all the tribes, by that means all the tribes had preachers: so now it is in the scattering of the Saintes, though they b scattered into divers places, yet they are made thereby a blessing to many coutries:
hereby they carry truthes into other places; hereby they are cleansed from their own filthi∣nesse, herby they learn to walk more humbly, herby they learn to dye daily to the world and outward comforts, herby they are weaned from their freinds and all naturall engagements; hereby they are made more conformable to Jesus Christ, who was a stranger upon earth hereby they meete with many experiences, hereby they see many promises fullfilled, here by they enioy the ordinances of God in a purer manner then before, so that all their scatte∣rings are blessings to them. Though the people of God be scattered yet they are ga∣thered againe. For great shall Hos. 1. 11. be the day of Jezreel. yet more fully Ier 23 2 3 4 Therfore thus
saith ye Lord God of Israel against the Pastors that feed my people, ye have scattered my flock & dri¦ven thē away & haue not visited them, Behold J will visit vpon you the evill of your doing, saith the Lord, And J will gather the remnant of my flocke out of all countries whether I haue dri¦ven them, and will bring them againe to their foldes, and they shall bee fuitfull and increase, and I will set up shephards over them which shall feed them, and they shall feare no more nor bee dismayed, neither shall they bee lacking, saith the Lord. Yea they are therefore scattered that they may be better gathe∣red. 34. Ezek: 11. 17. Thus saith the Lord God, Behold I even I will both searche my sheepe and seeke them out as a shepheard seeketh out his flocke in the day
that hee is among his sheep that are scattered, thus saith the Lord God, behold I iudge be∣tweene cattell and cattell, be∣tweene the rammes and the hee goates, before their scattering the goates were mingled with the flock; upon their gathering, the goates were separated: a good garment may be rip∣ped into pieces, that it may be better sewed, good is that speech of Augustine, He that Qui tru cidat noncon∣siderat quomo∣modo la¦niat, Qui cu∣rat con∣siderat quomo∣do scat. killeth considereth not how he slasheth and rendeth, but he that cutteth to cure, conside∣reth how he cutteth, or thus, Suppose a man be to cut two men; the one to cure him, the other to kill him, that man which he cutteth to cure, he considereth how he cut∣teth him, but he taketh no care how he slasheth him
whom he intendeth to kill, so doth God deale in the cuttings and scatterings of his own children, and the vile world: or thus, an army you know, may be scattered two waies, The Souldiers when they come from their trenches, every one goeth to his hutt, and the whole army is in some measure scattered and devi∣ded, but in order, this is an or∣derly scattering: but when they are routed, that is another scattering, wherin there is no order, Gods people are scatte∣red as those that go to their huts, but the wicked are scat∣tered otherwise, their scatte∣ring is a full routing, that is never gathered, this is the punishment of the enemies of the Church, they shall be scattered.
If so: Hence we may see what a lamentable thing it is to be an enemy of God, this is the portion of all the ene∣mies of God, they shall be scattered, lamentable is their condition therfore, that are Gods enemies. Brethren, God is the best friend, and the worst enemy, if God be my friend, what though J haue many enemies? afflictions shall be all rated of in due time, as the dog is when he falleth upon a friend: if the dog fall upon a thiefe or an e∣nemy, we let him alone, he hath leaue to worry him; when afflictions seaze upon Gods people, in dew time they are chidden of; but when they fall upon Gods enemies, they shall not be rated of, they they may worry them, and the
venome of their teeth shall a∣bide in them to all eternity. the text saith as for those mine enemies &c. It is some griefe to be slaine before iustice, but before mercy it selfe, that is more grevious, it is some griefe to be slaine before those that cannot help: but to haue help stand by and not help, that is most bitter, such is Christ, he is our help, he is our mercifull high Priest, and yet he saith, As for those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring Luke 19 27 hither and slay them before me, oh what a sad thing it is to be Gods enemy. Quest. But who are those enemies? Answ. You will all say thus, that if a man seeth the picture of another, and assoon
as hee seeth it, hee falleth a tearing of it, and the more like the picture is to the man, the more hee teareth it: surely this man was an enemy to him whom the picture is like unto, so when men shall fall a tea∣ring of Gods people, and therefore because they are godly, are not they enemies to God? Secondly. Consider Psl. 68. 21. ther is a plain place to shew you who are Gods enemies, saith the Psalmist, But God shall wound the head of his enemies and the hairy Psal. 68. 21. scalp of such an one as goes on still in his trespasses. Such as go on still in their trespasses, are Gods enemies, there is no child of God but may and doth fall into sin, he may aile in his speech, and in his
practise, but it is the character 1 Ioh. 5. 19 of the world to ly in wickednes. and therefore know you such an one as hath been a drunkard and a drunkard still, a swearer, eight, nine, or ten yeares ago, and a swearer still, a Sabbath-breaker, a lyer, an adulterer a great while agoe, and so still, that man is an enemy, and in due time the Lord will wounde the hairy scalpe of such a ruffian, for he is an e∣nemy. Thirdly When men can∣not endure to heare of th well-fare, and good success of the Churches, and of th ordinances of God, that is  signe they are Gods enemies,  man loueth to heare good  him that he loueth, if a m loue God, he loueth to hea good of God, and all that b
longeth to him, of the chur∣ches and of all the ordinances, but when men heare of good newes of the Churches, and of the ordinances, and do se∣cretly grudge, repine and wish it otherwise, these are now secret enemies, and will be open. Fourthly. The Scripture phrase telleth us who are Gods enemies: saith the Psalmist, Lord make plaine thy way be∣fore Ps. 5. 8. my face, because of mine enemies. in the Hebrew it is, Lord make plain thy way before me, because of my observers, malicious observation is a signe of enmity, and therfore when men shall diligently ob∣serue, and lay waite for the haltings of Gods people, and are glad to find any thing to raise a scandall, more rejoycing
at the scandall, then greeving for the sin: those (as beastes Quitan quam famelici porci immer∣gunt se, in sterco¦ra sanc∣torum et exjis delicias faciunt Luther in Gen. 9. which seek for the excrements of men to nuzzle in them) are Gods enemies, and God is theirs Fiftly. Those that hinder the great proceedings, that God hath in the world, are his enemies, In the restauration and rebuilding of the Temple, God had many enemies: Tobiah, Sanballat, and many others; how did it appeare? they did out of malice labour to make the work of God to cease: so when men in their generations and times, shall 5 Nehem. 6. 1. maliciously labour to cause the workes of God to cease, and hinder the great procee∣dinges, which God hath on foot in the world, these are enemies and none but ene∣mies,
now God is and hath been working of many great workes in the world; if any mans heart tell him that he hath thus taken up armes a∣gainst God, let him lay down his weapons, and humble himselfe, for God will be a∣boue him, God is greater, and will break him; The second part of the doctrine follow∣eth. viz. Tht these enenmies, when God ariseth, are scattered; Gods rising is the cause of their scattering. First. When God ariseth, then all his host ariseth, when a man riseth, then all his cloathes arise: when the sub∣ject ariseth, all the accidents rise; when the Prince in the Field ariseth, all his Souldiers arise; when God ariseth, then
all his followers arise, and when they arise the enemies fly, and so are scattered. Secondly Consider but the nature of his enemies as they are described in Scrip∣ture, they are compared to waxe before the fire, though Ps. 68. 2. waxe may lye a while there and not melt whilest the fire is not blown up, yet when the fire flameth, the waze melteth; they are compared to the Jude. 13. waues of the Sea, that roare whilest they are in the Sea, yet when they come to the shore, they break; they are compa∣red to smoak, which though Psa. 68. 2. it rise like a dark cloud, yet is soon scattered and consu∣med by the puffe of the wind; they are compared to vapors, Hos. 13 3. mists and clouds: which though they may seem to
threaten the earth with some great stom, yet when the sun ariseth in its full heat, then are they scattered, such waxe such waues, such smoake, such vapours and mists are the Lords enemies; soon there∣fore scattered when he ariseth. Obiect. But though it may be easy (in regard of Gods power) to scatter the enemies of the Churches; yet when we look upon the condition of the Churches, as they are in themselues, their delive∣rance is very difficult, it is an unlikly thing that the distress∣ed Churches should be deli∣vered as the matter now stan∣deth with them, when were the enemies of the Church more prevailing then now they are? Answ. So it must be; what
is more unlikely, then that a dead man who lieth upon the graues mouth, should be rai∣sed up to life, and to such life as to ascend, and go up to heaven, yet such is the delive∣rance of the Church when it cometh; Reu. 11. 12. It was Rev. 11 12. a very unlikely thing, that Iudah should ever come out of Babilon, the Iewes did de∣spaire of it, and therefore as a man that thinketh he shall ne∣ver returne the way that he goeth, taketh no heed to his way, observeth not by what turnings, windings and marks he commeth: so were they in their journey and way to Ba∣bilon: wherfore saith Jeremy, Set thee up way markes, make Jeremy 31. 21 and 22. thee high heapes, set thine heart towards the high way: even the way which thou wentest, turne
thee again oh virgin Israel: turn again to these cities &c. For the Lord hath created a new thing in the earth, A wo∣man shall compasse a strong man: as if he should say thus, you think your seleus in a very weak and low condition, the enemy strong, and you in their hands, well, but the time shall come, that a woman shall lay siedge to a strong man: Faemina virum fortem Angusti∣abit, Ps. 1 18. for that word read to compasse, in the Hebrew sig∣nifieth also to compasse by way of Siedge, and that word read man (in your translati∣ons) signifieth a strong man, and the sence of all is, that those which are as weak as women, shall beset, incom∣passe and beleaguer those that are strong and valiant men, but
we see no likelyhood might they say of this, No, it may be so, but saith God, I will do a new thing: but there is no meanes. Answ. It mattereth not, J will create a new thing: I that drew once the world out of nothing, will draw the delive∣rance of the Churches also out of nothing: I will be a creating God to the Churches though they be never so low, was it not an unlikly thing for Peter to be delivered that very night Acts 12. 5. 6. when he was to die the next day; First he was in close prison, Secondly he was fast in chaines Thirdly he was there kept with Souldiers. Fourthly he had rough keepers to keep the prison doores. Fiftly he had to go through the first and second watch. Lastly he
was to passe the ion gate that leadeth into the citie, yet prayer conveyed him through all these parties of opposition, the Church prayeth and Peter commeth, but what is this to us? we may not expect mira∣cles now. Ans. yes, we even we are commanded to com∣mit our soules into the hands of 1. Pet. 4. 19. God in well doing, as unto a faithfull creator: not as unto a redeemer only, but of a cre∣ator, who hath promised his creating strength to supply us in our distresses, and therefore saith, into the hands of a faith∣full creator; well then, though the afflictions of the Churches be never so great, let us not mourne as those that are with∣out hope, for God can do it with ease, and much facility: he is our creator he will do it
in truth, and in much faith∣fulnesse for he is our faithfull creator, into whose hands we are to commit our selues and the condition of all the Churches. Thirdly. When God ari∣seth, then God appeareth; now the enemies of God can∣not endure the sight of God; When Iohn the beloved disci∣ple of Christ (who had the honour to be trusted with the book of the Revelation) saw but one Angell. Rev. 22. 8. he fell downe and trembled: Rev. 2 2 8. Iohn was a good man, he had not a guilty Conscience, yet when an Angell did but ap∣peare: John falleth down, how shal men tremble when the great God shall appear, and they shall appeare before him in all their guiltinesse, surely
they will tremble and feare then, and that their feare will end in scattering. Beloved we may see what an easy thing it is for God to scatter the enemies of the Church, though the afflicti∣ons of the Church be never so greate, and the condition of the Saintes be neuer so meane, Is it not an easy thing for a strong man to rise when hee is free and healthy: is it not an easy thing for fire to dissolue the wax: Is it not an easy thing for a lion to teare the caull of a mans heart. What is more strong then a lion, what more thin then the caull of a mans heart. And God hath said it: I will rend the cawle of their Hos 13 8. Iudg. 16. 9. heart and there will I devoure them like a lion: was it not an easy thing for Samson in all his
strength to breake those cords and withs where with he was tyed, Iesus Christ is our spiri∣tuall Samson, and though his body the Church be bound with the withs and cords of the Philistims, yet he can easi∣ly arise, cracke, and breake, them in pieces, though they be never so strong, Is it not an easy thing for a man to open his hand, God openeth his hand and wee are satisfied, Is it not an easy thing for a man to set his face against another? God only setteth his face a∣gainst his enemies and they are scattered, O with what infi∣nite facility can God helpe the church: if his servants had noe credit with him, or if hee could not help them but with much difficulty, there were room for our discouragments,
ut it is not so he speaketh the word only, hisseth, stampeth, iseth and wee are helped. In the Second place Hence ee what a necessity there is hat wee should ponder, and bserue the workes of God; nd the iudgments of the ord; in these great volums, ee may read much of God; when God ariseth, then God  to bee seene, and seene e∣ecially, when Gods enemies re scattered, then hee ariseth: Now there are three sorts of eople that are too blame ere, as concerning the obser∣ation of the Lords workes, nd his great iudgments, the rst are those that the prophet omplaines of▪ when the hand Isa. 26 11  the Lord is lifed up on high ey will not behold his Maies∣ An other are those that the
Psalmist strikes at in the 2 psa 10 vers: Be wise therefore O yee Ps, 2. Kings verse 12 kisse the sonne least hee bee angry and ye perish in the way, who seeing and obseruing God fetching his stroke at a land or people, will not stand out of Gods way, and reach; the third sorte are those that degrade the workes of God and nickname them, saying they are none of Gods workes but workes of Satan, like the Jewes and Pharises who when Lazarus was raised from the graue by a miracle would haue killed Lazarus out of spight to Christ, so these men when God hath wrought gloriously for the conversion of a poore sinner, or the destruction of his vile enemies, doe what they can to put Gods worke to death,
calling that hipocricy which is Gods grace, that obstinacy which is good conscience, and that chance which is Gods glory; But let all these con∣sider that one place in the Ps. 28. 5. because they regard not the workes of the Lord nor the operation of his hands he shall destroy them, and not build them up there is more in it then wee are aware of; who doth not desire to be build vp; wherefore do many men of knowledg and learn∣ing study and take so much paines wearing out their flesh, but that they may be built vp in name and credit, wherefore doe you trade vp and downe the world but that you may be built up in your estate, and what is that which men feare more then destruction; de∣struction
is finall ruine, now my brethren if the great workes of the Lord bee done before you and you do not obserue thm, you cannot be built up, and if you will not at∣tend the operation of the Lords hands you shall be de∣stroyed; Gods judgments will take hold on those that will not giue heed to his judg∣ments, a man may be destroy∣ed for not observing another destruction, it is a fearful iudgment to haue no judge∣ment, and he hath no judge∣ment that doth not minde th Lords judgment, it is mad the Character of the Saintes i the latter times of the worl that they are able to sing t song of Moses the servant  God and the song of the La saying, Great & marvelous a Rev. 15 3. 4.
thy workes Lord God Almighty, iust and true are thy waies thou King of Saintes: who shall not fear thee O Lord and glorify thy Name, for thou onely art holy, for all Nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy Judgments are made mani∣fest. Quest, But suppose evill befall other men, it may bee that it falleth out by common providence, how shall I say that God is risen, & to be seen, & seen specially in a judgment, and when may a judgment be said to come in way of a judgment. Answ. First when wic∣ked men are snared in the workes of their own hands, then God is seen, and seene ap∣parently Psal. 9. 16. The Ps. 9. 16 Lord is known by the judgment hee
that he executeth, the wicked is snared in the worke of his own hands. Higgajon Selah: there is not such a clause again, in all the whole scripture that J remember, you haue Selah in many places, but you haue not those two wordes Higga∣jon Selah in any other place: the word Higgajon commeth from the Hebrew word Hagah that signifieth to meditate, and Higgajon is Meditandum a∣liquid, a thing worth our me∣ditation, or as much as if he should say, this is a matter of speciall meditation, that God is to be known by the judge∣ment that he executeth, when the wicked are snared in the work of their own hands, whē therefore wicked men begi a work against the people o God, and it wheeleth abou
upon their own heades, inso∣much as they are taken and snared in their owne practises, then God is seen specially, and known by the judgment that he excecuteth. Higgajon Selah. Answ. 2. Then God is specially to be seen, when the iudgment lyeth beyond the reach of second causes, and is greater then the stock of the second cause cn beare, Sam∣sons strength was a judgment to the Philistines, How was God to be seen in that? yes, for Samson was the strongest man that ever was, yet his mother (when she was bree∣ding him) was commanded to drink no wine, or strong drink, Iudges 13. 4. nor to eat any unclean thing: (which also did include strong meat) God would not haue
Samsons strength imputed to the strength of second causes, out of the weak came strong, the second cause was not able to bear so strong effect, his strength was their iudgment, their vexation, their scourge, and this their judgment lay beyond the reach of the se∣cond cause, therefore was God seen herein apparently: where there is any thing of Gods creating power, there is God plainly to be seen, now where the effect lieth beyond the bounds of the second cause, Gods creating power is seen for to raise that, and therefore if in any evils, which befall the children of men, the strength of the second cause cannot reach them, there you may say: Oh my soule here is Gods judgment, Gods plague,
Gods hand, hre is God seen, and seen specially, here God is risen. Answ. 3. When Gods judgments for mens sin, do so find them out, as they are their owne blabs, their owne accusers, their own condem∣ners, and somtime their own executioners, then God is to be seen, and seen especially: so with Judas, and many others it is written of Iulian the apo∣stata, (who raised an army a∣gainst the Persians, in the fight he was stucken, whether with an arrow or otherwise J say not, but) being sorely woun∣ded, he took a handfull of his own blood, and flung it into the aire, saying: Vicisti Gali∣lee, thou hast overcome mee O Galilean: you haue many stories to this purpose in the
book of Martirs, recorded by Maister Foxe: J will name but that one, of that vile wretch, who dealt so injuriously with the Martir James Abbes, who after all his base usage of that good man, was taken with a strang kind of Phrenzy, and cryed out Iames Abbes is sa∣ved and I am damned, Iames Abbes is saved and I am dam∣ned, and so died: others were not privy to all his injuries, but his owne guilt made him his own blab, so now when a mans sin commeth, and arest∣eth him, and his heart and con∣science is upon the rack conti∣ally, he bursting out into hide∣ous outcries, being his own ac∣cuser, his own condemner, or his owne executioner, there God is seen, and seen appa∣rently.
Answ. 4. Further when the worke of the Lord is carri∣ed with such a strong hand, as cannot be resisted, there God is seen: I will worke, and who Jsa. 43 13 shall let saith God. Answ. 5. Then a judgment commeth in way of a judg∣ment, when it maketh way to a further judgment, as when God giveth in mercy, he gi∣veth that he may giue, so when he smiteth injudgment, he smi∣teth that he may smite, he mak∣eth way to his anger, when he is angry indeed, and when you see this: then say, here is God seene and seene especially, now God is risen, Blessed are all they that trust in him. Quest. But how shall we raise God, that he may be seen in the world, for the good of
the Churches? Answ. The next point tel∣leth us: viz.  Our prayers doe excite, raise, and stir up God to the scattering and destructi∣on of our enemies; I will not spend much time in the proof of this; you all know the para∣ble of the unjust judge, and you all know the promise of the just God, to heare prayer: Brethren, is God able to scat∣ter his enemies? Is God migh∣ty? Is God all sufficient? Hath God power enough to do it? God is pleased to make over his power, his wisdome; his mercy to our prayers, who doth not know what credit prayer hath in heaven, and what strength in erth, the truth is, prayer may do any thing that is reasonable with God; And if you aske prayer by
what authority it doth all, it will shew you its commission in that place: 2. Chron. 7. 1. 2 compared with 2. Chron. 6. Where God wrought a mira∣cle, to shew that he would answer prayer. Quest. But you will say, can any prayer do this, ex∣cite, stirre up and awaken God? Answ. 1. No; But it must be a crying prayer, if vi∣olence be offered to a man in his house, and he doth not cry for helpe, helpe commeth not in presently, but if there be the eues in the house, and he putteth his head out at win¦dow, and cry murder, murder, men will breake up the dores, and come in presently. Answ. 2. Besides, they must be selfwakening prayers,
that prayer will neuer waken God, that doth not waken your selues, and that prayer will neuer stirre and raise God, that do not stirre and raise your owne soules. Thirdly It must be a selfe de∣nying prayer, you know the case betwene Moses, and Israel Israel had prouoked God, God sayes to Moses, that hee Exo: 32 10: 14. would consume Israel, and raise up him, to bee a greate people. Moses layes by all that, and he goes to God in prayer, and what arguments doth hee use, his prayer was but short, ad all the arguments were fetched from God, and the covenant, remember thy co∣venant with Abraham, and thou art a mercifull God, slow to anger. &c. not a word of him∣selfe, it was a self-denying pray∣er,
and was heard presently, in prayer, those arguments take most with God, that are from God. Fourthly Besides it must be a continued prayer: as Col: 4: 2: prayers are the Saints fact∣ors, and negotiate for them in heauen, therefore they must ly by it. Fifthly it must be where the man abideth in Christ, and Christ in him 15. Iohn. If y John 15 abide in mee, and my words a∣bide in you, yee shall aske what you will, and it shall bee done unto you: he doth not say if you abide in an tauerne or in an alehouse, or in such a vile course, but If ye abide in mee, and my wordes abide in you, then ye shall aske. Sixthly Reforming prayers are most preuailing Virtutes sunt
orationis fundamenta there is no energy in those prayers that are not strengthned with re∣formation, either your prayers will eat up your sins, or else your sins will make a hand of your prayers Isai. 58. 6. Loose the bands of wicked∣nes Isa. 58▪ 6. &c. Then shalt thou call and the Lord shall answer, thou shalt cry, and he shall say here am I; if thou &c. Though the lesson be never so good, yet if the instrument be out of tune, there is no harmony, and har∣monious prayer is very spee∣ding therefore. Lastly Jt must be joynt prayers, when the Church prayed, Peter was delivered. it is trve that their prayer was very urgent in it selfe, for according to the Originall i is, they continued in out-stret∣ched
prayer, it was holding prayer, for they continued, it was seasonable, for it was the night before his appointed death, yet withall the Church prayeth, and Peter commeth, one string doth not make the harmony, and the word is, If two or three of you shall Mat. 18. 16. make a Symphony Mat. 18. 19 It shall be done for you: God that is overcome by none, suf∣fereth Deus qui nul∣lis con∣trase su¦perari potest precibus supera∣tur Hieron. himself to be overcome by prayer, but your prayer must be full of himselfe, pres∣sing and a close leaguer, wher∣fore all you lie perdue, keep Centinell, or to speak in Scrip∣ture phrase Isay 62. 6. 7. All you that are watchmen upon the wals of Ierusalem, all the day and all the night continu∣ally, cease not, ye that are mindfull of the Lord, keepe
not, ye that are mindefull of the Lord, keepe not silence, And giue him no rest, till he repaire, and untill he set up Ierusalem the praise of the Lord. Vse Will prayer do it? Will prayer raise God, for the scattering of the enemies of the Churches? J beseech you in the name of God, let us consider where to lay the fault, and the blame of much of that evill, which is come upon the Churches, in these latter times when the defeate was lately before Antwerpe there was fault laid on such a man, and such a man, when we consider the afflictions of Germany, we are ready to say, if such a King or country had stepped in, all this evill had been prevented, the Palatinate
restored, and peace setled, but may we not rather say, if our prayers had stepped in, This word telleth us, that our pray∣ers do awaken God, and when God is awakened, then the enemies are destroyed, we see then in truth where the fault lyeth, our prayers haue not come in full enough, where∣fore the lesse we haue prayed before, the more let us pray now, pray in your closets, pray in your families, pray in the assemblies, pray alone, pray in company, pray for all the Churches, pray for Ger∣many, the first place of refor∣mation, pray for Holland your hiding place, and in all your prayers forget not England, still pray for England, take some motiues, First You are unnaturall,
if you pray not; it is repor∣ted of Croesus his sonne, that hee was dumbe: and see∣ing one about to kill his fa∣ther, though he had been al∣waies dumb before, yet then he burst forth into this speech, what will you kill Croesus? If you be in Christ, the Church of Christ is more to you then many Croesusses; your grace doth not extinguish nature, but advance it, helpe, and not hinder, a gracious heart can∣not be unnaturall though it loveth to be supernaturall. Secondly It is the proper∣ty of a good Christian, and of true grace, to obserue what worke God is doing, and to helpe on that worke: what God is doing in the world, and to help that on, what God is doing upon his own heart, and
to helpe that on, Oh Lord saith the soule, helpe mee, I will help thee; I will put my shoulder unto thy worke, as thou art pleased to put thy hand to my duty; now the great work which God is do∣ing in these times, is the pow∣ring out of the seven vials, Rev. 16. and if you look into the Rev. 5. 8. You shall finde that the saints prayers are their vials, help forward then Gods vials, with your viall, viall doth call for viall. Thirdly Either good and deliverance will come unto the Churches or els it will not; if it do not, you had need pray that your hearts may be sup∣ported in all and setled, prayer is a composing duty, and fully setling, if it doe come, you had neede pray that you may
haue the comfort of it, when it commeth, or els that you may not envy at those that haue prayed, for it is a hard thing for one that standeth Idle, not to envy at him that wor∣keth. Fourthly You do not loue the Churches if you doe not pray for them: He that loveth Ierusalem, prayeeh for the peace of Jerusalem: Doe you loue England? Doe you loue Ger∣many? Do ye loue Holland? Doe you loue the Churches, and your friends? He that lo∣veth Ierusalem, prayeth for it, and if you doe not pray for them, you haue no loue to them. Fiftly You cannot prosper if you do not pray, they shall prosper that loue thee: how loue thee? in praying for thee,
you cannot prosper if you pray not for the Churches, will you not pray then? Sixthly you are not Gods seruants, if you doe not pray for his servants; you are not Gods children, if you pray not for his children, if you mark that of the Psalmist; it is made an act of service, and a signe of a servant, to pitty the dust and stones of fallen Ierusa∣lem: saith he, thy servants pitty the dust therof, as if they were not servants that haue no pitty, I know you would not haue your livery taken from you, all things of the like na∣ture sympathize with one auo∣ther, if you haue the same na∣ture with the Saintes, you shall, you will, you must sympathyze with them in all conditions you cannot but
pray. Seventhly You cannot haue a part in the prayers of the Churches, unlesse you pray for the Churches, think upon this argument, can you be contented to loose your share in all the prayers of the Saintes, an action there, is better then an action in the East-India company, there stock is great, if your stock go not in, you cannot haue a part with them, and that is evill. Eightly If you pray not for the Churches your own selfe∣ish prayers will be bootlesse, when a man shall pray much for his owne family, his own name, or estate, his owne child that lieth a dying, and will not pray for the dying Churches, this is a self-ish du∣ty,
a carnall selfe-ish spirit is very loathsome in what is spi∣rituall, and what are you the better for your rich cabbin, your warme cabbin, your neate cabbin, if your ship sinke. Ninethly Consult with the 13 chapter of Nehemiah 1. 2. There you find it writ∣ten, Neh. 13 1. 2. that the Ammonite and the Moabite should not come into the Congregation of God for ever: what was the reason? because they met not the childrē of Israel with bread and with water. He that will not meet with distressed Israel, with such reliefe as he may, is an unfit man to haue a name in a Church of Christ, and it is unfit he should come into the house of God for ever, wher∣fore as ever you desie to haue
a name in Gods house, pray, pray, oh now pray, you may with this bread and water meet with Israel, and in me∣ting with them, you do meet with Christ. Tenthly The price of the welfare peace, and good of the Churches is now rising, Fugian∣tia se∣quimur. the time may come it may not be purchased or bought in by prayer. J remembcr I haue read of a man that brought the booke of the Sibils unto the Emperour or King of the Ro∣manes, and desired a great price for those books, the Emperour refused, he goeth away, burneth halfe the books doubled the price, and then commeth to the Emperour, and offered him them at that rate, the emperour refuseth again, he went away, and burnt
the halfe of those books which were left, and doubled the price, which the Emperour considering, gaue him the whole money which he desi∣red, so now it may be, you may haue the welfare, the peace, the life of the Churches for prayer, time may come wher∣in though you adde to your prayer, your estates, to your estates, your liberties, to your liberties, all your welfares, and to your welfares your lives, yet you may goe with∣out it, now it may bee had at this good rate, will you not take this good commodity whilest it is offe∣red to you? Tenthly Jt may be the bu∣sinesse 10. of the Churches stayeth upon your prayer, if that mid∣wife would come away, the
woman would be delivered, Reu. 7. Foure Angels were Reu. 7. sent out to punish the world, and after that a fift Angel is commissioned to go bid them hold their hand, till the ser∣vants of the living God are sealed in their foreheades: An∣gels work must stay, till they be sealed saith Hezekiah. Is. 37 3. This day is a day of trouble, Isay 37 . and of rebuke, and of blasphe∣my, for the children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth. So say I brethren, it may be the Lord your God will hear the words of all Rabshakahs, whom the e∣nemies of the Church haue em¦ployed to reproach the living God & will reproue the words, which the Lord your God hath heard, wherefore lift up your pyer for the remant
that are left, God said to Moses, let me alone, but to you otherwise, why doe you let me alone, I stay for you, if you pray earnestly, I will come quickly. Lastly. I put you but this disjunction, either oh Iacob thou hast thy brother Esau to meet withall, or else thou hast not; if not, what mea∣neth thy feares, If thou art to Gen. 32 24. and 33. 10. Isa. 54 26. 17 58. 14: meet with rough Esau, then remember what one nights sweating in prayer did, how it first obtained the face of God, then of Esau, the promise is made to you, Jf every promise is a new foot∣step for prayer, wherefore you that ever prayed, pray now, nay you that never prayed, pray now, now is a praying time, and it is good
pulling whilest God is com∣ming, begging whilest God is giving, and hath God dealt out nothing to the Churches in these last times? Doe but obserue which way the wheele turneth, in these latter dayes. Quest. But why doe you exhort us to pray? we are here purposely, and come to pray. Answ. True, we are so, but we must pray at other times too, we are here this day to pray, that we may pray hereafter, that wee may set wheeles of prayer on going, prayer doth fit for prayer, but yet pray for the present, and so we come to the fift note. Obser. 5 When the people of the land go forth to warre, the
of the Lord should go forth to prayer, when the Arke re∣moved, then said Moses, Arise O Lord &c. our prayers are to lead Armies into the field. 1. Iosh. 17. see how the people lead forth Ioshua, Ac∣cording as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee, only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses. you know the prayer of Asa, Iehosha∣phat, Hezekiah, and other worthies, to this purpose, reasons of it, are these especi∣ally. Reas. 1. Every businesse is to be led forth by prayer, prayer is a leading duty, to all our dutes, and the greater any businesse is, the more prayer is to be made, the businesse of warre is a great
businesse, almost miraculous, when I see an Army, me∣thinks I see a company of walking Townes, it is a great matter, and will you not haue so great a businesse led on by prayer. Object. But if a man haue a businesse to do, which re∣quireth hast, by attending to prayer, he may loose his businesse. Answ. For that purpose, consider but that one place, in answer to this, Iosh. 5. 2. In the foregoing chapter the children of Israel went through Iordan and came in∣to their enemies country, and in this verse the Lord said unto Joshua, Make thee sharpe knives, and circumcise againe the children of Israel the second Ioshua 5. 2. time, now upon their circum∣cision
they were sore, wher∣fore vers. 8. it is said, They abode in their places in the camp, till they were whole. Now being come through Iordan, and lying before Iericho, among all their ene∣mies, the natiues could not but heare that they were cir∣cumcised, and how sore they were, insomuch as the chil∣dren of Israel might haue ob∣jected and said, Oh Lord, if we be circumcised, we shall hinder our designes, weaken our selues, advantage our enemies, that they may fall upon us in our trenches, but as the Lord commanded, so did they, they were circum∣cised, neither did this act of Religion hinder their busi∣nesse, and therefore let none say, If I stay upon prayer,
my businesse will take despair, No no, precedent prayer will make it prosper, trust God, and you will finde it. Reas. 2. Salamon saith, All things are beautifull in Eccles. 3 1. 11. their season: there is a time for all things: therfore a time for prayer, and though wee are to pray continually, yet there is somtime, wherein we are especially to draw near to God; saith the Psalmist: For this shall every one that is Psal 32 6. godly, pray unto thee, in a time that thou maiest be found, Grace maketh one pray, the wisdome of grace maketh one know the occasion, season, and time of pray∣er. First Fearing times, are times of praying, saith the
Psalmist; At what time I am afraid, J will trust in thee, and true faith soon worketh it selfe into prayer. Secondly Tropicall uncer∣taine times are times of pray∣er: Zeph. 2. 3. Seek ye the Lord all ye meek of the earth, if so be that ye may be hid in the day of the Lords wrath, &c. when the world labou∣reth under uncertainty, then should the Saintes labour in prayer, Again the morning time is a time of prayer. Ps. 5. 3. My voice shalt thou hear Ps. 5 3. in the morning, O Lord in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee. There is a morning of every yeere, aswell as a morning of every day: there is a morning to every busi∣nesse, aswell as a morning to every day; now is the yeeres
morning, now is the mor∣ning of our great businesse, wherefore now up in the morning of this great worke, let us direct our prayers to the Lord, and looke up, pray now my brethren, for now it is seasonable. Reas.  Thirdly; As the promise is the only hold that we haue on God, so prayer is the only ods that we haue of our enemy: Beloved the ene∣mies haue most commonly the outward advantage of Gods people, look upon both, and you shall find, that outwardly they haue much odds, either more men, more money, or more munition, what shall weigh downe this odds but prayer? Many times prayer doth more then the whole Army, consider Ps. 76. 3 Psal 76 1.
There brake he the arrowes of the bow, the sheild, the sword, and the battaile: where? In Salem, Jn Sion, He doth not vers. 2 say in the field, the arrowes are first broken in the assem∣blies by the Saintes prayers, after that in the field by the Lords Souldiers, It is said of Archimeder being a Mathe∣matician, that he did more by drawing his lines, then any other Souldier did by his va∣lour, so Gods people may do more by the lines they draw, and the prayers they make, then others can do any other way, prayers are the Saintes scaling ladders where∣with they leap over wals, and their strength whereby they break through hostes, you know usually there is much disorder in Armies; the Soul∣diers
haue much evill and sin among them, though the Souldiers be outwardly strong yet many of them are inward∣ly weak, and prayer com∣meth in to gather up the weak forces, Numb. 12. 15. you may see how that for the sin of one woman, the whole hoste of Jsrael was staide, and could not march on, her sin hindred their march, shee was but one, and a woman, it may seem therfore strang that the whole body of the Army should stay upon her, yet so it was, and they could not remooue till prayer came in: vers. 13. Moses cryed to the Lord saying, heale her now O God J beseech thee. Then she was healed, and the people iourneyed, thus prayer orde∣reth the rankes, fetcheth up
the weak forces; leadeth on the Army upon the enemy, and commeth in the reare, without prayer then; there is no footing, we are not fit to strike till our armes be in ioynt, and prayer iointeth us, we are not fit to be exalted, till we be humbled, and pray∣er humbleth us, and if it be so, then by way of use. Vse You may see what worke we haue to do this day, we are to lead forth this well formed Army, as you heard in the mandate, sent unto us by the States, of a well∣formed leaguer, under the command of that Noble and worthy Generall, the Prince of Orange, and mee-thinks he doth as it were put prayer in office, and saith, I will not
be commander, prayer, shall, J will be only Lieutenant unto prayer, let prayer goe first, let prayer strike the first stroke mee-thinkes I hear a dialogue and conference betweene him and the country, wee desire you Sir to take the care of this great Army, wee commit it to your wisdome, goe and prosper, but saith he, I dare not goe untill prayer goe, J am under prayer, giue mee prayer first, and then I will go, first smite with your pray∣ers, and then wee will smite with our weapons, smiting prayers are now expected, and though there are divers mo∣tiues which I haue used to stir up your heartes, to pray for the Churches in generall, yet take three or foure more, which may haue some speciall
relation, unto this people and you amongst them. First The enemies which Sicut paupe∣es spir¦tis & simpli∣ces ad predi candum elegit, ita asta tos et du plices Anti∣christus ad falsi∣tatis pre¦dicatio∣nem as∣sumet. Greg mor. lib 12. cap. 5. you pray against are the most wicked enemies that God hath of all enemies those are most wicked that are most crafty, the artificial sinner is the worst sinner, (as the naturalized grace is the most gracious) such are the Antichristian ene∣mies of the Church, for as (Gregory observeth it) Iesus Christ did chuse simple poore men to preach the truth, so Antichrist chuseth those which are crafty, subtill to disperse errors, of all enemies those are most vile, which are most cruell, and those are most cruell unto the Churches, that haue once made profession of the truth, & proved Apostates, the Scripture pointeth at three
especially in this particular, the Devill, the Iewes, and Antichrist, the Deuill is cruell unto mankind, he is the grand Apostate, the Iew is cruell unto all Christians, he is a vile Apostate, Antichrist is cruell to all the present Chur∣ches, and he is a greate Apostate, yea not onely an Apostate, but Apostacy in the abstract. 2. Thess. 2. 3. and therefore cruelty it selfe: in the book of the Revelation, Rome and the Antichristian party is called Sodome, it is called Egypt, and it is called Babilon: you know the un∣kindnesse of Egypt, the cru∣elty of Babilon, and the vilany of Sodome vnto Gods people, why should Rome and the antichristian party stand under all these names, but because
they are guilty of all their evils, and the worser they are, the more hold you haue on them to pray against them, Arrius was a vile enemy to the Churches, and ver ciuell, yet he was destroyed, how so? Historians tell us, Orationes o∣pus fuit, non morbi, his death was the work of prayer, not of his disease, such effects may your prayers haue, what stub∣ble can stand before the flame of prayer, Oh that our heartes were much inflamed in this great service. Secondly consider you are here in your possessions, in your lot, hidden when others of your brethren are not come to their lot, mark that place in the 3 Deut. Reuben, Gad, Deut. . 18. 20. and the half tribe of Manasseh, were come into their lot, and
inheritance, before the rest of the Children of Israel, What then, should they sit downe quietly? No, at the 18 vers. they were not to sit downe, but they were to passe over armed before their brethren, so God haueing provided for you, before many of your deare brethren, and his good people, you are not now to sit downe quietly in your own lot, but to go up armed before the rest of Gods people, and prayer is your best harnesse. Thirdly You are here on purpose to pray, it is the end why you are come hither, that you might haue liberty to pray, J am loath to speak it, I would I might not, you had praying liberty denied to you, when any met together in pri∣vate
to pray, you know it was theirs and your reproach, this place is your Gilgall, wherin the Lord hath rowled away that reproach from you, Oh that your liberty might not degenerate into licence, you haue now praying liberty and if this be the thing you are come for, and now you haue such an oppertunity, will you not improue it, if a man leaue one place of trading, that hee may set up his shop wirh more freedome in another, and in the second place money be brought unto him, will hee refuse to take money? this is your case, you could not haue so free a trade for heaven as you desired, here you haue leaue to open your shops, and behold this day a praying op∣pertunity, which I call money,
is put into your hands, will you refuse it, Consider you are come on purpose to pray. Lastly in all likelyhood this country shall be hidden, and you shall not loose your pray∣ers, I will tell you what Mr. Brightman saith, whose me∣mory is sweet and precious, he sayeth, there are three sorts of reformed churches, the first the German, the second, the French, the Sweedish the Scottish, and Holland, the third the English, which are all different, for the English is ruled by prelates, the French, the Scotish, Swedish and Hol∣land is turned by presbyters the German hold consubstan∣tiation, and other things which other reformed Chur∣ches do not, Germany there∣fore
he compared to Sardis, and thence foretold all the e∣vills tht haue come up on it. Holland, Swethland, Stotland, and the French he compared to Philadelphia, and sayeth though they haue but a little strength, and the houre of temptation shall come, and some shall labour to shut their doore, yet none shall shut it, it is the rather to bee conside∣red, because he foretold the evils that came upon Germa∣ny, and why may he not speak true in this also, and then who would not pray for this peo∣ple, seeing that he may not loose his prayers? wherefore I intreat you in the Name of God, now up and be doing, arise; O daughter of Sion, arise O herts of the people of God that God might arise, and his
enemies might be scattered, awake, awake, and now up to prayer. Quest. You will say to me we are agreed, wee must go to prayer, both now and at home; but what shall wee speak, that God may arise and that his enemies may be scat∣tered. First Bring forth the Lords engagements, and tell him how much hee is engaged to helpe the Churches, the Lord saith in his word, that Babilon shall fall, for strong is that God Rev. 1 8. Ps 121. 4. 2 Chron 6. 34. 35 that hath condemned her: the Lord saith, He never slum∣breth nor sleepeth, the Lord sayeth in his word; If his peo∣ple pray when they goe forth to warre, he will hear and main∣taine their cause, goe and tell God; Lord thou hast said thus
and thus, thou hast said thou wilt neither slumber, nor sleepe, thou hast saide thou wilt maintaine thy cause, Oh then, arise O Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered. In the second place. Tell the Lord how long hee hath seemed to sleep; and that the time appointed for the Chur∣ches deliverance is now at hand, saith the Psalmist, Jt is Ps. 119 126. time for thee Lord to work, for they haue made void thy Law, and again, Haue mercy upon Zion, for the time to fauour her, Ps. 102 13. 14. yea the set time is come, for thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favour the dust thereof: this is the reason why the time is come, so go to God and tell him; Lord thou hast stood still a greate while, oh now the time is come, men
haue made void thy law; the Saintes pitty the dust and take pleasure in the stoes of the wasted churches, it is time for thee to rise. Arise O Lord. &c. Further, Tell the Lod that the enemies are up already a∣bundantly, tell him that ere long he will rise though you do not pray; Lord if wee should never pray, woulst not tou helpe the Churches? ad wilt not thou arise a little the soo∣ner for our prayers? wherefore Arise O Lord, &c. Lastly Tell the Lord that all things are w rdy; it is an argument that God moveth us with to cōe in to him, Lord we use thine owne argument, Lord Arise all things are now ready, when the wind is good, & when the servants of the ship are ready, and haue got their
takling all ready, and the an∣chor is up, onely the mster is not come into the ship, they will send one to tell him, Sir the wind is good, your servants are ready, and the ship is un∣der sayle, we pray you come away, so tell the Lord that all his people are up at prayer ex∣pecting him; and all the pray∣ers of Gods people are spread; and their heartes under sayle, and nothing can be done till the Master come; untill God himselfe come; come therefore O Lord; come away; Arise O Lord & let thine enemies be scattered.
After this Sermon began to be printed, somthing was added, the rest was taken by Charact∣ers, whilest it was preached.
Faults escaped in the Printing. pag. 5. l. 25. read. These. p. 12. l, 1. for so that read but p. 18. l. 6. r. flame r. p. 20. l. 5. r. are apt. & l. 12. r seemeth. p. 25 l 2. r. blessing. p. 28. l 1. r. owne p. 29. l. 5. r. contrary. & l. 21. r. be. p. 30▪ l. 4. 5. & 7. r hereby. p, 42. l 12. r. waxe, p. 45. In the margent for Ps, 1, 18, read, Ier 31, 22, p: 58 l 5. r this p. 93. l. 9. r prayer & l. 19, r, at a window▪ p. 65. l 14. r. mee. & l. 18. r. a tauerne p; 66. l. 1 r fundamenta. p. 67. l. 17 r. you that ly p. 67, & 68, r ye that are mind. full of the Lord keepe not silence but once. p, 73. l. 19. r one another. l 76. in the margent r. fugientia l. 77 l. 21 r. for tenthly eleventh∣ly. p. 79. l 18 blot out Jf p 80. l. 21. r. first p. 81 l 1 r people of the Lord p 84 l 24 r prayer. l. 87. l. 10 r Archimedes p 88. l 6. r. gather vp. & l. 14. r strange. p 90 l 17 r our p. 91 in the margent for spiritis r. spiritus & for astatos r, astutos. p. 93. l, 6 r very & l 8 r o∣rationis p. 93. l. 11. & 24. r orportunity. p. 96. l. 20. r for turned governed.
