4895 99843334 8058
AN ANSWERE TO CERTAINE scandalous Papers, Scattered abroad vnder colour of a Catholick Ad∣monition. Qui facit viuere, docet orare. ¶ Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. ANNO 1606.
AN ANSWERE TO CERTAINE scandalous Papers, scattered. abroad vnder colour of a Catholicke Admo∣nition. HAuing lately re∣solued to recall my Thoughts from the earthly theatre, where they sate and beheld the variable motions of men, with those cares and cogitations which are the pro∣per companions of publike ministers, ho∣ping thereby to bee made partaker of their contentments, which borrow from publike Action, to giue to priuate Contemplation;
I perswaded my self, that I could neuer make choice of a better Subiect for my medita∣tion, then of the late Treatise, Intituled: His Maiesties Speach in the late Session of Parliament, together with a Discourse of the maner of the discouerie of this late intended Treason. Wherein, so many true and liue∣ly Images of Gods great fauour and proui∣dence, are represented: (Euery line discoue∣ring where Apelles hand hath beene) As all that obserue the naturall description of this Tree of Treason, amp; in Ramo & in Radice, may truely say,Cap 6. lib 2. Reg. there needes no Elisha in our dayes, to tell the King of Israel, what the Aramites doe in their priuatest Coun∣cels. In this Princely and religious worke, his Maiestie (like to those kings of whome Seneca speaketh, that doe more good by Example then by Lawes) hath increased our obligation, by leauing vnder his owne hand, such a plaine & perfect Record of his owne true thankefulnes to Almighty God, for his so great and miraculous graces; as neither the present Time, nor ages to come can euer be so ingrate, as not to retaine the
same in perpetual memorie. A duety requi∣red by God of all his creatures, Non ad prae∣mium, sed ad honorem. For as amongst all the excellent faculties of the minde (next to the vnderstanding) Remembrance hath the precedencie, for necessitie and vse: So in the accompts of all those seruices we owe to God, (who desireth rather, wee should remember what he hath been to vs, then cu∣riously to affect what he is in himselfe,) Re∣membrance is the first, and the first cōman∣ded. In this facultie we excell die beasts, and imitate the Angels: For they being present beholde at once, GODS Good∣nesse and Loue, in the mirrour of his Dei∣tie; and wee vpon earth, (in the Table of his Workes) haue a present and full view of that which God is, by that, which hee doeth. So as, although we cannot see him in himselfe, yet we doe particularly see him in his means, especially in those great works of deliuerances and defences, which he pro∣uideth for whole Nations and people, a∣gainst publike and priuate practises. And therefore if wee shall grow forgetfull, or
thinke it sufficient for a day or a yeere to pay him our Tributes of humble thanke∣fulnesse, when the Heathen themselues doe continually offer vnto their false gods, their Cynamom and Frankincense, Then shall our errour be no lesse, then that of Is∣rael, whose prayse and prayers ended al∣most assoone as they had passed the Red Sea. But now while I was in this most seri∣ous and silent Meditation, (sometimes ra∣uished with the infinitenesse of GODS Mercie and Iustice, who restraineth the power of the wicked, as hee did the Vi∣per from the handes of Paul; sometimes comforted in calculating my dayes of happinesse, to liue vnder a King, blessed in himselfe, blessed in his Oliue bran∣ches, beloued of men for his integritie and wisedome, and pleasing to God for his zea∣lous endeauours, to clense the Vessels of his Kingdome from die Dregs and Lees of the Romish grape;) Euen then (I say) when my heart was not a little cheared, to obserue so much as the least note of my Name, in
his Register, for one that had beene of any vse in this so fortunate a Discouerie, (much like to the poore day labourer, who taketh contentment many yeeres after, when hee passeth by that glorious Architecture, to the building whereof he can remember to haue caried some few stickes or stones:) Euen then, was I most bitterly calumniated, with many contumelious Papers and Pas∣quils, dispersed abroad in diuers parts of the Citie, without any Author, and yet so con∣tinually coming vpon me, one after ano∣ther (like the messengers of Iob) as I could neither deuise to whom to turne mee to make my answer, nor yet imagine by what hard destiny I had drawne vpon me their furie, thus to single me out for a Subiect of so much bitternesse, in the dayes of so great ioy and gladnesse: Yea euen in the time when I was perswaded, that they which had diuided themselues for consci∣ence sake from all Communion with vs in our Religious offices, would yet haue tuned their harps, to haue ioyned with vs in chear∣full Songs for this our happy deliuerance.
Resting long in this debate with my selfe, whether I should now begin a warfare of words, that had so long put on an habite of suffering, especially against any of those, with whom Disputes are endlesse; because their ende is clamor, without desire to re∣ceiue satisfaction; After I had taken secret and faithfull counsell, from the loue and duetie, which liueth alwayes in me towards my Soueraigne, and entred into serious consideration, how easily die errors of pub∣like Ministers, may reflect vpon the best de∣seruing Princes; hauing also heard from Forraine parts, how farre my Name was there proscribed for a man of blood; I thought it fit in regarde of the place I hold, to take some occasion to expresse my selfe in some cleare tearmes; left any of those clouds which are vniustly cast vpon mee, might darken the brightnesse of his Royall minde, which hath beene alwayes wate∣red with the mildest deawe of Mercie and Moderation. And therefore although I know, that Stylus prudentiae est silentium, and doe re∣member
well the caution prescribed by Sa∣lomon, in the apprehension of scattered ca∣lumnies, wherein the follyes of men like clouds of tempest are imagedm when they lacke occasion to power foorth showers of malice, on the heads of Persons in place of gouemment: Yet finding my selfe in such an absolute possession ouer my owne soule in patience, as it is not in the power of any calumniator to disturbe the peace of a quiet minde; I throught it meete to breake si∣lence, and to the intent my answere might be the better conceiued, to set downe first the Copie of one of their originall writings; Whereof the tenour followeth.
¶ To the Earle of Salisbury. MY Lord, Whereas the late vnapprouable & most wicked deseigne, for the destroying of his Maiestie, the Prince, and No∣bilitie, with many others of worth and qualitie, (attempted through the vndertaking spirits of some more fie∣rie & turbulent, then zealous & di∣spassionate Catholicks) hath made the generall state of our Catholicke cause so scandalous in the eye of such, whose corrupted iudgements are not able to fanne away and seuer the fault of the professor from the profession it selfe; as that who now is found to be that Religion, is perswaded, at least in minde, to allow (though God know∣eth
as much abhorring as any Pu∣ritane whatsoeuer) the said former most inhumane, and barbarous pro∣iect: And whereas some of his Ma∣iesties Councill, but especially your L. as being knowen to bee, (as the Philosopher termeth it) a primus motor in such vncharitable procee∣dings, are determined (as it is fea∣red) by taking aduantage of so fowle a scandall, to roote out all memory of Catholicke Religion, either by sud∣den banishment, Massacre, impri∣sonment, or some such vnsupportable vexations, and pressures; and per∣haps by decreeing in this next Par∣liament, some more cruell and hor∣rible Lawes against Catholicks, then already are made: In regard of these premisses, there are some good men,
who through their earnest desire for continuing the Catholicke Reli∣gion and for sauing of many soules, both of this present, and of all future posteritie; are resolued to preuent so great a mischiefe, though with a full assurance aforehand of the losse of their dearest liues. You are there∣fore hereby to be admonished, that at this present there are fiue, which haue seuerally vndertaken your death, and haue vowed the performance thereof, by taking already the blessed Sacrament, if you continue your dayly plotting of so tragicall Strata∣gems against Recusants. It is so ordered, that no one of these fiue knoweth who the other foure be, for the better preuenting the discouery of the rest, if so any one by attemp∣ting
and not performing, should be apprehended. It is also already a∣greed, who shall first attempt it by shotte, and so who in order shall follow. In accomplishing of it, there is expected no other then assurance of death; Yet it will willingly bee em∣braced for the preuenting of those generall Calamities, which by this your transcendent Authoritie, and grace with his Maiestie, are threatned vnto vs all. And in∣deed the difficulties herein are more easily to bee disgested, since two of the intended Attemptors, are in that weake state of body, that they cannot liue aboue three or foure monethes. The other three are so distressed in themselues and their friends; as that their present griefes
(for being onely Recusants) doe much dull all apprehension of death. None is to bee blamed (in the true censuring of matters) for the vndertaking hereof: For we protest before GOD, wee knowe no other meanes left vs in the world since it is manifest that you serue but as a watch, to giue fire vnto his Ma∣iestie; (to whome the worst that wee wish, is, that hee may be as great a Saint in Heauen, as hee is a King on Earth,) for intending all mis∣chiefs against the poore distressed Catholickes. Thus giuing your Lordship this charitable admoni∣tion, the which may perhaps bee necessary hereafter, for some others your Inferiours (at least in grace and fauour) if so they runne on their
former inhumane and vnchristian rage against vs, I cease, putting you in minde, that where once true and spirituall Resolution is, there, notwithstanding all dangers what∣soeuer, the weake may take sufficient reuenge of the great. Your L. well admonish∣ing friends, &c. A. B. C. &c. Postscript. It may be your Lordship will take this but as some forged Letter of some Puritanes, thereby to
incense you more against Recu∣sants. But wee protest vpon our saluation it is not so, neither can any thing in humane likely∣hood preuent the effecting there∣of, but the change of your course towards Recusants.
THis being now one of their charges verbatim, because it is not my mea∣ning to wander further, then the paths of their own vncharitable passions do lead me; I will only direct my answere to the seueral parts therof; though the same as they lie, druert me from any other good or regu∣lar methode. For the first part therefore, wherein this writer in the Name of the Catholikes prote∣steth against the fact as an vnapprouable & most wicked desseigne; I must shortly say, that whosoeuer shall read the Panegyricall oration of Sixtus Quintus, made vpon the murder of Henry the third the French king, shall well perceiue that sinne to bee prefer∣red before the act of Iudith to Holofernes, by which Gods people were deliuered; and may also obserue in diuers other cases, how generally our aduersaries are inclined, to make an ill interprestation onely of those thinges, which faile in execution (for otherwise foelix scelus virtus vocatur) to which may be added that which is vulgarly knowen, what number of Authors are illu∣strated
strated in Rome, which strongly mainteine the doctrine of deposing kings. Neuerthe∣lesse, because I haue euer loued to mea∣sure others by my selfe, and alwaies wished that by some cleare and constant course, the state of Christendome might be freed from all pernicious instruments, which seeke not to plant peace, but to worke confusion; I haue bin a long time sorie, that those which imploy so many seditious spirits, dayly to instruct the vnlearned Catholickes in those mysteries of deposing Princes, haue not, by some publike and definitiue sentence ortho∣doxall (in which it is supposed the Pope can∣not erre) made some such cleare explication of their assumed power ouer Soueraigne Princes, as not onely those which acknow∣ledge his superiority, might be secured from feares and iealousies of continuall Trea∣sons and bloody assacinats against theirper∣sons; but those Kings also which doe not approue his Papal iurisdiction, and yet would faine reserue a charitable opinion of their subiects, might know how farre to re∣pose themselues in their fidelitie, in ciurl obe∣dience,
howsoeuer they see them diuided from them in point of conscience. For who∣soeuer shall attribute most to the force of Excommunication, shall neuer finde it (if I mistake it not) further powerfull either by the originall institution, or in the succeeding practise for many yeeres after Christ, then onely to depriue men from spirituall graces, and to shut them as it were out of the dores of heauen, without so grosse an vsurpation, as to remoue them out of the earth, or to de∣stroy their being in Nature. Insomuch as the writ it selfe de excommunicato capiendo, and other such like courses, which are variable in sundry gouernments, haue rather issued from the goodnes of such Christian kings, as were desirous to worke the better obedience to the Rules of the Church, then from any power of Excommunication in his owne na∣ture, all censures of the Church hauing left life vntouched, siue fuerat Ethnicus siue Pub∣licanus: Many of the heathen themselues ha∣uing taught this for a rule, Bonos imperatores voto expetere oportet, quoscun{que} tolerare. And therefore I cannot but maruaile the more at
some dark and cautelous writings published of late vpon this accident, & auowed vnder the name of one of their Prime men, wherin he hath bestowed many thundring words, against those which shall attempt against Princes by priuate authoritie, and yet reser∣ueth thereby a tacite lawfulnesse thereof, in case it be directed by publicke warrant. A matter no lesse discrediting the sinceritie pretended in this particular, then that most strange and grosse doctrine of Equiuocation, which is so highly extolled in the Church of Rome, though it teare in sunder all the bondes of humane conuersation. For who so shall please to reade one place of the holy Father Saint Augustine (of whose Bookes by this occasion I haue turned ouer some fewe leaues) shall finde, that when the Priscillian Heretickes in all their examinations before the Rulers of that time, did seeke to dissemble their here∣sie, by vsing those answeres of Equiuoca∣tion, wherewith the Papists now maiutaine it lawfull to deny all trueth vnder a mentall reseruation, and wresting the words of S.
Paul, who requireth euery man to speake the trueth to his neighbour, inferred, as if they might speake falsely to all others. This reuerend Father soundly and cleerely refuted that irreligious Principle, with this short sentence; Corde creditur ad Iustitiam, ore fit confessio ad salutem: Otherwise (saith hee) Peter, who professed Christ in heart, and denyed him in wordes, would neuer haue redeemed his denyall with so many Teares. This were to take away the Crowne of Mar∣tyrdome, and to make all the holy Martyrs fooles; who, making a conscience to dissem∣ble with Heathen Magistrates, sealed with their blood the inward thoughts of their hearts and confessions of their mouthes. Neither should any man professe this opinion, but hee that seeketh to subuert all Lawes and dueties of Ciuil societie, breaking out into this Expo∣stulation, O fontes lachrymarum, Where are ye to be found, O ye fountaines of teares? How shall we hide our selues from the displeased face of Trueth? For the second part, where you pretend
an apprehension of so many massacres and pressures to come against Catholickes, or some more horrible Lawe to bee decreed in Parlia∣ment, then is already allowed, and therein taxe me as one that am like to prooue a fierie Instrument; Giue me leaue to tell you, That those are false pretences, which some lewd Impostor hath vsed as false glasses to multi∣ply your feares. These poore Calumniations are like to Adams figge leaues, vnable to couer your shame. For as hee sought a couering, non quia nudus sed quia lapsus; So is it your fault, not your feare, that maketh you cast those vniust Imputations vpon your Prince and State. Sed pereuntibus mille figurae. These men that rule your consciences, haue first dazled your eyes with fearefull, but false obiects, thereby hoping to engage you more deepely in their pernicious At∣tempts. They haue sought with Nero to set Rome on fire, and after to lay the blame on Christians. Thus hath your credulitie bene ouerta∣ken
with vaine shadowes, whereas, the chil∣dren of Wisedome are of slow beliefe. If therefore you had measured those things by the rules of Time, and had entred into a true comparison of things past, with things present; you must needs haue con∣duded better of things to come. For if you behold the precedent Reignes of the two late sister Queenes of different Religion, you shall finde more blood in fiue or sixe yeeres of the first, then in fiue and fourtie yeeres of the second. Examine likewise, whether you haue seene since this Kings time, any the least prints of bloody steps. Hath he added new seuerities to the Lawes of the former Time, which he found established? or hath he not in some things qualified them? and in other forborne to execute them, euen vpon those persons which publish with sound of trum∣pet the sentence of diuorce betwixt his Subiect and his Souereigntie? Let me ap∣peale to your owne consciences (which in euery man holdeth place of Iudge and Wit∣nesse) whether vpon the present fury of this
fiery Treason, which inflamed so many a∣gainst the generalitie of the Papists (ac∣cording to die nature of suddaine perill, which hardly admits of rust distinctions) there hath beene any one acte of blood or crueltie committed; though all men know, that die greatest violences that could haue beene vsed in such cases, vnder colour of publicke safetie, would haue been interpre∣ted to be the true effects of care and proui∣dence. Nam crudelitas si à vindicta, iustitia est si à periculo, prudentia. Nay rather behold the excellent temper of his Maiesties mind, who doubting what the humour of sudden apprehension might produce at such a time, no sooner had performed his owne publicke duety of Praise and Thanksgiuing to God, but hee pronounced in open Parliament how farre he was from the condemnation of the generall for particulars. All which being laid together, I doubt not, but those which are not in the desperate consump∣tion of sinne, will freely acknowledge his Maiestie to bee a Prince of PEACE and MERCY, that delighteth nor in the noyse
of Chaines & Fetters, but rather with Theo∣dosius deferreth Execution, and wisheth Se potuisse potiùs mortuos à morte reuocare. And now for the imaginary Power, which it pleaseth you to ascribe vnto vs of his Ma∣iesties Coūcel, in which number, as a plotter against Romish Catholiques, you make me to be one of the Quorum; I should take it al∣wayes for an Honor and happinesse, for me to receiue not onely iniury, but persecution it selte in so Noble a Societie, where persons of so great Honour and Iudgement are A∣ctors; who know full well, that Counsailors of Kings doe stand for thousands or hun∣dreds, onely as it pleaseth them to place them; and that all their greatnesse groweth meerely from humble endeauours, no fur∣ther meritorious then as they are valued by a gracious acceptance. Neuerthelesse, see∣ing I am made by you a diuided Member from the Body, and graced with so hard an Epithete as a Boutefeu, and that you are content to borrow my Name to scandalize the State you liue in; I must freely say to you without bitternesse, That howsoeuer
it may serue your turne for a while, to make me the marke of your malice; yet those that rightly iudge of the spirit in which this wri∣ter speaketh, will hardly imagine, that this Faction followeth any other Body, then the Body of Authoritie. It is not the Head a∣lone, nor any other particular members that these men shoot at, but at the Church and Common-wealth; which like Hippo∣crates Twinnes haue long both wept and laughed together. These are the things which the Enemies of this tithe doe studie to subuert, and not any poore greatnesse of mine, who am onely great in the eyes of Enuy. Nay rather they are angry with Ari∣stotle, who bids wise Princes keepe downe Faction, which is euer humble till it get the Key of Power. They are grieued, or rather heart-broken, to behold such an Vnitie of State and Councell, as dares bid the world doe, as she would be done vnto. These are knowen so well to bee the true causes of their Despaire and Discontentment, as they shall ground a faith vpon very weake Prin∣ciples, if they imagine, that open vowes of
my destruction (a matter of so small conse∣quence) can make them free from imputati∣on of contriuing higher Practises. But now for that which commeth in the third place, which is their protestation, that for the auoiding new mischiefe to come, it is intended by good men vpon a spirituall Reso∣lution, to take my life; and that there are fiue persons vpon the secret, but all bound vp by the Sacrament, whereof two are so weake and so sickely, as they can hardly forfeit two or three moneths of life: To these I can onely say, that hauing their feete so nigh the graue, their ghostly father deserues small thankes, that will send them thither in bloody cof∣fins. For they doe neither carrie the markes of Rome Heathen, nor of Rome Chri∣stian: for vnder Heathen Emperours, the victories were scorned, which were barba∣rously gotten, mixtis veneno fontibus: And when Rome was pure and primitiue, you shall finde the Armes of the Church were Teares and Prayers. But now their Oracles are so farre degenerate from the former pu∣ritie of that ancient Church, as they make
murder spirituall Resolution, and openly threaten the liues of Kings that are Gods breathing Images; when die Prophet Da∣uid trembled to violate the skirt of King Sauls garment. All which considered, I doubt not but those Recusants which doe discouer such pernicious spirits, will out of the light of this fire perfectly discerne the darkenesse and danger of that Religion, whereof the faith is lapped vp in such an ignorant & implicite obedience; and so much the rather, because it hath fallen out so often, that the scruples of Conscience and seeds of Treason, haue growen vp as close together, as the huske and Come in one eare. And therefore I should thinke that those men, which carie the vnlearned Papists, like Hawkes hoo∣ded, into those dangerous positions, may instly challenge any that shall seeke to rob them of the deserued Titles of Boutefeux and fiery matches. For these are they that haue made their Church a Court, their reli∣gion a vassal to ambition, and are so hot vp∣on earthly Honours, as they cannot distin∣guish
Inter summa & praecipitia. These are they that enioyne men to eate their God, vpon the bargaine of blood; where those whom they depraue doe know, that what∣soeuer God doth affect in goodnes, he doth effect by good meanes. And howsoeuer they terme our Sacraments as bare and na∣ked signes; we may iustly say that wee haue neuer hitherto brought them into the com∣bination of murder, or into the house of crying sinnes. As for that sort of them which pretend to bee so full of present griefe, through the distresse of them∣selues and their friends (for being onely Re∣cusants) as it dulleth alt apprehension of death: Those that lacke charitie, will iudge this dulnesse to be, Plus tristitiae quàm poeni∣tentiae, more for sorrow that the proiect hath failed, then that it was concerned. As for the Plotters and stratagems whereof they complaine, If those which vse lawfull meanes to preuent conspiracies, must bee esteemed Plotters, and Subiects fit for pro∣cription; howe shall his Maiestie escape their censure, that was Gods chosen mini∣ster
vpon Earth for this particular Discoue∣rie? Or to what ende doe Princes admit of Councellors care, or Secretaries vigilancie, (whose Offices are to stand Sentinell ouer the life of Kings, and safetie of States) if their endeuours to countermine the secret mynes of Treason, be thus exposed to mis∣construction? Or if by stratagems those Lawes are meant, by which all branches of Treason are punished; why doe they for∣get that those ordinances are deriued from the wisedome of Parliaments, two hundred yeeres before my cradle? Besides, if any thinke it in the power of fewe, much lesse of anyone, to be able to extort determinations of extremitie, or procure new Lawes in Par∣liament by selfe humour; those neither vn∣derstand the course of Law-making, nor the wisedome, grauitie, or nature of Law∣makers in this State, where Kings them∣selues, from whom (as from the Center) all the liues and executions of Lawes take their beginning, are pleased freely to admit their Subiects negatiues, with good and gracious acceptation.
And now for my selfe, with whom you would condition to leaue Plotting, as you tearme it, against Recusants: First, discreti∣on telleth me, that as the Husbandman, which casteth his eye ouer-curiously vpon winds and clouds, doeth neither sow nor reape in season; so, that seruant, whose faith and zeale in the seruice of Kings, becom∣meth awfull of enemies either for their power or enuy, is neither worthy of fauour nor protection. For when I consider die Prince I serue, that hee hath not taken vp wisedome of Gouernment vpon credit, but carrieth still the Iethro of order in his owne bosome, disposing the meane causes, to those that are fit to rule ouer hundreds, and ouer fifties, reseruing still the greatest to the greatnesse of him selfe, like a King rich in the experience of many yeeres Raigne, o∣uer a free and valiant people, both by na∣ture, seat, and education: I freely professe both before mine owne and all other Nati∣ons, that although I participate not with the follies of that Flie, who thought her selfe to raise the dust, because shee sate on the Cha∣riot
wheele: Yet am I so farre from disauow∣ing my honest ambition of my Masters fauour, as I am desirous that the world should hold me, not so much his creature, by the vndeserued Honours I hold from his Grace and Power, as by my desire to bee the shadowe of his minde, and to frame my iudgements, knowledge and af∣fections according to his: towards whose Royall Person I shall glory more to bee al∣wayes found an honest and humble Sub∣iect, then I should to command absolutely in any other calling. For the rest which may concerne mee in my Religion (howsoeuer darkned with this middle vaile of sinne and frailtie) it is built vpon the sacred grounds of Hope and Faith, in the precious blood of my Redeemer, without presuming vpon any particular merits. And whereas they alledge, that men resolued to die, are ma∣sters ouer other mens liues; My answere is, they haue no more power then the least Spider, who by permission can doe as much. And if the dayes of my life were in their hands; as they might peraduenture take
from me some moneths of ioyes: So am I assured they should take mee from yeeres of sorrowes. But these poore threats a∣maze no hopes of mine, I am none of those that beleeue with the men of the olde world, that the Mountaines shake, when the Moules doe cast. And farre I hope, it shall be from mee, who know so well in whose Holy BOOKE my dayes are num∣bred, once to entertaine a thought to pur∣chase a spanne of time, at so deare a rate, as for the feare of any mortall power, in my poore Talent, Aut Deo, aut Patriae, aut Patri patriae deesse. For who doubteth that the Magistrates who conuerse with va∣rietie of spirits, must not sometimes vnder∣go Tempests? All our actions are vpon the open stage, & can be no more hidden then the Sunne. If we deserue ill, we shall heare ill; Or if the present time doe flatter vs, yet when our glasses are runne, (which cannot be long) that glory which maketh worthy men line for euer, dyeth with vs; and our posteritie shalbe the heires of our dishonor. And therefore suadeat loquentis vita non ora∣tio.
Besides, that errour which in all mortall things hath her power, strength and decli∣nation; hath now her foundations discoue∣red and her Towers taken, so as it is to bee suspected, shee will play so long with the temporall Soueraigntie of Kings, as it shall bee the glorious worke of Kings to breake downe her walles and strongest defences: And therefore ill becomming seruants to slacke their pace, for feare of malice, but ra∣ther to rest assured, that vnto such as faith∣fully bestow their time in the seruice of God, the euening and the night shall come vpon them naturally one after another: Their faith shall ascend before them, and their good fame shall remaine after them. To conclude, seeing God hath pleased to deliuer vs from so many vnspeakeable mise∣ries and afflictions ready to haue fallen vp∣on vs, like the visitation of Ierusalem, wherof the Prophet speaketh; When their candle hath his cleared light, and when they sleepe in the armes of peace, loe then shall he the time of their visitation: And seeing this should haue happened vnto vs in the dayes
of a iust & gracious King, when euery man reioyced vnder his Vine and vnder his figge Tree: Let vs both for the honour of our Nation, & the good of our soules, be mind-full to informe our selues so perfectly of all our dueties both diuine and humane, as wee may not become (through our owne grosse ignorance) the authors of our own confusi∣on. Let no man set so high a price on that false reputation of keeping oathes to pri∣uate friends, as for their sake to forfeit faith and loyaltie to Prince and Countrey. Will you finde true friends, saith Seneca? Search them inter recta officia, and there shall you finde them So saith the Canon Law, Nonest appellanda fides, quae ad peccatum inuitat. Tul∣ly in his bookes of Offices disputing the case inter Patrem & Patriam, If thy father (saith he) intend a Treason to his Countrey and State, and tell thee of it; thou must first dis∣swade, after threaten, and after accuse. For this is a Rule approued; In promissorio prore iniusta, iurans illicitum, obligator ad contra∣rium. And therefore seeing God hath sa∣ued vs so miraculously from this confusion;
whereof the minde of man (which within a moment searcheth from East to the West) can no way finde the bottome; Let vs make it appeare vnto the world, by the dif∣ference of our constant measure of thanke∣fulnesse, that we esteeme not this an ordi∣nary acte of Gods prouidence, nor a thing to be imputed to any fault or fayling in their plots or proiects, but a miraculous effect of the transcendent power, farre beyond the course and compasse of all his ordinary proceedings. Who although hee seeme for a time to giue way, as though hee re∣garded not how men come to their ends and purposes; (letting them grow like poy∣sonfull herbes,) yet at length when they are ripest, hee will cut them off, and when they are fullest of their venimous qualitie, pull them vp for other mens medicine; ha∣uing made the Scorpion to carry the oyle about him, which cureth the wounds he gi∣ueth. To which let vs adde this further Faith, that as the place where this prodigi∣ous Massacre should haue bene commit∣ted, is the same place where the ancient Re∣ligion
of the Primitiue Church, shooke off the bonds and fetters of the Romane cor∣ruption vnder which it had long continued in seruitude: So whiles the same Faith shall bee Religiously and constantly professed, that it shall neuer be in the power of mortall man, to shake the least corner stone of that blessed and sure foundation. Thus haue I giuen my pen her libertie to runne her stage; thereby to free my minde trauelling (as a woman with childe,) with more waighty cogitations then I could con∣taine in silence, or expresse in order; hoping my intentions shal receiue a fauourable cen∣sure, seeing they are bounded with honest and humble limittes. If it be saide that I haue taken too slight an occasion to an∣swere a slander that lacks an Authour; I de∣sire to be thus rightly concerned, that no man would haue sooner contemned those Shewells or dead papers, which moue with the winde, then I should, if so many ad∣uertisements from abroad, and Confessions at home (concurring with this calumnie)
did not in Iustice challendge at my handes some speedy course to preserue my poore reputation from these cruell aspersions. In which consideration, although my de∣sires to weare out many dayes, are drawen within as small a circle as my feares, and both my spirit and Iudgement, farre from such a deiection or weakenesse, as to ende∣uour, or expect a remooue of fixed reso∣lutions, by force of Arguments or protesta∣tions; Yet when I remember with Seneca, that euen the great and fairest Kingdomes, whose Lawes abound in bloody lines, doe loose so much of their beautie, as they be∣come no lesse deformed, then the basest Shambles; and when I know that our grea∣ter IVDGE, and SAVIOVR of the World, who alloweth voyces to all kindes of sinnes, hath made the voyce of blood to speake so lowd, as it pearceth HEAVEN it selfe: I doe presume so well of all indifferent and equall Iudgements, as my desence in this degree, shall neuer bee held for a need∣lesse curiositie; Quia Inauditi, tanquam in∣nocentes
pereunt; Especially seeing mine owne conscience telleth me so plainely, that as Clemencie is the truest keeper of King∣doms, So Cruelties are of al other the falsest Guards. If it be said, I haue bene too sharpe in censuring the Romish Catholiques in generall, because I haue beene iniured by some Infested spirits of that Profession; I doe professe ingenuously, that I am not per∣swaded that such a Malice as this, which hath no Paralell, can euer fall into those hearts that hold any seeds of Conscience, or that these fiue pretended good-men, which are combined in this resolution, haue any sense of any Religion at all, but rather that they are some dispersed remnant of that impious Consort, whose eyes and hearts are dayly wounded, to behold so many faire Mornings, to follow after so blacke a Day, as had prepared miserie euen for the childe vnborne. And when I doe remember vpon the death of the late Queene of happy memory, with what obedience and applause, both professions did concurre to his Maiesties
succession and now obserue how little assi∣stance was giuen to these late sauadge Pa∣pists, who had gathered together some few rotten branches, fallen from such decayed and withered Trees as CHRIST had cur∣sed in the Gospel, hoping therewith to haue set a Fire, and made a combustion in the State: Although my prayers shall neuer cease, that wee may see the happy dayes, when onely one Vniformitie of true Reli∣gion is willingly imbraced in this Monar∣chie; Yet I shall euer (according to the Law of God) make so great difference in my Conscience betweene seeing sinnes, and sinnes of Ignorance, as I shall thinke it Iust by the Lawes of men, Solum necis artifices arte perire sua. And now for answere to your Postscript, wherein you seeke so much to diuert me from suspecting those whome you call Puri∣tanes to be Authors of this Slander; I haue onely this to say, That you should neuer haue needed to put your selfe to so much paines for that perswasion, seeing neither the regular Protestant, nor those that are
vnconformable to the present Discipline of the Church, can euer be iustly charged to haue mixed their priuate differences with any Thoughts, much lesse with any Actes of bloody Massacres. Et hic baculum fixi. Further replyes expect not therefore at my hands: I will henceforth rest in peace in the House of mine owne Conscience, where if I doe good deedes, no matter who sees them; if bad, (knowing them my selfe) no matter from whom I hide them: for they are of record before a Iudge, from whose presence I cannot flee. If all the world ap∣plaud me, and hee accuse me, their praise is vaine. Falli potest fama, conscientia nunquam. If this may not suffice, but that you will still threaten and exclaime, I must heare with patience, and say with Tacitus, You haue learned to curse, and I to contemne: Tu linguae, ego aurium sum Dominus.
