6094 S105164 99840894 5437
¶ The voyce of the laste trumpet blowen bi the seuēth An∣gel (as is mētioned in the eleuenth of the Apo∣calips) callynge al the estates of menne to the right path of their vocation, wherin are con∣tayned xi. lessons to twelue seueral esta∣tes of menne, whych if they learne and folowe, al shal be well and nothynge amise. ¶ The voyce of one criyng in the deserte. Luke. iii. ¶ Make ready the Lordes way. Make hys pathes strayte. Euery valey shal be fylled, and euerye mountayne and little hyll made lowe. And thyngs yt be croked shal be made straight and harde passages shal be turned into playne wayes, and al fleshe shal se the health of God. Esa. xl
The contentes of thys boke. i. The Beggers lessone. ii. The Seruauntes lesson. iii. The Yeomans lesson. iiii. The Lewde priestes lesson. v. The Scholers lesson. vi. The Learned mans lesson. vii. The Phisicians lesson. viii. The Lawiers lesson. ix. The marchauntes lesson x The Gentilmans lesson. xi. The Maiestrates lesson. xii. The Womans lesson.
The beggers lesson. WHo so would that all thinges were well, And would himselfe be wyth∣out blame: Let him giue eare, for I will tell, The way how to performe the same. Fyrste walke in thy vocation, And do not seke thy lotte to chaunge: For through wicked ambition, Mani mēs fortune hath bene straūge ¶ The Beggers lesson. IF God haue laied his hande on the, And made the low in al mens sighte: Content thy selfe with that degre, And se thou walke therin vpright. If thou I saye, be very poore, And lacke thine health, or any limme: No doubte God hath inough in store. For the if thou wylt truste in him. If thou wilt trust in him I say,Esai. xl. And continue in patience: No doubte he wyll fede the alwaye, By hys mercifull prouidence. Call thou on hym, and he wyll moue, The hertes of thē that dwell the bye: To giue the such thynges for hys loue
As serue for thy necessitie. When Daniel was in the denne Dani. xiiii.Of Lions, hauing nought to eate: Abacucke was sent to him then, With a pot of potage and meate. iii. Reg. xvii.And when Elias fled awaye, From Ahab and quene Iesabell: The Rauens fedde him by the way, As the story of kynges doeth tel. Psal. cxlvii.And as kinge Dauid doeth recorde, The Rauens birdes lefte in the nest: Are when they crye fedde of the Lord Though they know not to make request Trust thou therfore in God aboue, And cal on him with confidence: Psa. xxxii.And doubtles he wil mens hertes moue To fede the of beneuolence. But if at any time thou lacke, Hebru. xii. Apoca. iii.Thinges nedeful, yet do not despayre: As though the Lord did the fosake, Or did to the displeasure beate. But in such case call to thy mind What plenty God hath to the sent Tob. xiii.And thou shalt wel perceiue & find That thou shalt many thinges mispent. Then thinke Gods iustice could not leaue The vnplaged for that thou hast: Sapi. xMispente the gyftes thou didst receiue, To liue vpon and not to waste. Thē must thou nedes giue god glory,
For his vpright and iust iudgement:Luke. xv. And be moste earnestly sory, For that thou hast his giftes mispent. But if thou find thy conscience cleare As fewe men can I am right sure: Then let Iobs trouble be thi chere, That thou maist patiently endure, Yea though thou shouldest perihe for fodeLuke. xiiii. Math. v. Psa ix. Yet be are thy crosse patienely: For the ende shall turne to thy good, Though thou lye in the streates & dye. Pore Lazarus died at the gate, Of the riche man (as Luke doth tel)Luke. xvi. But afterwarde in rest he sate When the riche glutton was in hel. Say thou thy selfe therfore vpon These examples confortable:Mat. xi. And doubles thy vocation Thou shal not thinke miserable Neithr shalt thou grudge or repyne, That thy pouertie is so greate: But shalt thy selfe euer encline, To Goddes wyll who doeth the viset. Thou shalt not grudge, when yu doeste craue Of any man his charitie: Though at his hand thou canst nought haue But shalt praye for him hertely. That if he haue this worldely riches, And yet hath not Godly pitye. The spirite of God will him possesse:i Iho. v.
Math. xxii Luke. xx. Act x. Rom. ii.And teach hym to knowe hys duty. Thus doing thou dost walke vpryght In thy callynge thou maist be sure: And arte more preciouse in Gods sight, Then men that be ryche paste measure. Thus leaue I the in thy callinge, ii. Timo. ii. Tob. iii.Exhortynge the therin to stande: And doubtles at thy laste endynge, Thou shalt be crowned at Gods hand. ¶ The Seruauntes lesson. BRother come hither vnto me, And learne some parte of dis∣cipline: For I am sent to enstruct the, And teach the some Godly doctrine. I am sente to call the I saye, Backe frō thy stoute & stubburne mind: Take hede therefore, and beare away Such lessons as thou shalt here inde. Fyrste considre that thy callynge, Is to do seruice and obey: Luke. xvii.All thy maisters lawfull biddynge, Bearinge that he shall on the laye. If he be cruel vnto the, And ouer charge the with laboure: Call to the Lorde, and thou shalte be, Shortely out of his cruell power. Remembre thou Iacobs kynred, That in Egypt were sore opprest:
But when they were moste hard bested,Exod. i. The Lord brought them to quiet rest. They coulde not crye so sone but he, Had heard and graunted their requeste:Exod. i. iii. And ryght so will he do by the, And se all thy great wronges redrest. He will I saye deliuer the, Out of bondage and seruitude. And brynge to passe that thou shalt be,Math. xxv. Maister of a greate multitude. And bicause thou didst walke vpright Shewynge thy selfe obedient: Thy seruauntes shal haue still in sight,Math. vii. and .xiiii. The feare of God omnipotent. And like seruice as thou hast done, Thou shalt haue done to the agayne: For sence the worlde was firste begone Neuer true seruaunt lost his payne. Iacob serued full fourtene yere, And deat truly with his maister: As in the Bible doth appeare,Gene. xxi. And was exceadinge riche after. Fourtene yere he serued Laban, Who was made riche by his labour: But afterwarde Iacob began, To groue to muche greater honour, Laban was neuer of such might As Iacob was wythin shorte space: For his true seruice in Gods sight, Had purchast hym fauour and grace.
Thus seest thou how god doth regard The good seruice of seruauntes true And howe he doth in them reward The seruice that is but their due. It forceth not what maner man 1 Petre. ii.Thy maister is, so that thou be: In thy seruice a christian, Doynge as Christ commaundeth the. But if thy maister be wicked, And woulde haue the do wyckedly: Then se that thy fayth be pitched On thy Lord God most constauntly Call to thy minde good Daniel, Who serued his prince fayethflly Notwithstandynge he was cruel And eke his Lorde Gods enemy. Serue him truly I say, for why, God hath bade that thou sholdest do so: But do thou nothinge wickedly, Neither for well nor yet for wo. Se thou serue him as faythfully, As he were thy Lord, and thy God: olo. iii. Ephe. vi.Not with eye seruice faynedly, Neither for the feare of the rodde. But for the conscience thou dost bear, To thy Lorde Gods commaundement. That is for loue, and not for feare, Of any worldely punishmente. Do thus and then thou shalt be sure, Thy Lord wil euer prospere the:
And at his good will and pleasure, Thou shalt not misse to be made fre. But if thou wilt be still sturdy, And do thy seruice wyth grudging: The Lord shal lage the worthely, With manifolde kindes of scourginge. Thou shall be put to drudgery, Many a day, ma grea thine head: Ad be kepte still in slauery, Al thy life dayes till thou be dead. And if thou chaunce to renue awaye, Either thu shalt be brought agayne: Or else when thou doest chaunce to stay, A worse maister shall the retayne. Once thou halt be certayne of this, Tha if thou refse thy callinge: Of miserie hou halte not misse, Thgh thou escae sodayne fallinge. Yea though thou do prospere a while And see to haue fortune thy frende: Yet thou doest but thy selfe begile, For misery shall be thyne ende. For as thou didest thy master serue, So shall al thy seruauntes serue the: And as thou didst hys goodes preserue So shall thy goodes preserued be. And beside this Gods wrath is bent, Towarde the for disobedience: Wherefore vnles thou do repent He wyl adde therto vehemence.
He wyl plage the here wonderously, And at the ende caste the in payne: Where thou shalt lye eternally, And wyshe to be a slaue agayne. Repent therfore, I the aduise, And seke thine owne saluation: And then thou muste in any wise Walke still in thy vocation. Do thy seruice diligently, And shewe no disobedience: Be thou not stoute, but stil apply, And do all thynges with reuerence. Refuse nothing that must be done, But do it with all redines: And when thou hast it once begone. Then set a syde all slouthfulnes. Be true, trustye, and trifle not, Be gentle and obediente: And blessyng shall lyght on thy lot, For doynge Gods commaundemnt. To make an ende haue still in minde, Thine estate and condition: And let thine herte be still enclinde, To walke in thy vocation. ¶ The Yeomans lesson. THou that art borne the groūd to till, Or for to laboure wyth thyne hande:
If thou wylt do nought that is yl, Desire not idle for to stande. But se thou do plowe, plante, & sowe, And do thy nedeful busines: As one that doeth his duty knowe And wyl not the Lords wil traunsgres. For what doest thou if thou desire, To be a lorde or gentilman: Other then heape on the Gods yre, And shewe thy selfe no christian? For Christes shepe do heare his voyce Whyche biddeth the worke busily:Iohn. x. Exod. xx. Sixe dayes, and in the seauenth reioyce And giue somewhat to the neady. It doeth also bid the beware, Of the desire to be alofte: For he that doeth for honour care, Falleth in Sathans snares full ofte. Haue minde therfore thy selfe to hold With the bosides of thy degre: And then thou maist euer be bold That God thy lord wil prosper the. And though the Lord giue the plenty Of corne, cattel, and other thinge:Prou. xxiii. Psal. lxii. Be thou neuer the more gredy Nor set thy minde on gatheringe. But thinke the Lord doth these thinges send To the as to his stuard true: That wilt not his goodes wast & spend, But bestowe thē where they be due.
And if with thy labour thou get Money much more then thou dost nede: Do not thy minde on rayment set Neither on deuity fode to fede. Set not (I say) thy minde on pride, Neither vpon deliciouse fare: Neither forget at any tide, To giue the pore that thou maist spare. But when thou hast sufficient, i. Timo. vi.Of fode and honest apparaile: Then holde thy selfe therewith content As with the wage of thy trauaile. The rest if ought remaine vnspent, Vpon thine owne necessitie) Bestowe as he that hath it sent, Hath in his worde commaunded the. And if thou finde not written there, That thou maist heape thy chest wt gold To bye greate liuelode for thine heyre. Hoe darest thou then be so bold. Howe darest thou be bolde I say, To heape vp so muche golde in store: Out of the due that thou shouldest paye, To them that be pore, sycke and sore? Psal. v.Wo be to them sareth Esai, That heape togither hose and Land: As mn that wolde neuer finde staye, Til al the earth were in their hand. What, wil ye dwel alone (sareth he) Vpon the earth that is so wyde?
Wyll you leaue no parte thereof fre From your vnsacrable pride? Ye nede not to be so gready, For the Lord doeth you plainely tell: That greate houses shall stande empty, And no man left therin to dwell. And Moses saith that thou shalt build Houses and neuer dwell therin:Deu. xxviii. Thy selfe nor leaue them to thy chylde. Nor any other of thy kynne. And why? because thou hast no mynd To kepe the lordes commaundement. But sekest euer for to fynde. Wayes to encrease thyne yerely rent. No maner threatnynge can the let. From purchasinge the deuel and all It is all fyshe that cometh oner. To mantayne thy great pryde with al Well turne agayne  the aduise. And I iue to walke in thine estate: And set goddes feare before thyne eyes. Leste when thou woldest it be to late. And haue in thy mynde euermore, This rule of thy profession:i. Cor. vii. Whyche is in dede gods holy lore. To walke in thy vocation. But if the Lord do the not blesse. In thy labours wyth geate plenty Yet thanke thou him neuer the lesse. Thou hast more then thou art worthy.
If thy Landlorde do rayse thy rent Se thou pay it wyth quietnes: And pray to God omnipotent, To take from hym his cruelnes. So shalt thou heap coles on his head And purchase to thy selfe great rest. By the same man thou shalt be fedde, By whom thou wast before opprest For God who ruleth ech mans herte, Shal turne thy Landlordes hert I say: And shall al his whole life conuert So that he shall be thy greate stay. Or els if he be not worthy, To be called to repentaunce: No doubte thy Lorde wyll him destroy, Or take from him hys heritaunce. Sure thou shalt be he wyll the set Fre from thy Landlordes tyranny: For he did neuer yet forget Any that walked orderly. But if thou wilt nedes take in hande Thne owne wronge for to remedy: The Lorde him selfe wyll the wtstande, And make thy Landlord more gredye. And where before thou paiedst greate rēt Thou shalt now lose thy house & al: Bicause thou couldst not be content Wyth patience on him to call. In like sort, if thy prince wyl take, More tribute thē thou canst well spare:
Se thou pay it him, for Gods sake, Whose officers all princes are.Math. xii. For in his nede boeth thou and thine, Are his to maintaine his estate: It is not for the to define, What great charges thy kinge is at. Yea though thou se euidently, That he wasteth much more then nede: Yet pay thy dutye willyngely, And doubtles God shall be thy mede. Nowe touchynge thy religion, If thy prince do commaunde the ought: Agaynst Gods Euangelion, Then pray for hym still in thy thought. Praye for him still, I say that he May haue Godly vnderstandinge: To teach Gods word to such as be, Committed to his gouerninge. And se thou do not him despise, But answere him wyth reuerence: And thoughe yu mightest, yet in no wise, Do thou forget obedience. Take not his swerd out of hys hand, But lay thy necke downe vnder it:Rom. xiii. (Yea, hough thou mightest his force wtstande) For so to do for the is fit.Math. xxvi. Thy master Christ hath taught yu well When he woulde no resistence make: Neither against he powers rebell When men were sent him for to take.
Yet if the Lord haue geuen to the Such knowledge that thou art certaine Of thy fayeth knowynge it to be Of the trueth do therin remaine. For thoughe man may thy bodye kyll Yet oughtest thou not him to feare: Mt x.For he can do thy soule none yll. Wherfore be bold, do not dispaire. Beholde I say Christ to confesse Wihout feare of this worldly paine. For when thou shalt be in distresse Mat. x.Christe shall acknowledge the againe. Christ shall acknowledge the I say If thou conquere by sufferyng: Luke. xxi.And do thy selfe hereupon staye, That thou must walke in thy callyng But if thou do lyfe vp thy sworde Agaynst thy kynge and Souerayne: Math xxviThen art thou iudged by Gods word, As worthy therwith to be slayne. Yea, thou maist not grudge or repine Aganst thy kynge in any wyse Though thou shouldst selaine wt thyne Tha he were wicked past al sise eyen For it is God tha appoynteth, Kinges and rulers ouer the route: roue. viii.And with is power he auoynteth Them for to be obeyed o doubte . xx.If they be euel, then thinke thy sinne, Deserueth that plage at Gods hande:
And se thou do forth wyth begynne Thine owne wyckednes to withstande. Corah and dathan did Rebell,Nom. xvi. And thought yt thei them selues coulde point A better priest in Israell, Then Aaron whom god did annoynte But what came of their fantasie? Was not destruction their ende? God dyd destroye them sodenly Because they would his workes emēde. Let thys example suffice the. To kepe them obedience To suche as god shall set to be Ouer the in preeminence. If thou do ths, thou shalt besure That god thy lorde wyl euer se That though thy rulars be not pure Yet they shal euer defend the. Contrary wyse, if thou Rebel. Be sure the lorde wyll the destroye Which thing hath bene declared well. Within thys realme verye lately. For notwithstandinge that our kyng And eke our rulars euerychone Be merciful in their doynge Yet haue the Rebelles cause to moue. And why? because no rebelles shall Escape goddes hand vnpunished For god him selfe doeth princes cal Hys Christes and his annoynted.
Who so therfore doth them resist Roma. xiii.The same resisteth God certaine For god him selfe doeth them assist Agaynste them ouer whom they raigne. If thou therfore fynd the greued Wyth men set in authoritye. Seke not thou to be auenged Eccle. xxviii.But let God take vengeaunce for the. Let me take vēgaunce (sayth the lord) Rom. xii.And I wil paye them al their hyre Do thus, and scripture doeth recorde That thou shalt haue all thy desyre. Thou shalt haue thy desire, I say Vpon the wycked maiestrate If thou wylt kepe thy selfe alway Within the boundes of thyne estate, Thus leaue I the, wyth threatenyng To the thy soules damnation If thou mislikynge thy callynge Wylt nedes chayng thy vocation. The lewde or vnlearnned priestes lesson. THou that arte lewde wythout learnyng Whom commonly men cal syr Iohn, Geue care for I wyl say somethynge Concerning thy vocation. Thou art a man voyde of knowledge
And eke of all good qualities Only mete for to diche and hedge Or else to plant and grase mens tres. Thou art not as yu wouldest be calde An offerar of sacrifice or though thy crone were .iiii. times balde Yet canst yu not so beare our eies. For it is playne in holy write That none can offer sacrificeHebru. For synne, either in flesh or spirite Though he be both learned and wyse. For Christ was once offered for al To satisfie for all out synne And hath made fre that erst were thrall The faythful floke of Iacobes kinne. To offer sacrifice therfore Thou arte not cald I tell the playne For Christe lyueth for euer moreRom. vi. And can no more for vs be slayne. Thy state therfore and thy callinge Is none other bt for to wyrckeGene. iii. oh. v. And not to lyue by forstalling. And name thy selfe one of the kyrcke If thou therfore wylt liue for aye And reigne wyth Christ for euer more Desyre no moe masses to say But get thy fode with laboure sore.Exh. iiii. Geue ouer all thy typpillinge Thy tauerne gates, and table playe. Thy cardes, thy dice and wine bibblingEph. .
And learne to walke a sober waye. And if thou haue any liueing i. Timo iiii.So that thou nedest not to laboure Se thou apply the to learninge Wyth al diligent endeuour. But to this ende se thou studie That when thou hast the trueth learned Thou maiste profit other therby Whom in time past thou hast harmed. And se thou go not Idlely From house to house to seke a place To say men a Masse secretly Their fauour therby to purchase. Put not the ignorant in hope That they shall se al vp againe That hath bene brought in by the Pope And al the preachars put to payne. But if thou canst do any good In teaching of an A. B. C. A primer or else Robinhede Let that be good pastime for the▪ Be euer doyng what thou can Teaching or learnyng some good thing And then lyke a good Christian. Thou doest walke forth in thy callinge. But if thou wylt knoweledge reiecte And al honest labours refuse Then arte thou none of goddes elect Rom. vi.But art worsse then the cursed Iewes. Repent therfore I the aduise
And take wholesome counsel by tyme And take good hede in any wyse That knowledge double not thy crime. Thus leaue I the, makyng promise To make for the peticion That thou mayst leaue the popishnes And walke in thy vocation. The Scholars lesson. COme hither yonge mā vnto me Thou that arte broughte vp in learnyng. Geue eare a whyle, I wyll teache the. How thou shalt walke in thy callyng. First marke wherfore scholes were erect And what the foundars dyd intend And then do thy studie directe For to attayne vnto that ende. Doubtlesse this was al their meaning To haue their contrie furnished. Wyth all kindes of honest learninge, Whereof the publike wealth had nede. Call thou therefore to memory, What knowledge thy contrey doeth: And apply the same earnestly, By al the meanes that thou canst make lacke And when thou arte determined What knowledge thou wilt most apply Then let it not be loytered,
But seke to get it spedily. Spend not thy tyme in Idlenes. Nor in vayne occupacyon But do thy selfe wholely addresse To walke in thy vocation. Se thou do not thy mynde so set On any kynde of exercise: That it be either stay or let To thy studie in an wise. To fyshe, to foule, to hunt or halke Or on an instrument to playe And some whyles to comune and talke No man is able to gayne saye. To shore, to bawle, or caste the barre To playe reuise or tosse the ball Or to enne base lyke men of war Shall hurie thy study nought at al. For all those thynges do recreate The mynd if thou canste hold the meane But if thou be affectionate Then doste thou lose thy study eane. And at the last thou shalt be founde To occupye a place only As do in Agme ziphras rounde. And to hinder learnyng greatly For if thou hadst not the lyueyng An other should that wold apply Him selfe to some kynde of learnynge To profite his contrey therby. If thou therfore wylte not be founde Worthy goddes indignation
Make thy studie perfect and sounde And walke in thy vocation. Let not tyme passe idelly Lose not the fruite of any houre Or else suffer him to supply Thy place that wyll hym endeuoure Thou doest but rob ye cōmone wealth Of one that would be a treasure Better thou were to lyue by stelth Then for to worcke suche displeasure, But haply thou wilt say agayne Shall I surrender my lyuynge? Shall I not thervpon remayne After I haue gotten learnynge? Yesse thou maist kepe thy liueyng styl Tyll thou be called otherwise But if thou wylt regard goddes wyllLuke. xix. Thou must thy selfe styll exercise. When thou arte thorowly learned Then se thou teache other thy skyll If thou wylt not be reconed For a seruaūat wycked and IllLuke. xix. Teach them, I say, that thou doest se Wyllinge to learne thy discipline And vnto them se thy lyfe be A boke to laye before theyr eine. Let them neuer se the Idle Nor heare the talke vndiscretly And by all the meanes possible
Let all thy doinges edifye. Rom. iiii.Ths leaue I the, wyshinge that thou Maist by this admonition Hensfrth desier (as I do nowe) To walke in thy vocacion. The learned mans lesson. THou learned man, do not disdayne, To learne at me a symple might Thy geate abuses to refraine And in thy callyng to walke right. Thou arte a man that sittest hie In the simple mens conscience To lyue therefore dissolutely Thou shouldest be vnto them offence. Offence, I saye, for they should thinke All that thou doest to be godly Wherfore do not at this thyng wyncke But do emend it spedely Emend thy wicked lyfe I saye And be (in dede) a perfect light As Christe our sauiour doeth say Math. v.And let thy workes shyne in mens sight For it is thy vocation i. Corh. i.To leade other the ready way How great abominacion Arte thou then if thou go astraye? But therin lieth the whole matter
To knowe which waye yu shouldest them leade Wherfore I wil the not flatter But tel the trueth wythouten dreade. Thou must thy selfe humiliate, And acknowledge thy wicked synneMath, vii. And striue to enter the straite gate Where fewe men do fynde awaie in Thys way thou cāst not walke so lōg As thou wylt trauayle sea and land And frame al the wordes of thy tonge To get promocion at mans hand. Thou must humble thy selfe I say And not aye seke to be alost, For he that walketh in rough way And loketh hie, stumbleth ful ofte. Thou muste acknowledge that yu arte Through synne vnworthy thine estate And that thy discipline and arte Can not bringe them at that gate. Thou must, I saye, striue to enter And not to get promotion Thy life thou must put in venterIhon. x. For Christes congregation. How dost thou walke in thys calling When thy mind is earnestly bent: To gather vp eche mans fallynge, By all the waies thou canste inuent? Geue eare I say, therfore thou fole, And learne thy first lesson againe: Enter into Gods holi schole.Math vii
And do not hys docrtyne disdayne. He wylleth the fyrst to apply uke. vi.Thy mynde to knoweledge and to take The greate beame out of thyne own eye And thyne abuses to forsake. And then he woulde that in no wyse Thou shouldest be stacke or negligent To pycke the motes out of mens eyes Teachyng them how they should repent If thou wylt that they do repent Tite. ii.Repēt thou fyrst, that they may see That the whole some of thyne intente Is to make them like vnto the. For if thou wylt them to refraine Murther, thesse, whoredome and Incest If they se thefe thynges in the raygne They wyll all thy doctryne deteste. If thou forbyd them gluttony And wyll them the flesh for to tame They myll defie the vtterly If they se the not do the same. If thou tell them of apparayle Or of ought wherin is excesse. Then wil they saye, thou doest but raile Vnlesse thou be therin faltnesse. What shouldest thou speake of vsurie, When thou doest take vnlawful gaine? Or rebuke men for Simonie. When nothyng else doeth in the raygne Maye not the lay man falsly saye,
I learned of the to by and sel, Benefices, which to this day Thou canst put in practise ful wel? Whye should not I, as wel as thou Haue benifices two or thre? Sence thou hast taught me the way how I may kepe them and blamlesse be? I can set one to serue the cure That shall excel the in learninge More then thou dost me I am sure And also in godly lyueynge: I can kepe hospitalitye And geue as much vnto the pore In one yere as thou doest in thre And wyl performe it wyth the more Alas that euer we shoulde se The flocke of Christ thus bought & solde Of them that should the shepperdes be. To leade them falsly to the fold. Repent this thinge I the aduise And take the to one cure alone And se that in most faythfull wyse Thou walke in thy vocation. Then shal no laye man say by ryghte That he learneth hys mysse of the For it is playne in ech mans syght That thou doest walke in thy degre. More ouer, if thou chaunce to be Made a prelate of highe estate To thine office loe that thou se
And leae not thy flock desolate. And fyrst before all other thynges Timo. v.Seke thou to fynde good ministers And appoynt them honest lyueynges To be the peoples enstructers. Let none haue care wythin thy See In whom any great vyce doth raygne Timo. v.For wher mysslyueyng curates be The people are not good certayne. zach. xxxiii.And for them al that do perish Through thy defalte, thou shalt answer Wherfore I do the admonish To loke ernestly to thys geare. Loke vnto it thy selfe I saye And trust not to a trifellar That wyl allowe al that wyl paye Sonne what vnto the regester. Se that they do enstructe the youth Of ech parri he diligently And trayne them vp in the lordes ruth So much as in theyr powre shal lye. Nowe if so be thou be called To be thy princes councellour Be ware thou be not corrupted By the vayne desyre of honour. Be not carefull howe for to holde Thy selfe styl in authoritie But to speake truth be euer bolde Accordyng to goddes veritie. Wyncke not at faltes that thou shalt se
Though it be in thy Souerayne But do as it becometh the Exhorte him al vice to refraine. If thou perceiue him ignorant In any poynte of his dutye Se thou do him not checke or taunt But tel him wyth sobrietie. Tel hym his falt, I say, playnly. And yet wyth al submission, Lest thou do seme to speake vainly. For gettynge thy vocation. Thus haue I told the as I would Be told if I were in thy place. To the intent that no man should Haue cause to tell the to thy face. Thus do I leaue the wyth wyshynge To the a wyl for to aduaunce Goddes glorye by godly learnynge And not thy lyueyng to enhaunce. ¶ The Phisitians lesson. GEue eare maister Phisition, And set a side thyne vrinal: And that with expedition For I, the last trumpet do cal Geue care I say, and marke me well. And printe al my wordes in thy minde: For eche thynge that I shall the tell Thou shalt both true and certaine fynd. God made the to succour mans nede.
As Iesus Sirach wrytteth playne lt. xxxviii.But by due proofe we know in ded That many thousandes thou hast slaine. But nowe am I sent from the kyng Of powre and domination To call the from thy murtherynge To walke in thy vocacion. Fyrst, where thou dydest her to fore vse To haue respect to the ryche man I would not nowe thou shouldest refuse To helpe the pore man if thou can. Helpe him I saye thoughe it be poore And hath nothynge wherewyth to paye For his maister hath yet in store Iacob. ii.A crowne for him at the last day. And if thou do on him thy cure For his sake yt gae herbes their strēgth Thou shalt vndoubtedly be sure He wyl rewade the a the length. This maister of his doth regard Mercye so much that he hath told Al his that thei shal haue reward Matt. ix.For geueynge water thin and coulde. And thynkest thou that he wyl not Reward them that geue medicine? Thou hast no suche mistrust I woe In his promies that is diuyne. I say therefore, if thou canst cure The pore mans soe or maladie Of thy reward thou shalt be sure
If thou wylt shew on hym mercye, But if thou suffer him to lacke Thine healpe because he lacketh goulde No doubt whē thou shalt a compt make Thy confidence shalbe ful colde. Then shewe thy writting if thou can Wheron thou bearest the so bolde. That thou wylt viser no sicke man That canno lyue thy pursse with gould Bringe forth thy writting then, I say If thou haue any such in store Whereby thou mayst require ech daye A noble of goulde, or else more. And shew by what ryght yu maist take Two pense for the syght of water Whē thou knowest not therby to make The sycke man one farthyng better. Yea if a man should try the wel To proue what thy coūtyng can do He should fynde that thou canst not tell Whether the man be sycke or no. I graūt the water sheweth something But not so much as thou dost crake Neyther is thy labour condyngue That thou shouldest money for it take. But if so be thou canst espye. By the water what is a mysse Teache hym how to seke remedie And worthy some reward, that is. But if thou do but gesse, as doth
The blynd man that doth cast hys staffe Though thou by chaūce hit one the soth Thy labour is scrase worthy crafe. Thou doest burgesse money to wyne And wt straunge wordes make mē agast And yet thou thynckest it no synne To cause pore mē theyr goodes to wast. But noe I saye to the, epent And do thy selfe hensforth employe To vse the gyft God hath the sente To the profyt of thy contrere. Let not lucre make the professe Before thy knowledge be perfect For he that ministreth by gesse Shal not so sone heale as infect. Apply the earnestly therfore To get phisickes perfection, That thou maiest ease the sicke and sore And remedy infection. And shut not vp thine helpe from such As stande in most nede of the same: And certes thou shalte gayne as muche By them, as by men of greate fame, Math. xxvi. Luk. x.For God hym selfe hath promised To make for them a recompence: Wherefore doubte not to be paied, Both for thy labour and expence. But if thou wilt not take my read, But folowe after lucre styll: I wyll put the out of all dreade,
Thy last rewarde shalbe full yll. For when cruel death shal the stynge, And thy lyfe from the seperate: Then shalt thou se thou hast nothing, Thy silly soule to recreate. Wherfore I must nedes greatly fear That in that extreme Agony: Thou wilt of Gods mercy dispayre And so perishe eternally. Take hede therfore, take hede bi time Let not slyppe thys occasion: But spedely repent thy crime, And walke in thy vocation. ¶ The Lawyers lesson. NOw come hither thou manne of lawe, And marcke what I shall to the saye: For I entende the for to drawe, Out of thy most vngodly waye. Thy callyng is good and Godly, If thou wouldest walke therin arighte. But thou art so passynge gready, That Gods feare is out of thy sight. Thou climest so to be alofte, That thy desire can haue no stay: Thou hast forgotten to go softe Thou art so hasty on thy way. But nowe I call the to repent,
And thy gredines to forsake For Gods wrath is agaynst the bent If thou wylt not my warnynge take. Fyrste call vnto thy memory For what cause the lawes were fyrste made And then apply the busily, To the same ende to vse thy trade. The lawes were made vndoubtedlye That all such men as are opprest: Might in the same fynde remedy And leade their lyues in quiet rest. Doest thou then walke in thy callyng When for to vexe the innocent: Thou wylt stande at a barre ballyng With al the craft thou canst inuent? I say ballynge, for better name, To haue it can not be worthy: when lyke a beast wythout all shame Thou wilt do wronge to get money Thyne excuses are knowen to wel Thou saist thou knowest not the matter Wherfore thou sayest thou canst not tel. At the fyrst whose cause is better. Thou knowest not at ye fyrst I graūt, But why wylte thou be retained Of plaintife or defendaunt Before thou hast their cause learned? For such a plea I blame the not, When neither parties right is knowen But when thou thy selfe dost wel wot
Thy client seaketh not hir owne It were a Godly way for the, To know the ende ere thou began But if that can by no meanes be To make short suite do what thou can If thou be a mans atturney In any court where so it be: Let him not wayte and spend money If hys dispatch do lye in the, Apply his matter earnestly And set him goynge home agayne, And take no more then thy dutyLuke. iii. For God shal recompence thy paine. If thou be calde a counsellar. And many men do seke thy read: Se thou be founde no triffellar Either for money or for dread But waigh mens matters thorowly, And se what may be done by ryght And further as wel the neady As thou woldest do the man of might Se thou haue no respect at all To the person but to the cause And suffer not such trueth to fall,Leuit. xxx As thou findst grounded on good lawes If any man do th desire Him to defende in donge wronge Though he wold giue the trile hire Yet geue none eare vnto his song. Fere not his power though he be king A duke, an earle, a Lorde, or kinght:
But euermore in thy doynge ii. Par. xxii.Haue the Lordes feare present in sight. If thou be iudge in commune place, In the kynges bench, or Eschequier Or other court, let not thy face Be once turned to the bryber. Beware yt bribes blinde not thy sight Deu. xvi. Eccle. xx.And make the that thou canst not se: To iudge the pore mans cause aryght, When it is made open to the. Why sholdest thou stil admit delaies, In matters that be manifest, Why doest thou not seke all the wayes. That may be, to rid the oppreste To thine office it doeth belonge, Leuiti. xix.To iudge as iustice doth require: Though the party that is to stronge Would giue the house and land to hire. I haue no more to say to the, But warne the that thou be conente To lyue onely vpon thy fee Fearynge the Lorde omnipotent. And for to se that no man wreste, The lawes to do any man wronge: And that no pore man be oppreste, Nor haue hys suite deferred longe. Now if thou be Lorde Chauncelour, As Censor ouer all the reste: Se thou do thy beste endeuour, To se all open wronges redrest.
And of this one thyng take good hede That among them that do appeale: Thou do not for fauour or mede Suffer any falselye to deale. Beware of them I saye that vse, Firste for to tempt the commune lawes And yet the iudgement to refuse When they be like to losse their cause, Beware of them, and let them not Abuse the courte in any wise: To wery suche as by iuste lot To clayme theyr ryght do enterprise. When they shall make peticion, Examine them diligently: And graunt not an Iniunction To eche false harlot by and by. Graunt thou not an Iniunction To hym that doth nought else entende: But by subtyle inuention His owne falsehode for to defend. I nde not to tell any more, Of thy duty thou maiste it se: In Gods sacret and holy sore If thou wylt thereto apply the. Thus leaue I the thou man of lawe▪ Wyshynge the to be as willynge: To folowe as I am to drawe The backe againe to thy callynge. ¶ The Marchauntes lesson.
NOwe marcke my wordes thou Marchaunte man, Thou yt dost vse to bye and sel, I wyl enstruct the if I can, How thou maiest vse thy callynge wel. Fyrst se tho cal to memory The ende wherfore al men are made And then endeuour busily To the same ende to vse thy trade. The ende why all men be create As men of wisdome do agre Is to mainayne the publike state In the contrey where they shal be. Apply thy trade therfore I say To profit thy contrey wythal: And let conscience be thy staye That to pollynge thou do not fal. If thou venter into straunge landes, And brynge home thinges profitable: Let pore mē haue them at thine handes. Vpon a price reasonable. Though yu maist thy money forbeare Til other mens store be quire spente Yet if thou do so that thy ware May beare high price, yu shalt be shente Thou shalt be shent of him I say That on the seas did prospere the And was thy guide in al the way That thou wentest in great ieopardye. For he gaue the not thy richesse,
To hurt thy contrey with all, Neither gaue he the good successe That thou sholdst therbi make mē thral But thy richesse was geuen to the That thou mightest make prouision: In farre contreys for thinges that be Nedefull for thine owne nation. And whē by Gods helpe yu hast brought Home to thy cōtry am good thing Thē shouldst yu thāke him that al wrought For thy prosperouse returnyng. Which thing thou cāst not do in dede, Vnles thou walke in thy callyng And for his sake tht was thy spede Content thy selfe with a liuynge But oh me thinke I write in vayne, To marchaunte men of this our time For they wil take no maner paine. But onely vpon hope to clime. So sone as they haue ought to spare, Beside their stocke that must remaine: To purchase landes is all theyr care And all the studye of their braine. Ther can be none vnthrifty heyre Whō they wil not smel out anon And handle him wt wordes ful faire Til al his landes is from him gone The fermes, the woddes, and pasture That do lye roūd about Lōdon Are hedged in within their mowndes, groūds
Or else shall be ere they haue done They haue their spyes vpon eche side To se when ought is lyke to fall: And as sone as ought can be spied, They are ready at the fyrst call. I can not tell what it doeth meane But white meae beareth a greate price Which some mē thinke is by the meane That fermes be found such marchādice For what is it when the pore man That erste was wont to pay but lite Must now nedes learne (do what he cā) To playe eyther double or quite? If ye aske of the coliar Why he selleth hys coles so dere: And ryght so of the wodmongar They say marchaūtes haue all in fere. The wod (say thei) yt we haue bought In tymes past for a crowne of golde We can not haue if it be ought: Vnder ten shyllynges ready told I am ashamed for to tell, Halfe the abuse that all men see: In such men as do by and sell, They be so bad in eche degre. I wyll therfore do what I can To make plaine declaration How thou that arte a marchaunt man, Maist walke in thy vocation, Apply thy trade as I haue tolde,
To the profit of thy contrey And then thou maist euer be bolde, That thy Lord God wil guide thy way Thou shalt not nede to purchase lāds Neither to take leases in groundes That whē thou hast thē in thine handes Thou maist for shyllinges gather poundes Thou shalt nor nede to bye or sel Benefices which should be fre: To true preachers of Gods gospel To helpe thē wyth that helles be. No more shalt thou nede for to lende, Thy goodes out fo vnlawfull gayne In suche sorte that by the yeres ende, Thou maist of one shilling make twainLuke. v Thou shalt aye haue inough in store For the and thine in thy degree: And what shouldest thou desire more, Or of hygher estate to be? Let it suffice the to marye Thy daughter to one of thy trade: Why shouldst thou make hir a Lady Or bye for hyr a noble warde? And let thy sonnes euerychone Be bounde prentise yeres nine or ten To learne some art to liue vpon For why sholde they be gentilmen? There be already men mowe That beare the name of gentil bloude Tel thou me then, what nede hast thou,
So vainely to bestowe thy good? or thou canst not promote thy sōne But thou mst bye him lande & rent Wherby some muste neades be vndone To bring to passe thy fonde entent. Some man perchaunce, nede doth cōpell To morgage hys land for money And wilt thou cause him for to sell, The liuelode of his progenie? Tel me if yu wouldst haue thy sonne, (If haply he should stande in nede) To be so serued when thou art gone Of marchauntes that shal the succed? Do thou as thou wouldst be done by As very nature doeth the reach Math. vii.And let thy loue and charitye Vnto all the Lordes creatures reache. And if any man stande in nede Lende him frely that thou maiste spare Luke. vi.And doubtles god wil be thy mede And recompence the in thy ware Math. v.Be iust, plaine, and not deceitfull, And shew mercy vnto the pore: And God that is most merciful Shal euermore encrease thy store. And in the ende when nature shall, Ende thy peregrination: Thou shalt haue Ioye emong them all, That walke in their vocation. But if thou do refuse to walke,
In thy callynge as I haue tolde Thy wysdome shalbe but vayne talke, Though thou be boeth auncient & olde Say what thou wylt for to defende Thy walkynge inordinately: Thou shalt be certayne in the end To be damned eternally.Mat. vii. For in the worlde there can not be More greate abhomination To thy Lord God, then is in the Forsakynge thy vocation. ¶ The Gentilmans lesson THou that arte borne to lande and rente, And art clipped a gētilman: Geue eate to me, for mine curent Is to do the good if I can. Thou art a man that God hath sette To rle the route in thy contrey, Wherfore thou hadst nede for to getEccle. vii. Good knowledge rather then money. For ignoraunce shall not excuse When all men shall geue a rekeninge. And the iudge will money refuseMath. xvi. Rom. ii. And iudge after ech mans doynge. Fyrst I aduertise the therfore, And require the in Christes name: That of knowledge thou get the store, And frame thy liuynge to the same
Get the knowledge I say and then Thou shalt perceyue thyne owne degre: To be suche that amonge all men, Thou hast most nede learned to be. Thou shalt perceyue yu hast no time To spare and spende in banketyng For though thou watche til it be prime, Thou shalt haue inough to doynge. Thou shalt not finde any leasure Math. xiiTo dice, to carde, or to reuell: If thou do once take a pleasure In vsynge thyne owne callyng wel. For parckes of Deere thou shalte not care Neither for costuous buildyng: For apparel, or for fyne fare Or any other worldly thynge. Thy mynde shall be styll rauished With the desyre to walke vpright. And to se all vyce punished, So muche as shall lye in thy myght. Thou shalt delite for to defene The pore man that is innocent: And cause the wicked to emende, And the oppressour to repent. Thou shalt haue delite in nothyng Sauynge in doynge thy duty: Whych is vnder God and thy kyng To rule them that thou doest dwel by. Thou shalte not thinke yt thou mayste take Thy rent to spend it at thy wyl
As one that shoulde no recknyng make,Rom. xiiii For ought that he doth well or yll. But thou shalt fynde yt thou art boūd And shalt answer much more straightlyLuke. xii. Then the pore men that tyll the ground If thou regard not thy duty. ¶ Thou shalt not fynde that thou maist reise Thy rent or leauy a great fyne More then hath bene vsed alwayes For that only is called thyne. For as thou doest hold of thy kynge So doeth thy tenaūt holde of the And is allowed a lyueynge As wel as thou in his degre. If thou therfore wouldst not thy king Should take of the more then hys due Whye wylt thou debate the lyuyng Of thy tenaunt and cause him rue. For knoweledge wil tel the that thou Must do as thou wouldest be done byMath. vii. And ryght so wyll she tell the howe Thou maiste discharge all thy dutie She wyl teach the to be content Wyth that thou haste by heritage And eke to lyue after thy rene And not to falle into outrage. If thou maye dispende. xlli, Thou maieste not lyue after .lx. Neyther maist thou enclose thy ground That thou maist make it yerly more.
For knowledge will teach the to seke Other mens health more thē thine own And rather to fede on a leke Then one house should be ouerthrowen. Thou shalte by hir learne that yu arte A father ouer thy contrey And that thou oughest to play the part Of a father both nyght and day. Thou shalt by knoweledge vnderstād Psal. lxxxii.That thou must succour the neady, And in their cause sch men wtstand, As shewe them selues ouer gready. In fine knowledge that is Godly Wil teach the all that thou shalt do Belongynge to thyne owne duty And other mens duty also. Get the knowledge I say therfore That thou maist be worthy thy name: For without hir thou maist no more Be calde a Gētilman for shame. For without knowledge thou shalt be Of all other most out of frame: Bicause there is nothinge in the That may thy luste chastice or tame. Without knowledge, yu wylt folowe Thy fleshe and fleshly appetite: And in the lustes therof wallowe Setting therin thyne whole delite Without knowledge yu wilt oppresse Al men that shalbe in thy power.
And when they shall be in distresse Thou wylt them cruelly deuoure Without knowledge thou wilt araie Both the and thine past thy degre And eke maintaine outragiouse play Til thou haue spent both land and fee. To make an end, vnlesse thou haue Knowledge remayninge in thy breste Thou shalt be worsse then a vile slaue That doth al honesty detest. Get the knowledge therfore I say, And eke the feare of God aboue: And let thy study be alwaye To knowe what thing doth the behoue. But fyrst before all other thynges Sette the Lordes feare before thy face:Psa. xxxiii. To guide them all thy doynges That thou delite not in trespace. For he that doth delite in synne, Shal neuer gouerne his life wel: Nor any Godly knoweledge wyn, For wisedome wil not with hym dwell.Sapie. i. Then seke for knowledge busily And leaue not of ty she be found And whē thou hast hir perfectly To the Lordes feare let hir be bound And let theim two beare al the swea, In thy doynges early and late: Let them agre and ende their plea Before thou do appoint the state.
By their aduise suruey thy Lande And kepe thy courtes doeth farre & nere And se they do faste by the stande, In thyne housekepynge & thy chere Gaue them present before thine eyes, In all thy dedes what so they be: In cessions and eke in assise, Let them not be absent from the. Let them rule al thy familye And eke enstructe thy children yonge: That they may thyne office supply When wt his dart death hath the stonge And last of al, leaue them to guide Thy chyldren and theyr families: That thine house and stocke may abide, And rle the route in godly wyse. No more to the haue I to say, But that thou kepe Gods feare in sight And make it the guyde of thy way As wel by bright day as by nyght. So doynge I dare the assure That in the ende thou shalt obtayne: The blysse that shal euer endure Wyth Christe our maister for to raigne. ¶ The Maiestrates lesson WHo so thou be that God doth call To beare the swerde of punishemente.
Marke well my woodes, & take thē all Accordyngly as they be ment. When thou art in Authoritie And hast the bridle raine in hand Thē be well ware that Tyranny Do not get the within hir band. Loke not vpon thy sword alwaye But loke some tyme on thy balaunce And se that neither do decaye In the tyme of thy gouernaunce. For, to punishe wyth equitie Is and aye shall be bysemynge Where as to ewe extremitie Is founde rather a bloud suckeynge. If any man be accused Se thou heare him indifferently And let him not be punished Tyl thou know his cause thorowli If he haue wrought againste ye lawes So that istice wolde haue him dye Then n thy balaunce laye his cause And iudge him after equitie If he did it of ignoraunce, Of nede or by compulsion Or else by fortune and by chaunce Then muste thou vse discretion Consyder what extreme nede is And home force may the weake compell And howe fortune doeth hyt and mysse When the intent was to do well
And though the euidence be playne And the accusares credible Yet calle to mynde the elders twayne Dani. xiii.That Daniell founde reproueable And if thou fynde them false or vayne Forged to worcke theyr brother yll Then let them suffer the same paine That he shoulde haue had by their wil Much myght be sayd in this matter Out of the workes of writters olde And for to proue it the better Many late stories myght be tolde But I leaue this to the studie Of them that haue had exercise In iudgment, in whose memorie It is as styll before their eies. I thought mete to touch it only That thou mightest haue occasion To call to mynde the chiefe dutie Of thy state and vocation. Which is to scanne the euidece And eke to trye the accusars all Though thei be men of good credence Leste haply the iuste be made thral. Moreouer, it behoueth the If thou wylt walke in thy callynge To se that all good statutes be Executed before all thynge For to what ende do statutes serue Or whye should we holde parliamente
If men shall not such lawes obserue As in that courte we shall inuent? And what thynge shal a realme decay So sone as when men do neglecte The wholsome lawes, as who should say They were in dede to none effect? For in that realme the myghtie shal Worcke after theyr fancie and wyll For there the pore may crye and call For helpe and be oppressed styll. Se thou therfore to thy duttie In this behalfe boeth daye and nyght And let none breake such lawes fely But let thē knowe yt lawes haue myght Let them all knowe I saye that thou Art set to minister iustyce And that thou madest therto a vowe At the takeynge of thyne offyce. Wincke not at thinges yt be to plaine Leste godli knowledge fle the fro And thou flyt into endlesse payne At such tyme as thou must hense g. For if thou wylt not minister Iustice to them that do oppresse What are the people the better For the, when they be in distresse? The heauenli housband man therfore Who planted the vice to suppresse Shall drye thy roe for euer more And geue the vp to wyckednes.Ihon. xvi
Be ware of this vengeaunce betyme Leste it come on the sodainly When yu wouldest faine repēt thy crime But shalt dispere of goddes mercie: For what thing causeth men dispeire Of gods mercie at their last ende But their cōscience that sayth thei were Tolde of their fault & would not mende. If thou therfore doest se this thinge And wilt wincke at it willingly I saye that when death shal the stinge Thou shalt dispeyre of gods mercy. Yet hae I more to saye to the Concerning thy vocacion Which if it growe styl must nedes be Double abhominacion. For he that byeth, must nedes sell Thou knowest alreadie what I meane I nede not with plaine wordes to tell If sinne haue not blynded the cleaue. Se vnto it I the aduise And let not offices be solde For god wyl punishe in straite wyse Suche as with him wyl be so bolde. He wyl not aye suffer his flocke Of wolfes to be so deuoured Neither shall they yt would him mocke Escape his handes vnpunished. Exo. xiiii.His arme is as stronge it was When he plaged Kynge Pharao
In Egipt, and can bringe to passe All that he listeth now also. He spent not all his power vpon The ynge Nabuchodonozer He shall neuer be founde suche oneDani. iiii. That he should not haue might in store. Take hede, take hede, I saye therfore That thou fall not into his hande For if thou do thou art forlore Thou canst not be able to stande.Hebru. x. Yet one thing more I must the tell Which in no wise thou maist forget If thou wylt professe gods Gospel And thine affraunce therin set. Thou must not couet imperie Nor seke to rule straunge nacions For it is charge inoughe perdie To aunswere for thine owne cōmons. Let thy studie therfore I saye Be to rule thine owne subiectes well And not to maintaine warres alwaye And make thy contrei lyke an hell. Let it suffise the to defende Thy limites from inuasion And therin se thou do entende Thine owne peoples saluation. For, marke this. If thou do inuade And get by force commoditie The same shall certeinly be made A scorge to thy posteritie.
This haue I sayde, to call the backe i. Reg. xiii.From the Philistines station Trustynge thou wylte my counsell ta And walke in thy vocacion. The womans lesson. WWho so thou be of woman kinde That lokest for saluation. Se yu haue euer in thy mynde. To walke in thy vocacion If thy state be virginitie And hast none housband for to please Then se thou do thy selfe applie i. Cor. vii.In christen maners to encrease If thou be vnder a mesties Se thou learne hir good qualities And serue hir wyth all redines Haueyng goddes feare before thine eies If thou se hir wanton and wylde Then se thou call vpon god styll That he wyll kepe the vndefylde And kepe from the all maners yll Auoyde idle and wanton talke Auoyde nyce lokes and daliaunce And when thou doest in the stretes walk Se thou shewe no light contenaunce. Let thyne apparayle be honeste Be not decked paste thy degre
Neither let thou thyne hede be dreste Otherwise then besemeth thei. Timo. ii Let thine heare beare the same colour That nature gaue it to endure Laye it not out as doeth an whore That would mens fantacies allure Paynt not thy face in any wise But make thy maners for to shyne And thou shalt please all such mens eies As do to godlines enclyne. Be thou modeste, sober and wise And learne the poyntes of houswyfry And men shal haue the in such price That thou shalt not nede a dowry Studye to please the lorde aboue Walkynge in thy callyng vpright And god wil some good mans hert moue To set on the his whole delyte. Now when thou arte become a wife And hast an housbande to thy minde Se thou prouoke him not to stryfe Lest haply he do proue vnkynde Acknowledge that he is thyne headei. Co. xi. And hath of the, the gouernaunce And that thou must of him be led Accordyng to goddes ordinaunce Do all thy busynes quietly And delyte not Idle to stand But do thy selfe euer apply To haue some honest worcke in hand
And in no case thou maiste suffer Thy seruauntes or children to playe For ther is nought tha may soner Make them desyre to tenne awaye Se thou kepe them styll occupyed From morne tyll it be nyght agayne And if thou se they growe in pryde Then laye hand on the brydle rayne But be thou not to them bytter Wyth wordes lacking discretion For thyne housband it is fytter To geue them due correction But if thou be of such degre That it is not for the semely Emonge thy maydens for to be Yet do thy selfe styll occupye Do thy selfe occupy I saye In readynge or hearyg some thynge Or talkynge of the godly waye Wherin is great edifiynge Se thy children wel nurtered Se them broughte vp in the lordes feare And if theyr maners be wycked In no case do thou wyth them beare. And if thyne housbande do outrage In any thinge what so it be Admonish him of his laste age Wyth wordes mylde as becometh the. And if he do refuse to heare Thy gentle admonition
Yet se if thou can cause him feare Goddes terreble punission Do what thou canste him to allure To seke god by godly lyueynge And certenly thou shalt be sure Of lyfe that is euerlastynge For though the fyrste woman did falli Timo. ii. And was the chiefe occasion That synne hath pearsed through vs all Yet shalt thou haue salluation Thou shalt be false I say, if thou Kepe thy selfe in obedience To thyne housband, as thou dydste vow And shewe to hym de reuerence But in fayth must all this be done Or else it doeh nothynge auayle For wythout fayh nought can be woneHebr. xi. Take tho neuer so greate trauayle. Thou must beleue and hope that he Tha bade the be obedient Wyll be ryghte well leased wyth the Because thou holdest the content Nowe, if thyne housband be godly And haue knowledge beter then hou Then learne of him all thy dutie And to his doctryne se thou bowe Se thou talke with him secretly Of such thynges as do the behoue And se thou obserue thorowlye All such thynges as he shall aproue
Seke to please hym in thyne araye And let not newe tryckes delyte the For that becometh the alwaye That wyth hys mynde doth beste agre Delyte not in vayne tatyllars That do vse false rumours to sowe For such as be greate babbelars Wyll in no case theyr duetie knowe Theyr commynge is alwaye to tell Some false lye by some honest man They are wrosse then the deuell of hell If a man would them throughly scanne They wyl fynde faute at thyne araye And saye it is for the to base And haply ere they go awaye They wyll teach the to paynt thy face Yea if all other talke do fayle Before the idle tyme be spent They wyll teach the howe to assayle Thyne housbande with wordes vehemēt Thou maste swere by goddes passion That longe before thou sawest his heade Thou hadest ech gallant fassion And wylt agayne when he is deade Thou must tell him that he may heare Wyth a lowd voyce & eke words plaine That yu wilt some time make good chere With ryght good felows one or twaine. I am ashamed for to wryte The talke that these gossepes do vse
Wherfore, if thou wylt walke vpright Do theyr cōpanie quyte refuse For they are the deuelles ministres Sent to destroye all honestie In such as wyl be theyr hearars And to theyr wycked reade applye But thou that arte Sarais daughteri. Pet. iii. And lokeste for saluation Se thou learne thy doctrine at hir. And walke in thy vocacion. She was alwaye obedient To hir housband, and calde hym lorde As the boke of goddes testamentGene. xviii. Doeth in most open wyse recorde. Folow hir, and thou shalt be sure To haue as she had in the ende The lyfe that shal euer endure Vnto the whych, the lorde the sende Amen. The Boke to the Reader, ☞ It pleased mine Autor to geue me to name The voice of the laste trumpe (as Sainct Ihon doth write) Thinking therby to auoide al the blame That cōmunely chaunseth to suche m write Plainly to such mē as walk not vpright For truth getteth hatered of such as be il And wyl suffer nothing that bridleth theyr wyll
I sought do displease you, let me beare the wyre For I am the doer of that which is done I barcke at your faultes, but loth I am to byte If by this barking ought might be won And for this entent I was firste begon That hearing your faultes ye might thē emende And reigne with your maister Christe at the ende. ¶ Imprinted at London by Ro∣bert Crowley dwelling in Elie ren∣tes in Holburne. The yere of oure Lorde God. M.D.XLIX. the .xxix. daie of Nouembre. ☞ Auiore eodem Roberto Croleo ¶ Cum priuilegio ad impri¦mendum solum.
