6036 99844723 9561
THE Estate of the Church, With the discourse of times, from the Apostles vntill this present: Also of the liues of all the Emperours, Popes of Rome, and Turkes: As also of the Kings of Fraunce, England, Scotland, Spaine, Portugall, Den∣marke, &c. With all the memorable accidents of their times. Translated out of French into English by Simon Patrike, Gentleman. LONDON Printed by Thomas Creede. 1602.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIP∣full Syr VVilliam VVray of Glentworth, in the Countie of Lincolne Knight. THis worke (Right Worshipfull) cal∣led the Estate of the Church, from the beginning of the raigne of the Em∣perour Augustus, to the first yeare of Rodolph the second, now liuing; First written in French, by I. Crispinus, and lately translated into our mother tongue by a Gentleman of desert: at the request of my very friends, I haue bene intreated to propagate to this present time. For him, although some hold, that trans∣lation is not capable of that elegance, as is the original, because the one hath full libertie of inuentiō, the other is by necessitie tyed to obseruation: yet in my opinion the Author hereof, for his faithfull & significant inde∣uour therin, hath deserued to be ranked with the choi∣sest inuentions. For my selfe in the continuation, as I haue alwaies in matters of small consequence, shewed the mightie perturbation of my mind, feare; so in this labour of extraordinary moment, especially in presu∣ming of protection vnder your worships patronage, I am confounded, since the shewe of my deuotion is begun with so meane a sacrifice: for to this heape I haue onely added an handfull. In the whole discourse
is set downe at large, the originall of Papacie (that slaughter-house of consciences) the aduancing & in∣creasing therof, the beginnings of all heresies, the per∣secutions of the faithfull, the chaunge of religions, the decrees and Councells of Bishops, the Canonie and lawes of the Church. The iudiciall knowledge wher∣of is a light, illuminating the blindnesse of soules, and deliuering them from the more then Cimerian darke∣nesse of ignorance. This rectifieth the iudgement of man, and teacheth him rightly to distinguish between true Religion and superstition, who both haue one ground, which is his soule. This prospectiue shewing the spots and errors of the Church of Rome, with the darke & sullen colours of hypocrisie & heresie, (which two venemous wormes like snakes do poyson and in∣fect the florishing estate of a setled Church,) will ma∣nifest the right Diaphonia and concord thereof. But iealous of this ouer-boldnesse I take my leaue: hum∣bly dedicating my poore labours to your Worships true-iudicial consideratiō, desiring withal, your gentle hand of approbation to this essentiall testimony of my most dutious loue. Your Worships humbly at commaund,
IOHN CRISPIN to the Church of Iesus Christ. SVch as apply their spirites to collect Histories ought to look vnto this principall marke,The true end of histories. to propose as in a glasse, the power, wisedome, iu∣stice, and admirable bountie of the liuing and eternall God, to the ende hee may lesse nothing among men, of that which appertaineth vnto him. As indeed he proposeth and setteth out nothing in the world, be it in the person of kings or of such as be of base condition,For what pur∣poses changes do serue vs. wherein he meanes not to shew that it is hee which setteth his hands to all things, that men may learne to depend vpon him, to hope for all good things at his hands, and to ho∣nour and tremble vnder his iudgements. When we see an Historie,A glasse for the comfort of such as be afflicted. that some kingdome hath bin established and brought into good estate, which before was dissipated & diuided: or else that some man hath bene deliuered from some great calamity, and hath recouered some prosperitie: behold heere is a glasse to let them know which reade such things, what good and happie issue they may attend at Gods hands, after long and troublesome calamities, if they trust in him. Againe, if we encounter such an example,A glasse for them of Ge∣neua. that a Common-wealth, which otherwise was of no great force to resist ma∣ny enterprises attempted against it; yet it standeth fast, only making it selfe strong vpon the succours it looked for at Gods hands: behold here a Painter to represent vnto vs liuely, with what wisedome God worketh, breaking the counsels of the proud which abuse their pow∣er, to confound and oppresse such in the middest of which he hath esta∣blished his seate to be honoured. Moreouer when such witnesses appeare, as the greatnes, force, magnificence, the long spreading & stretching of great Monarchies,
cannot often hinder,A glasse to cō∣template the incomprehen∣sible iudge∣ments of God. but all this hath bin ouerthrowne, or at the least comen to some decay; this is an other portrait which should make vs thinke vpon the admirable iudgements of God raigning, who therein shewe euidently has strong and outstretched arme from aboue: and would giue men to know, that if he can reduce and bring to nothing powers established in so apparant assurance, farre more easily can he ouerthrow euery arrogant and proud head: to the end there may be no humaine creature of what condition or estate soeuer it be, which trembleth not in the consideration of such wonderfull iudgements. Moreouer, so many chaunges and straunge mutations which the discourse of time bringeth vs, do demonstrate vnto vs what may be the assurance and felicitie of all the frame of the world, and what may be the common condition of men.Things here below subiect to changes. As indeed there is nothing so well gouerned vnder the Sunne, be it neuer so well ordeined and esta∣blished, which is not subiect to diuers chaunges. We see the Crownes of kings fall downe to the earth: the scepters of Emperours bruised, yea broken in pieces; the glory of Common-weales fade and decaie, but ambitiō,The causes of changes and mutations. proud ingratitude, insatiable auarice of such as were or∣deined to rule and acknowledged not God, are the cause of such ouer∣throwes and mutations. But since all men seeke to finde some firme estate wherein they may subsist & stand the reading of such examples should bring them to behold their God who is the firmitie & assurance of all things, and without whom,The alone Church of God remai∣neth firme. nothing can remaine firme one minute of time. And as he hath shewed this assurance in the middest of his Church against all tempests and stormes, and against all the assaults & machinations of Antichrists, as is clearly shewed in this present collection, so should this bee the refuge of euery one to finde out that hee would seeke for. The Church may well be shaken,The Church may be sha∣ken, but not ouerthrowne. but it can neuer be ouerthrowne: for it leaneth vpon the foundation of the truth of God: It may be tossed by tempests, waues & stormes, but her ancre ascendeth euen to heauen, and is sure held by the hand of him which cannot be remoued out of his place.The conditi∣on of the king∣domes of the world. But contrary, men perceiue not the stormes and tem∣pests which are to settle and sinke the great kingdomes of the world: yet it is so, that without being shaken they fall & vanish away as of thē selues. But the spirituall kingdome of the sonne of God, which is his Church, ought not to be esteemed after the daungers of this present
life: for it is preserued in the middest of the fiercest waues. As is said in Esay 60. Thou shalt haue no more the Sunne to shine by day: neither shall the brightnesse of the Moone shine vn∣to thee: For the Lord shall be thine euerlasting light, and thy God thy glory, and thy Sunne shall neuer goe downe, neither shall thy Moone be hid: for the Lord shall be thine euerlasting light, and the dayes of thy sorrow shall be ended. The assurance then of the Church ought not to be considered ac∣cording nor in regard of things present,The Church of God is sub∣iect to change because it is established in God and feareth no chaunges: For God is her light: so that she hath no need to borrow any brightnesse from either Sunne or Moone. And although the faithfull be not depriued of the commodities of this pre∣sent life, but rather there is nothing either in heauen or earth which God hath not created for the loue of them: seeing he hath a particu∣lar care of them: yet is there one thing much more excellent which the children of God do enioy; namely the heauenly light: which from all times hath bene cast on it. We must then lift vp our spirits vnto God, who gouerneth all both aboue and below,The heauenly light peculiar to the childrē of God.How exam∣ples written in histories are to be taken. and not attribute any thing to Fortune, as prophane men doo: heereunto men pretend to bring all the faithfull. Therefore hither men come not to feede the spirit of foolish cu∣riositie, or here to learne any thing to babble with vaine ostentation, or to take pleasure to heare a well adorned language: and assoone as the eyes are taken from off the booke, all fruite of that reading is lost: but there is neither fact, nor chance, nor issue,Examples of prosperitie. which euery man oght not to borrow for himselfe. If he finde that some vertuous and well liuing man hath bene well beloued of God and honoured of men, that vertue ought to be vnto him as a flame to lighten his heart, that fol∣lowing such a man he may come to a like felicitie.Examples of aduersitie. If contrary he en∣counter and light on one who for his vices fell into some greeuous in∣conueniences, it is an example to serue him for a bridle, that hee do not precipitate and throw himselfe headlong into the same ditch: and aboue all, such as haue great dignities and are called to doo great things, so much more as their ruine is daungerous, so much more also ought they to be carefull to looke how faithfully they acquite them∣selues in their charge committed vnto them. But well hath one said, that The Historie is a treasure which
should neuer depart from the hands,The aduer∣timet that we hu y like histories. wherwith men being aided▪ may more commodiously handle their affaires like to such as they finde re∣gistred in histories: seeing that almost alwaies alike causes happen and come to passe This small aduertisement may profit, if it light not vpon crooked and brutish spirits, vnto whom this labour will not be profitable, but onely vnto such as with an honest pleasure will ioyne a good desire to carry an humble reuerence to all the workes of God. But then O Church of God, seeing all things come and are done for the loue of thee, it is good reason that thy litle estate (or rather glasse of thy condition & of that thou hast endured since the comming of thy espouse) be dedicated and consecrated vnto thee. On the one side thou shalt know the heretikes, schismatikes, mockers & contem∣ners, with the tyrants and violent oppressors which haue done vnto thee a thousand euils: but on the other side thou shalt see Iesus Christ the stronger: who hath not declared himselfe thy head for a world or two: but for euer a protector of thine. And now is there any vnder∣standing that can cōprehend, & lesse tongue to expresse what he hath done for thee in these last dayes: when from thy renting and treading vnder foote we see so many children each where of so fruitfull a mo∣ther. O admirable bountie! O indicible ioy and consolation, to see the meruailes of the Lord in these last times: Let vs pray that hee will continue that hee hath begun and aduanced, to his glory and honour. So be it. Thine in the Lord, Iohn Crispin.
The order of the Bishops and Pope of Rome, after this Booke. SAint Peter vpon false tokens called the first in number of the Bishops of Rome. Linus. Cletus. Clement. Anacletus. Euaristus. Alexander. Sixtus or Xistus. Telesphorus. Higinus. Pius. 1. Auicetus. Soter. Eleutherius. Ʋictor. Zephirin or Seuerin. Calistus. Ʋrbain. Pontian. Antherus. Fabian. Cornelius. Lucius. Stephanus. Zistus. 2. Denis Felix. Eutichien. Caius. Marcellin. Marcel. Eusebius. Melchiades. Siluester. Marcus Iulius Liberius. Felix. Damasus. Siricius. Anastasius. 1. Innocentius 1. Zozimus. Boniface. 1. Celestinus 1. Sixtus 3. Leo 1. Hilarius Simplicius. Felix 3. Gelatius Anastasius 2. Simmachus Hormisda. Iohn 1. Felix 4. Boniface 2. Iohn 2. Agapetus. Siluerius. Vigilins Pelagius 1. Iohn 3. Benit 1. Pelagius 2. Gregorie 1.
Sauian or Sabinian. Boniface 3. Boniface 4 Deus dedit Boniface 5 Honorius Seuerin Iohn 4 Theodorus 1 Martin 1 Eugenius 1 Ʋitalian Adeodatus Donus Agathon Leo 2 Benit 2 Iohn 5 Conon Sergius Iohn 6 Iohn 7 Sisinius Constantine 1 Gregorie 2 Gregorie 3 Zacharie Stephen 2 Paulus 1 Constantine 2 Stephen 3 Adrian 1 Leo 3 Stephen 4 Paschal Eugenius 2 Valentine 2 Gregorie 4 Sergius 2 Leo 4 Iohn 8 Benit 3 Nicholas 1 Adrian 2 Iohn 9 Martin 2 Adrian 3 Stephen 5 Formosus Boniface 6 Stephen 6 Romaine Theodorus 2 Iohn 10 Benit 4 Leo 5 Christopher Sergius 3 Anastasius 3 Lando Iohn 11 Leo 6 Stephen 7 Iohn 12 Leo 7 Stephen 8 Martin 3 Agapetus 2 Iohn 13 Benit 5 Leo 8 Iohn 14 Benit 6 Donus 2 Boniface 7.
Benit 7 Iohn 16 Iohn 17 Gregorie 5 Iohn 18 Siluester 2 Iohn 19 Iohn 20 Sergius 4 Benit 8 Iohn 21 Benit 9 Siluester 3 Gregorie 6 Clement 2 Damasus 2 Leo 9 Victor 2 Stephen 9 Benit 10 Nicholas 2 Alexander 2 Gregory 7 Ʋictor 3 Ʋrbaine 2 Pascall 2 Gelasius 2 Calixtus 2 Honorius 2 Innocent 2 Celestine 2 Lucius 2 Eugenius 3 Anastasius 4 Adrian 4 Alexander 3 Lucius 3 Vrbain 3 Gregorie 8 Clement 3 Celestine 3 Innocent 3 Honorius 3 Gregorie 9 Celestine 4 Innocent 4 Alexander 4 Vrbain 4 Clement 4 Gregorie 10 Innocent 5 Adrian 5 Iohn 22 Nicholas 3 Martin 4 Honorius 4 Nicholas 4 Celestine 5 Boniface 8 Benit 11 Clement 5 Iohn 23 Benit 12 Clement 6 Innocent 6 Vrbain 5 Gregorie 11 Vrbain 6 Clement 7 Boniface 9 Benit 13 Innocent 7 Gregory 12 Alexander 5
Iohn 24. Martin. 5. Eugenius 4. Felix 5. Nicholas 5. Calixtus 3. Pius 2. Paul 2. Sixtus 4. Innocent 8. Alexander 6. Pius 3. Iulius 2. Leo 10. Adrian 6. Clement 7. Paul 3. Iulius 3. Marcel. 2. Paul 4. Pius 5. Gregorie 13. FINIS.
A Table of the Romaine Emperours, with the declaration of the yeares which euery one raigned. AVgustus raigned 56. yeares, that is to say, 12. with Anto∣nius and Lepidus, and 44. alone. The yeare 42. of his Empire, was our Sauiour Iesus borne.   yeares. moneths. Tiberius 23.   The 18. yeare of his Empire, was Christ crucified. Caligula 3. 10. Claudius 13.   Nero 14. 7. Galba 14 7 Otto   3 Ʋitellius   8 Vespasian 9. or 10.   Titus 2   Domitian 15   Nerua 1   Traian 19 6 Adrian 22 or 20   Antonius Pius 23   Marc Antonin 18   Commodus 13 or 12   Pertinax   6 Iulian   4 or 3 Seuerus 18   Antonius Caracalla. 6   Macrin 1   Heliogabalus 4   Alexander 13   Maximin & his son. 3   Gordian 6   Phillip 6. or 5.   During the raigne of this Em∣perour one 1000. yeares is ac∣counted since the building of Rome. Decius 2   Gallus & his son 2   Eucilian of some is not accounted Valerian 6   Gallien 9   Egnatius saith he raigned 15 yeares, namely 8. alone, and 7. with his father Valerian. Claudius 2   Aurelian 5. and a halfe.   Tacitus 6   Florian   2 Probus 6 4 Carus with his two sonnes, Carin and Numeran Diocletian and Maximini, or Maximinian 15   These two freely resigned the Empire. Constans & Maximin 2  
Maxencius 2. alone, and with Licinius and Constantin 16.   Constantine the great alone 13. yeares.   Constantine, Constant, and Con∣stans, his 3. sonnes, diuided the Empire. The first raigned 3   The second 13   The third 24   Iulian the Apostate 1 7 Iouinian or Iouian   7 Ʋalentinian 11 with Valence his brother 3   Gratian with his father, Valentinian 8 with Valens his vncle 3   Theodosius 4 or 6   Theodosius alone 11   Arcadus and Honorus his bro∣ther. Theodosius 2 26   Valentinian 5   Martian 7   Leo 1 18   Leo the yong. 1   Zeno 17   Anastatius 27   Iustin 9   Iustinian 38   Iustin 2 11   Tiberius 2 7   Mauricius 20   Phocas 8   Heraclius 29. or 31 after some. Constantine   4 Heraclenas 2   Constans 28   Constantine the bearded.     Iustinian after some 10.   Leoncius 3   Absimarus, or Tiberius 7.   Phillippicus 1 5 Anastasius 3. after some one yeare and 3. moneths. Theodosius 1   Leo Isaurian 24   Constantine Coproninius 35.   Leo 4. 5. after some one yeare. Constantine 10   His mother Himene alone 3. yeares.   Charlemaigne made Emperour. Wee account from Augustus till Charlemaigne was crow∣ned Emperour, about 843. yeares. From the building of Rome, 1550. or as some say, 1530.
The names of the Emperours of Constan∣tinople, after Charlamaigne. NIcephorus, and Stauracius his sonne. 9 yeares. Michael Curopleus. 11 yeares. Leo Armenian. 7 yeares. Michael le Begne. 8 yeares. Theophilus. 12 yeares. Michael his sonne. 14 yeares. Basile. 20 yeares. Leo the Philosopher. 25 yeares. Alexander. 1 yeares. Constantine. 39 yeares. Romaine Lecapen. 26 yeares. Romain Leon. 13 yeares. Nicephorus. 6 yeares. Iohn Zimiscus. 6 yeares. Basile and Constantine. 53 yeares. Romain Argiropilus. 5 yeares. Michael de Paphlagonia. 7 yeares. Constantine Monomache. 12 yeares. Theodora the sister of Zoe. 2 yeares. Michael. 1 yeares. Isaac. 2 yeares. Constantine Ducas. 7 yeares. Romain Diogeues Michael, Constantius sonne. 6 yeares. Nicephorus Botoniate. 3 yeares. Alexius Commene. 27 yeares. Calcian. 25 yeares. Manuel. 38 yeares. Alexie. 3 yeares. Andronice. 2 yeares. Isacie Angel Alexie Alexie the yonger. Baldwin Earle of Flanders.. 6 yeares. Henry. 11 yeares. Peter of Auxerre Robert his sonne Balwin. Michael Paleologus. 11 yeares. Andronicus Andronicus the yonger Iohn Paleologus Manuel Iohn Constantine. The rest of the Romaine Emperours after Charlamaigne. LEwis the gentle his sonne, raigned 26. yeares. Lotharie 15 yeares. Lewis 2 19 yeares. Charles the bald 2 yeares. Lewis the stutter 2 yeares. Charles the grosse 10 yeares. Arnulphe 12 yeares. Lewis 3 12 yeares. Conrade 7 yeares. Henry 1 17 yeares. Otthon 1 37 yeares. Otthon 2 10 yeares.
Othon 3 18 yeares. Henry 2 24 yeares. Conrade 2 15 yeares. Henry 3 10 yeares. Henry 4 1 yeares. Henry 5 20 yeares. Lothaire or Luder 13 yeares. Conrade 3 16 yeares. Frederic Barberosse 37 yeares. Henry 6 8 yeares. Phillip 8 yeares. Othon 4 4 yeares. Frederic 2 44 yeares. Some say 33. yeares, others 37. yeares. A Schisme in the Empire 23. yeares as some say: others say 28. yeares. William of Holland 2 yeares. Rodolph 1 18 yeares. Adolphe 1 6 yeares. Albert 1 10 or thereabouts. yeares. Henry 7 5 yeares. Lewis 6 33 as some say. yeares. Charles 4 33 yeares. Wencelaus 22 yeares. We passe ouer Iosse and Ro∣bert, because of the schisme in the Empire. Sigismond 29 yeares. Albert 2 2 yeares. Frederic 3 53 yeares. Maximilian 1 25 yeares. Charles 5 29 yeares. Ferdenand 1 yeares. Maximilian 2 14 yeares. Rodolphe 2. at this present raigning. yeares. FINIS.
THE ESTATE OF THE Church, with the discourse of times, since the Natiuitie of our Lord Iesus Christ, vntill this present yeare, 1601.Augustus. IT was foretolde by Daniell that the Mes∣sias should bee borne vnder the fourth Monarchie, which Iulius Caesar constituted about 47. yeares before the Natiuitie of our Lord: after he had brought the Ro∣mane Empire vnder his subiection. Pom∣pey before tooke by force and pilled the Towne of Ierusalem: and then the Scep∣ter and politicke gouernment of the Iewes began to stoupe. See Iosephus in the 14. booke of Antiq. Chap. 2. This came in the yeare of the world, 3903. and threescore yeares before Christ. Augustus the sonne of Iulius Caesars Sister, succeeded his Vncle beeing adopted of him. Vnder whose Empire the eter∣nall sonne of God was borne, taking flesh of the Virgin Mary in Bethelem, a Towne of Iury, the yeare of the worlds creation, 3963. This is the seede which burst the Serpents head, and deli∣uered vs from the mortall sting thereof. This is the soue∣raigne head of the Church, without which the body thereof can haue no forme. He takes a particular care thereof, and cau∣seth his presence to be there felt with efficacie: And in the middest thereof will be inuocated, serued, honoured and glori∣fied. The state whereof is to be deducted in this discourse. So soone as Christ the true annointed of God was borne
and manifested in the world, Herod stirred great persecution. The occasion thereof was by the wise men which came from the East, which brought newes of the Messias to them of Ie∣rusalem. He caused all the children in the coasts of Bethelem to be slaine, which were two yeares old and vnder. This Herod who obtained of Augustus the title and dig∣nitie of King in Iudea, was the sonne of Antipater the Idumeen, sonne of an other Herod which was a Secretary in the Temple of Apollo, in the Towne of Ascalon. Philo the Iewe rehear∣seth, that in the 13. yeare of his kingdome, he killed the or∣dinarie Iudges of the house of Dauid, and substituted others in their places. Hee was brought into such a rage, that hee made sley his owne sonne, which he had of a wife of the line of Iuda. Macrobius reciteth, that when Augustus heard it re∣hearsed hee said. It were better to be Herods Swine then his Sonne. Behold the iudgement of God.His execrable deeds remained not long vnpunished, and it is profitable we should knowe the issue worthie of such a Tyrant. Iosephus in the 8. booke of Antiq. Chap. 17. describeth it thus. The kings maladie encreased, and God shewed openly that he would punish his impietie. For he was burned with a slowe heat, yet without, none could perceiue it, only he felt it within, because it grated & wasted his entralles. He was so hun∣gry that he tooke no leisure to chawe his meate, but deuoured all that entred into his mouth: and so still some must cast meat into his mouth. His entralls were wounded and vlcerated, and he was tormented with collicke passions. His feete were swel∣led with flegmaticke humours, through which you might see the day. His shamefaste parts were rotted and full of wormes: his breath was stinking that none durst approach vnto him. And in the 21. Chap. of the first booke of the Iewes warres, the same Historiographer writeth thus. All his bodie was taken with a disease, and hee was tormented with diuers do∣lours. He had a burning and intollerable heate in him. The Chollick tormented him incessantly: his feete were swelled betwixt the skinne and the flesh: he sought to aduance his owne death; and calling for a knife lifted vp his right hand,
but Archilaus his cosen-germane perceiuing it,Tiberius. ranne to him and held his hand: hee died 5. dayes after he made his sonne Antipater die, hauing enioyed the kingdome the space of 34. yeares after he had caused Antigonus to die, and 37. yeares af∣ter hee was declared King by the Romanes. In all other things he was happie, yea if euer King were; for a man of so base condition to acquire that Kingdome and keepe it so long a time, and at last leaue it to his children. But concerning his domesticke affaires, none could be more vnluckie, &c. Hitherto Iosephus. This Historie is worthie of memorie, that all that read such a vengeance of God, may learne to feare his iudgements. After the death of this Herod, the Iewes not being able to support the ruling of a straunger, sought to raise vp seditions, but they were repressed by Archilaus.Archilaus Herodes successor, of whom there is spoken. Math. 2. But whilest Archilaus and Herod Antipas pleaded one against an other in Rome, a∣gaine other troubles arose in Iewrie; In so much as Augustus diuided Herods kingdome. He constituted Archilaus the Tetrarch of Idumea, Iudea, and Samaria, and the reuenew of those Regions amounted yearely to sixe hundreth Talents.A diuision of the kingdome of Iudea. He diuided the other part into two Tetrarches. He gaue also to Herod Antipas, Galilie and Perea, out of which Regions he had yearely 200. Talents. And to Philippes he gaue Bathania, Traconite, Aucanite, & Cal∣cide, of which places the reuenew came by yeare to an hun∣dreth Talents. This Archilaus was chased from Iudea, and fi∣nally banished to Ʋienne, which is in Gaul nigh to Lions, where he dyed. At this time the administration of the Kingdome was a∣gaine chaunged in Iudea. The Romanes placed Gouernours there, one after an other, as Coponius, Marcus, Anius, Rufus, Valerius, Gracchus, Poncius Pilate. Tiberius succeeded Augustus his father in lawe, and raigned 33. yeares. He gaue himselfe to Idlenesse and drunkennesse, so that in mockerie he was called Claudius Biberius Nero, in
place of Claudius Tiberius Nero. See Suetonius and Cor. Taci∣tus, Historiograph. Iohn Baptist began to preach the presence of the Redee∣mer, shewing with his finger the Lord Iesus: he reprehen∣ded the false seruices inuented by men, so that persecutions be∣gan to arise. The most enraged persecutors were the Pharisies, I meane such as were great in the Church of Ierusalem. These crimes they laid against him: namely that he vsurped the Mi∣nisterie to teach without the will of such as had charge in the Church. That he brought a new doctrine, diuerse from the vse of the Sinagogues. That he shewed a Messias, who had no ap∣pearance of a King, but abiect and poore. That hee vsed hard and sharpe words, and affirmed that the gouernment of Moses was come to an ende, and that they must haue a new Religion. That he foretold the reiection and ruine of the Iewes, and the vocation of the Gentiles. Mat. 3. Luk. 3. Iohn. 3. But because the people came euery day in great multi∣tudes to him, and was held for an excellent Prophet, his ene∣mies were brideled. But he endured an other persecution of Herodes Antipas (the first king Herods sonne) the Tetrark of Galilie, who tooke Herodias, his brother Philip Herods wife, and made him die, to please the appetite of that Herodias and her daughter Salome, after she had daunced at a banquet. As it is Mark. 6. Three Sects in Ierusalem.There were amongst the Iewes at this time three Sects; namely Pharisies, Saduces, and Esses, as appeareth. Touching the Temple.All the Nation of the Iewes had but that onely Tem∣ple which was in Ierusalem, called the Temple of God. Mat. 21. It was 46. yeares in edifying. Ioh. 2. Nabuchodonoser pil∣led and burned the stately Temple of Salomon, and rased it by Nabuzardam Generall of his Armie, when the rest of the peo∣ple were carried into Babilon. Cyrus the first of that name King of the Persians, at the perswasion of Daniel, gaue leaue to reedifie it. And the second yeare of Cyrus raigne, the Iewes began to build it, but they had great hinderances. The death of Cyrus followed. Cambises fol∣lowed him, a man full of impietie and crueltie, hee caused the
building to cease. Darius Hislaspes succeeded after him, who made an end of the Temple. And this was the cause it was so long in building. This Temple was situated in an imminent and high place, therein was great magnificence, and great gifts were giuen for ornaments thereof, as may be gathered in the 24. of S. Math. Mark. 14. Luk. 21. See Ioseph. in his last chap. of the 15. booke of Antiquit. The Ecclesiasticall gouernment of the Iewes was this.The Ecclesi∣asticall go∣uernment which was then. They which held the preheminence in the Church of the Iewes were called principall high Priests. It was ordained of God that there should be one high Priest,Soueraigne high Priest. who might remaine in that office vntill the end of his life, & after his death an other was substituted, Exod 29. Nomb. 20. When Christ came, all was confused, all was solde for mo∣ney, or by deceit and stealth. As Iohn. 11. It is said that Cayphas was chiefe Priest that yeare. After the high Priest,Priests. there was a great troupe of other Priests, which were distinct amongst themselues. For Dauid distributed the successors of Aaron into 24. orders. Therefore it is said, Luk. 1. that Zacharie was a Priest of the Family of A∣bia, which had the eight Lot. 1. Chro. 24. There were after Leuites, whereof is spoken,Leuites. Iohn. 1. and 10. Chap. There were also Scribes, which were Doctors of the Lawe. Luk. 5. There was the Maister of the Sinagogue, who was the principall Doctor. Mark. 5. Luk. 13. There were they which were called Rabbi or Maister,Maisters. which was an estate or office of teaching. Iohn. 3. Art thou a Maister in Israel and knowest not these things? The Elders of the people,Auncients. were they which they chose from among the people, hauing charge of things which belon∣ged to the Temple, to Iustice, and the gouernment of the Church. When Iesus had chased from the Temple the buyers and sellers, the next morning the high Priests and Elders of the people came to him, asking by what authoritie he did those things. Math. 21. About the 20. yeare of Christ, and the fift of Tiberius, as
Eusebius saith in his Chronicle,Caligula. thirteene Townes of Asia were ouerthrowne by an Earthquake: namely, Ephesus, Sardis, Me∣sthenes, Megechiere, Cesarea, Magnesia, Philadelphia, Hincel, Te∣nus, Cume, Mirthina, Apollonia, Diahyrcania. Such iudgements of God ought to serue for aduertisements and instructions vnto vs. Our Lord Iesus Christ exercised his Ministerie and office the space of three yeares, three moneths, and tenne dayes: and the beginning is taken from his thirtieth yeare, because in S. Luke, it is said, that Iesus began to be about thirtie yeares of age. He suffered death and passion the yeare 34. according to the supputation of many authors. Caius Caligula was an horrible Monster, who by his wic∣ked life despited heauen and earth, vttering his furie through all the iurisdictions of the Romane Empire, and by his Edicts would needs make himselfe a God. But finally he was taken with a straunge death. Iosephus maketh a singular recitall thereof in the 1. Chapter of the 20. booke of Antiquities. Cha∣reas, Sabinus, Aquila and others, which of long time had con∣spired his death, slew him cruelly after he had raigned three yeares, tenne monethes, and eight dayes. His body as Suetonius rehearseth, was secretly carried to the Gardens of Lamius: and being halfe burnt, was couered with a litle earth. He was of the age of 24. yeares. Such a Tirant who had prouoked both God and men against him, could no otherwise end his daies. Caligula banished Herod the Tetrarch (who went to Rome at the perswasion of Herodias, the yeare 40.) into the Towne of Lions in Gaul, where he died in pouertie with the said Hero∣dias his harlot. The same yeare the Iewes endured great afflictions. One was at Alexandria vpon this occasion. Caligula had ordained
that through all the Iurisdiction of the Romanes, there should be builded vnto him Temples and Aultars, where they should worship him as God. The Iewes alone resisted his impietie. Then were there many Grecians in Alexandria who wished death vnto the Iewes, therefore then they tooke occasion to make them odious vnto the Emperour except they obeyed his ordinance. When it came to proofe, the Iewes resisted it strongly, and the sedition about it was such, that many were slaine on both sides. The cause was finally debated at Rome: and Caligula a peruerse man made chase away Philo the Iewe, who pleaded the Iewes cause. Who then said.Naucle. It behooueth vs whom the Emperour hateth to take courage. For it is neces∣sarie that God should helpe, when humane succours faileth. Caligula vsed to say; Would to God the Romane people had but one Head. The Iewes also were greatly affli∣cted in Babilon of the Chaldeans, and in Seleucia of Siria.Two brethe∣ren Iewes. There were two brethren Iewes of base condition: the one named Asniens, and the other Anileus: the which being Robbers and Theeues, they gathe∣red together a great number of Rake-hells and disordered per∣sons. Artanabus seeing this euill encrease, thought good to re∣medie it. But it was too late. And finally mooued with the prowesse of these two yoong men, receiued them into amitie, and gaue them the gouernment of the Kingdome of Babilon. See Ioseph. in the 18. Booke and last Chapter. Iesus Christ ascended visibly into Heauen to confirme his Resurrection the better, and the glorie of his Kingdome, 40. dayes after his Resurrection. His Disciples yet dreamed of an earthly kingdome of Messias, & asked of him if he would not begin it. But Iesus Christ after he had spoken of the eter∣nall Kingdome and had blessed them, was lifted vp aloft, and a bright Cloude receiued him into Heauen, where he sitteth at the right hand and power of God. Now then we must consider what aduancements and en∣crease the Primitiue Church made by the Apostles and their Disciples; that all the faithfull may know that Iesus Christ the King of glory remaineth not Idle in Heauen: but by an ad∣mirable
manner maintained, gouerneth, and aydeth his, that his Gospell may be sowne through the world. But as God shewed that honour to the Land of Canaan, as to giue it the promises touching the Redeemer, so there also by his death he obtained saluation vnto mankinde.Churches in Asia the lesse. Aboue all Countries Asia the lesse had at that time the most flouri∣shing Churches. After the Ascention of Christ, there was an excellent Church in Ierusalem. In the first of the Acts it is re∣cited that there were about sixe score persons at the beginning. The holy scripture calleth Churches the publicke assemblies of many faithfull. Tenne dayes after the Ascension, was the Feast of Pente∣cost. The Lord Iesus then raigning in Heauen at the right hand of his Father, powred visibly and sensibly the holy Ghost vpon the Apostles which then were assembled at Ieru∣salem. The word of the Lord tooke his course, and the number of the faithfull by litle and litle encreased in Ierusalem, by the preaching and miracles of the Apostles. Behold the booke of the Acts, for the first preachings and the persecutions which came after the death of our Lord. Steuen sto∣ned.The 34. yeare after the Natiuitie of Christ, and the 19. of the Kingdome of Tiberius, after the death of S. Steuen, the high Priests of Ierusalem stirred more and more grieuous per∣secutions against the Church. Saul (which is also Paul) was chosen to persecute the faithfull: for before his conuersion he burnt with false zeale, espying into each house, and drawing into prison all he could catch. S. Ierome reciteth that S. Paul his parents dwelt in Sischal a Towne of Iuda, but when the Romanes tooke the Countrie they went into Tharsis, which is in Cilicia, where Paul was borne. His father was a Iewe of the Tribe of Beniamin, and a Burgesse of Rome. Act. Chap. 22. Many then were Martired, others were constrained to retire themselues into Countries adiacent, which occasioned
the Gospell to be further spread abroad. About the yeare fortie and fiue after the Natiuitie of our Lord Iesus Christ, and twelue yeares after his Resurrection, the third yeare of Caligula, a great persecution was stirred by Herode Agrippa against the Christians, wherein Iames the brother of Iohn was beheaded. Peter put in prison, but the Angell of the Lorde drewe them out most miracu∣lously. Soone after the Lord reuenged the death of his. For it happened that this Herode went to Cesarea. The cause was for that hee hadde enterprised a warre against the Tyrrians and Sidonians, which they preuented by gaining the Chamberlaine Blastus, and demaunding of a peace. One day Herode sumptuously adorned sate downe in Throne and spake to them, and the people made an acclamation as if GOD himselfe hadde spoken vnto them. But Herode was incontinently strooken by the Angell of the Lorde, and was consumed with vermine and died miserably, be∣cause hee yeelded no glorie vnto God, and so the persecuti∣on ceased. Heere is a second mirrour of Gods iudgement against such as oppresse the Church. Saint Paul after his conuersion returned fiue times to Ierusalem. At his last beeing there, hee recited the Histo∣rie of his Ministerie in the assembly of the Elders of the Church. His preachings were greatly spread abroad, neither cea∣sed hee to plant the Gospell wheresoeuer he went, as it appea∣reth in the Acts. He preached at Rome by the space of two yeares, although he was a prisoner. Where before there was an assembly of the faithfull as the Epistle to the Romanes wit∣nesseth. Philippe the Apostle preached in Samaria, where there was a Church: which retired thither after the death of Saint Steuen. In Azote the Church assembled; from thence it went
into the Maritine Townes. Peter the Apostle also preached the Gospell in many Townes, as is at large seene in the Historie of the Acts. Ori∣gine in his Tome vpon Genesis saith, it seemeth that Peter prea∣ched in Pontus, Galatia, Asia, Bithinia, and Cappadocia, to the dis∣pearced Iewes. There was also a Church in Babilon, as he himselfe witnes∣seth in the fist of his first Epistle. In Phinicia and Siria, in Tyre, Sidon, Serentia, Silicia, Pamphilia, Pisidia, Attalia, Lycaonia. Also in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, Bithinia, Misia, and Phrigia. Vnto these did S. Peter write. The seuen Churches of Asia are named in the Apocalips: namely, Ephesus, Smirna, Pergamus, Thyatirus, Sardis, Philadel∣phia, and Laodicia. Aboue all, the Church of Antioche was most famous, where the Disciples were first called Christians. Some say this was the thirtie and eight yeare after Christ: others fortie. Paul and Barnabas remained there one whole yeare. Acts. 11. and 13. Saint Iohn the Apostle and Euangelist, after hee had preached the Gospell through all Asia, he finally retired into the Towne of Ephesus, where he remained many yeares. From thence the Church might easily spread it selfe into Europe, which was nigh therevnto. Now we see the beginning of the Kingdome of Christ, and as it were a renewment of the world. About the yeare 42. the vengeance of God fell vpon Pilate. For after the Iewes had accused him of too great crueltie, Lord Ʋitellius then Gouernour of Siria, commaun∣ded him to goe to Rome, to answere the accusations that were to bee laid against him. But as hee was in the way hee died. Tiberius as Iosephus reciteth in the eighteenth of Antiquities, Chapter fiue. Eutropius in his seuenth booke saith, that Pilate was nipped and pinched with so great anguishes, be∣cause Caligula troubled him, that striking and beating himselfe
with his owne hands, he sought to destroy himselfe.Claudius▪ See Euse∣bius in his 2. booke, Chap. 7. This same yeare it is held that Saint Mathew writte his Gospell in Iudea. The same yeare the Tetrach ship of Herodes was deliuered to Agrippa, and a great discomfi∣ture now the second time was made of the Iewes in Ba∣bilon. See Iosephus in the last Chapter of his Antiqui∣ties. Claudius the fift Emperour was chosen to the Imperial dig∣nitie the aforesaid yeare, and raigned fourteen yeares and nine moneths. Herodes Agrippa the yeare 15. and the third of Claudius, held the Kingdome of Iudea, of the gift of Caligula and Clau∣dius. Beeing departed from Rome to come to Ierusalem, hee thought good to make a shew to the Iewes that he loued their Religion, and after to gratifie the high Priests, he put to death certaine of the faithfull. At this time Churches were gouerned by the Apostles which were instructed in the schoole of the sonne of God, and therefore there is no gouernment to be compared to this. Yet in this time the dwell had his instruments in Chur∣ches gouernment; that is to say, false Apostles and false bre∣theren. Euen alreadie wrought he the secret of Iniquitie by his Antichrist. 2. Thessa. 2. and 1. Iohn 2. and 4. There were Heretickes, Titus 3. Dogges, Philip. 3. Wolues and men speaking peruerse things. Acts 20. People which were neither hotte nor colde. Apoca. 3. If at this time Sathan had such license, how bolde thinke we will he be now that they are gone? Amongst them which now gouerned the Church,Difference of degrees in the gouernment of the Prima∣tiue Church. some were giuen Apostles to visit Churches. Their charge was to sowe the Gospell throughout the world. They had no place assigned. Besides the twelue, Paul and Barnabas are called Apostles. Acts 14. Epaphroditus is called the Apo∣stle of the Philippians. Philippians 2. Andronicus and Iunia,
are called notable amongst the Apostle. Romanes. six∣teene. Prophets are they which had the gift not onely to Inter∣pret scripture, but also to apply it to the true vse. S. Paul prefer∣reth Prophecie before all other gifts. Euangelistes hadde an office which came nigh vnto the Apostleship. The difference was onely in the degree of dignitie.1. Cor. 12. Ephe. 4. Of this estate was Timothie, and his like, which suc∣coured the Apostles. 2. Timoth. 4.5. Philip is called an Euan∣gelist. Act. 21. b. 8. Doctors were for the conseruation of the puritie of Religion, that the holy doctrine might bee kept and publi∣shed. Saint Luke ioyneth Prophets with Doctors. Acts. 13. a. 1. Priest signifieth Auncient; not for that they were of an age, but because age commonly hath with it more wisedome, experience, and grauitie. Vnder this name, are comprehen∣ded as well Pastors, as such as were ordeined for the Regiment of the Church.1. Pet. 5. S. Peter calles himselfe Priest, shewing thereby, that it was a common name. Deacons is a general name of seruice, but is taken for such as had the charge to dispence the Almesses. Actes. 19. a. 22. Ministers or seruants are called Adioints, or such as ac∣companied the Apostles in their viands. Timothie and Era∣stus ministred to S. Paul. Act. 19. a. 22. Bishop and Priest was then one same name and office. Saint Hierome in his Epistle to Euagoras witnesseth it. But afterward whilest Schismes endured, one was chosen from a∣mongest the Priests and set in the most principall place, and called Bishoppe, or Superintendent. And therefore the of∣fice of Bishoppe was after helde to bee higher then the Priests. Saint Paul commaunded Titus to place in euerie Towne Priests or Bishoppes. Titus. 1. a. 5.6.7. See Acts 20. f. 28.
With the good seede which was all ouer as is said dispersed, there beganne also heresies to be cast into the Lords field.Heresies at this time. The first and most pernitious were the Simoniaques. The originall whereof was Simon Magus, borne in a Towne of Samaria, which Iustin calleth Triton, and Eusebius Gitton; a man exerci∣sed in Letters, who by his Arts enchaunted many in Samaria before Philip had conuerted them. As is recited in the Acts. Chap. 8. After S. Peter had discouered his wicked Hipocrisie, hee went away in such despite, that making a mingle-mangle of the dreames of Philosophers and Painims with the religions of the Iewes, and that which he learned of the Gospell he cor∣rupted, and transferred to his owne person, that which was spoken of Iesus Christ, of the holy Ghost, and of the saluation of man. And as the light of the Gospell got aboue his mysts and cloudes, he came to Rome in the time of Claudius the Em∣perour, leading with him an whore called Selene or Helena, which he had drawne out of the common Stewes of Tyre in Phinicia, he called her the first conception of his vnderstan∣ding, and the mother of all, by whom from the beginning hee had conceiued to make Angels and Arch-angels. He attribu∣ted also vnto her, almost all things which the holy Scripture yeeldeth, vnto the eternall word of God, in the creation. Hee said also of himselfe, that he was the soueraigne God which descended, and was transfigured to correct things which had bene euill administred by the Angels. And although he ap∣peared in an humane forme yet was he not man, and although men thought he suffered in Iudea, yet he suffered not. So pro∣mised he saluation to all them which would trust in him and in his Selene, and full libertie to do whatsoeuer their appetite desired. For men should be saued by his grace and not by their owne good workes. For such workes were not after his nature but from his Angels, which by his permission had made the world, and had imposed such workes vpon men to drawe them into bondage. Behold heere the doctrine of this Maister, who afterward brought out the like fruite, as pailliardizes, adulte∣ries, thefts, drunkennesse, blasphemies against the true God,
and other the like fruites. Briefly Ireneus calleth him the foun∣taine and father of all Heretickes, in the Preface of his third booke of Heresies. Of his manner of death, Epiphanius accor∣deth not with Theodoretus. Menander the Disciple of this Simon, was also a Magi∣cian. The yeare fortie foure as many thinke, Saint Peter came to Rome, and gouerned that Church twentie and fiue yeares: but hardly can they shewe that he was at any time there, nor at what time, nor vnder what Emperour. For first, if Saint Peter were at Rome, he came not to Rome at the time they say: namely in the yeare fortie foure, after the Natiuitie of our Lord Iesus, and that which they say, that hee ruled the Church twentie and fiue yeares, hath no likelihood. For it may easily be gathered from the Epistle to the Galath. that hee was in Ierusalem the yeare 51. where the Apostles great Councell was held. Let the yeares be numbred. The yeare thirtie and fiue S. Paul was cōuerted, to which adde seuenteen, euen vntill that Councell, and it comes to fiftie and two. How could he then before seuen yeares bee at Rome? If hee were there he returned soone. But S. Luke then would not haue concealed it if it had beene so: neither is it found in any Historie of credit, that after Saint Peter was entred Rome, hee left that place to returne into the Towne of Ierusalem. Moreouer it is certaine he was not at Rome the yeare fiftie eight, and three score. And that it is so, when Saint Paul was ledde thither prisoner, he remained there in an hyred house two yeares. Heereof Saint Luke makes no mention of Saint Peter. And by the second Epistle to Timothie, it may be plainely knowne that Saint Peter was not at Rome at the time that S. Pauls death was so nie. For then S. Paul hauing occasion to make mention of all that was with him, would not haue forgotten Saint Peter if hee hadde beene there. Many wise and good men haue handled this matter at large, vnto which I referre you. The same yeare Herod the brother of Agrippa, was
made King of Calcide. The yeare 45. S. Marke the Disciple of Saint Peter preached Iesus Christ in Egypt, and Euodius was first ordeined Bishop of Antioche. And there was Iames the brother of Iohn beheaded, and Peter deliuered from prison by the Angell. The yeare 46. which was about the ninth and tenth  of the Kingdome of Claudius the Emperour, there was a great Famine through all Greece, at Rome, and in other parts of the earth, and this Famine was foretolde in Antioche by the Prophet Agabus. Who being mooued with that hee heard say of the Churches prosperitie of Antioche, departed from Ierusalem to come thither with other faithfull. Dion and Eusebius make mention of this Famine. At this time Helena Queene of the Adiabenians, and the King Isares were accounted to serue God faithfully. Iosephus speaketh amply thereof in his Antiquities, Lib. 15. Chapter 2.3. and 5. The same yeare Agrippa who was called Herodes,Agrippa cal∣led God, is straight puni∣shed. Act. 12. died af∣ter a straunge maner. In an assembly at playes he suffered the people to call him God, and therefore the Angell strooke him, for that he gaue not glory vnto God, and he was consu∣med with Lice. Iosephus reciteth it at large: and herevnto a∣greeth the holy scripture. But it is worthy to be noted,The death of Heod Agrippa. Lib. 9. cap. 17. that when he felt the horrible pangs of death, beholding his friends he said. Looke vpon your God: I am now constrained to chaunge my life. And the necessitie imposed vpon me redar∣gueth  your lye. You called me Immortall: but now behold how I am drawne to death. Iosephus reciteth these things more at length in his Antiquities. His Kingdome was chaunged in∣to a Prouince, and Cuspins Fadus was made Gouernour of the Iewes. The yeare fortie and seuen, Abbarus raigned ouer the Arabians, and Cassius Longinus was made Gouernour of Siria. The yeare 48. Marie our Lords mother died after the common opinion of the age of fortie nine yeares. Nancle.
See also Epiphanius, Lib. 3. of heresies. If we will beleeue some dreames, shee was in body carried vp to Heauen, but that tale is so friuolous, as he that cannot see it is more then blinde. Ʋpon such foundations Papists began by litle and litle to build the Articles of their faith: namely vpon tales and dreames. The Councell of Ierusalem, recited in the 15. of the Acts, was about this yeare, and the 6. of the Kingdome of Claudius, and the 14. yeare after the conuersion of S. Paul, as appeareth by that which is rehearsed in the Galath. 2. The same yeare during the said famine, Tiberius Alexander was made Gouernour of the Iewes. The yeare 49. which was the seuenth of the Emperour Claudius, there was so great a sedition in Ierusalem vpon Easter day, that twentie thousand men were stifled betwixt the gates, as Iosephus saith, but as others, thirtie thousand. The same yeare Cumanus was Gouernour of Iudea, and Quadratus of Siria. In the 50. yeare, a numbring was made of the people of Rome, and there were found three skore and foure hundreth thousand, an hundreth three and fortie. The same yeare He∣rod the brother of Agrippa dyed, and his Kingdome was giuen to Agrippa the younger. This was he that gaue audience to S. Paul. Act. 25. Oros. ch. 6.The same yeare were seene three Sunnes, which by litle and litle ioyned themselues together. There was also an hor∣rible Famine in Greece, and the Iewes were chased from Rome by Claudius. The yeare 52. S. Paul did that which is conteined in the 21.17. and 18. Chap. of the Acts. This yeare he came first to Corinthe,Act. 18. where he remained a yeare and sixe monethes. At this time the Emperour appeased the seditions which were be∣twixt the Iewes and the Samaritanes. The yeare 53. the Emperour Claudius tooke the King∣dome of Chalcide from Agrippa, which hee had held foure
yeares, and gaue him the Tetrarchie of Philip, with Traconite,Nero. Bathane, and Abele:Felix. and constituted Felix Gouernour of the Iewes. Iudea was maruellously afflicted about this time by inte∣stine  conspiracies and robberies, which was committed by the greatest men of Ierusalem. Ionathan the high Priest had ad∣monished the Gouernour Felix, to acknowledge the true God. But Felix was so grieued hereat, that he ordeined an other high Priest, namely Ioseph, who was a familiar friend of the said Io∣nathan. Ioseph assembled together a band of theeues and slew Ionathan. These theeues which remained vnpunished for this, in an assembly of people fell vpon all they thought good, nei∣ther carrying reuerence to any persons nor places, how holy soeuer. And the true cause of all this mischiefe was, that some false Prophets and seducers ioyned themselues with these theeues. But so soone as they were come vnto them, Felix made them die as seditious persons. Amongst them was a re∣nowned Egiptian, of whom Iosephus makes mentiō in his Anti∣quities. This deceiuer perswaded the common people to ascend with him into the Mount Oliuet; saying that from thence he would shewe himselfe to them, and that by his commaunde∣ment the walles of Ierusalem should fall:Act. 4.21. towards the end. lib. 1. 2. Chap. 29. of the Iewes warres. Eusebius. and promised them that thereby they might enter. Felix hereof aduertised, made arme certaine people, and with a great number of horsemen rushed vpon that disguised band, which was of thirtie thou∣sand, and slewe about 400. of them, and tooke 500. aliue. In the meane while this abuser escaped and was neuer after seene. Those theeues againe perswaded the people to make warre against the Romanes, and no more to yeeld them obedience. They burnt and pilled such Villages as resisted them. The yeare 56. S. Paul went to Ierusalem,Act. 19.20.21.22.23. & 24. where he was  taken and ledde to the Gouernour Felix. Domitius Nero succeeded in the Empire, and raigned fourteene yeares, two monethes, and certaine dayes. Hee was as very cruell man, and insatiable in whooredome and Homicide, euen in sleying his owne mother, his sister,
his brother,Church. his wife Octauia, and an other wife called Pompeia, whom he slewe with a blowe of his foote. Hee killed also his Schoolemaister Seneca, and a Romane Consull, named Atticus, the better to enioy his wife called Statilia. The yeare 57. after the death of of Aziarius, King of the Emesicians,Chap. 2. of the Iudaik warre. his brother succeeded him. See Iosephus. And Nero gaue the principallitie of the lesse Armenia, to Aristo∣bulus the Sonne of Herode King of Calcyde: and the King∣dome of Agrippa the younger, was thereby greatly encrea∣sed. The yeare 58. after Felix was departed from Iudea, there was a great sedition in Cesaria, which is in Palestine, where a great number of Iewes were slaine. The same yeare S. Paul was sent prisoner to Rome. There was a sedition also in the o∣ther Cesaria.Act. 27. Festus. And Festus succeeded Felix in the gouernment of Iudea. The yeare 59. in the Towne of Thoulouze which is in Gaul, there was a verie renowned Rethorician called Statius Surculus. The same yeare the Towne of Magunce was repai∣red by the Romaines. Chro. Eus.The yeare 60. In Rome was a great earthquake, and an  Eclipse of the sunne, at the time when Nero exercised his Par∣racides and whooredomes. The yeare 61. a boy of eight yeares of age in Italie, in the time of Fonteius and Ʋispanus Consuls,Iulius. Solinus. Chap. 6. did runne fortie thousand paces, from noone till the euening. The same yeare there was an Eclipse of the Sunne the last day of Aprill. The yeare 62. Albinus was made Gouernour of Iu∣dea. Hist. Eccle. Lib. 2. Chap. 23.The yeare 63. Iames the brother of the Lorde Iesus, which was called Iust, accounted Bishop of Ierusalem, was slaine by the Iewes. The high Priest Ananias thinking to recouer libertie, caused him to be called into iudgement, and accused him as a corrupter of Moyses Lawe. Some say hee was cast downe from the toppe of the Temple, and as
hee prayed for them which put him to death, hee was strooken with a Fullers Bowe on the heade, whereof hee dyed. Then did Albinus gouerne Iudea, succeeding Fe∣stus. The yeare 64. a Thunderbolte fell before Nero his Ta∣ble. The same yeare Saint Marke the Euangelist died,Osnald. Mic. which was the eight yeare of the raigne of Nero, hee was burnt for the Gospell in Alexandria which is in Aegypt, where hee preached. At this time Agrippa augmen∣ted the Towne of Cesaria Phillippe, and called it Ne∣ronia. The yeare 65. after S. Marke his death,Hist. Eccle. Lib. 2. ch. 23 Annianus was or∣deined the first bishoppe of Alexandria, and gouerned the Church 22. yeares. The yeare 66. beganne the first persecution, which was  the tenth yeare of Nero, and endured till his death. By the commaundement of this tyrant,Crime impo∣sed vpon the Christians. fire was lightned in the Towne of Rome, and that none should say it was his act, hee laide the fault vppon the Christians, and made them die of many kindes of deathes. They that called them∣selues Christians (which name was as odious vnto all men as if they had beene enemies of mankinde) and they also which were accused by the prisoners besides all other e∣uills done vnto them, endured also this opprobry,The first per∣secution a∣gainst the Christians. that bee∣ing couered with Beasts skinnes, they were with dogges torne in peeces; Some were fastened to Crosses and Gal∣lowes. Others burnt with fire, in so much that of them they made fires to cleare and lighten the night. Cor. Tacitus rehear∣seth this. After Festus vnder Nero, succeeded in the gouernment of Iudea, Albinus, and after Florus, vnder whom the Iewes be∣ganne to fall into such rebellions and dissentions, that nei∣ther menaces nor torments, exactions, nor occasions, could re∣presse them. In Asia three Townes perished by an Earth-quake: namely Laodicea, Hierapolis, and Colossa. All Townes
which had receiued the Gospell whilst S. PaulLinus. liued, who had instructed them partly by writings, partly by his Disciples, as by Epaphras. A mirrour of Gods iudgement, who cannot endure the de∣spising of his word. The yeare 60. the Church of the Lord Iesus in Ierusalem, as it was assembled was diuinely admonished and transferred into the Towne of Pella, which is beyond Iordaine. This same yeare Ʋespasian was ordeined by Nero to set an order in the Countrey of Iudea: who did many things worthy of me∣morie. The yeare 68. began the warres of the Iewes vnder Flo∣rus, because of his great crueltie, whereof Iosephus makes men∣tion, Lib. 2. Chap. 13. & Egesippus, Lib. 3. Chap. 4. The yeare 70. if we will beleeue the catalogue of the Ro∣maines. Linus succeeded S. Peter. S. Hierome, Nicephorus. Eutha∣lius Deacon and others say, that S. Peter was crucified the 14. yeare of Nero, which was the last of his raigne, and the 27. yeare after the conuersion of S. Paul. How then could this be, that Linus should succeed him in the Apostolicke Sea as they say, seeing Linus was Martired a yeare before S. Pe∣ter? For so is it rehearsed by a certaine Monke restorer of the Papaltie, who made two great bookes of Counsell in the Towne of Colongne. Hereby may we see how assured the foun∣dation of Poperie is. If Linus were the high Priest or soue∣raigne Bishop of Rome in the time of Nero, it is certaine S. Pe∣ter was not there. But to prooue the Institution of Popish ce∣remonies by the example of the Elders, they say that Linus or∣deined that women should not enter into the Church vnlesse their heads were couered: yet that was not an ordinance of Linus,1. Cor. 11. but of S. Paul. There is a great diuersitie in the Romish Catalogues of Bi∣shops, that hardly can the writers thereof be agreed in their differences, which is a great argument that the Papaltie of
Rome leanes vpon vncertaine arguments.Galba. You may also see this in Cletus. This yeare Ʋespasian war sent by Nero against the Iewes. Nero hated of all, and searched to be slaine, killed himselfe, of the age of thirtie and two yeares, and the yeare of his Em∣pire fourteene. Galba Sergius succeeded, of the age of 43. yeares, and raig∣ned seuen moneths. He became cruell, Auaricious, a Glutton, and a Sodomite. He was slaine of his souldiers by his successor Otho, in the place where men pleaded causes. His head was presented to the souldiers, and exposed for a derision and mockery. Otho the eight Emperour, like in all vices to Nero.Otho. Hee raigned three monethes. He slewe himselfe with a stroake of his Poinard in his left Pap, after the battaile he lost against Vi∣tellius. Ʋitellius Spinter the ninth Emperour,Vitellius Spinter. raigned about seuen or eight monethes. He was a great whooremoonger, cruell, bloudie, and a Glutton. It is rehearsed of him, that at one sup∣per he was serued at his Table with two thousand sundrie sorts of Fishes, and seuen thousand sorts of flying Fowle, he was so excessiue. He was miserably slaine and drawne naked through the streetes. And after hee had beene launced and pierced with many Darts, was cast into Tiber. Hee was of the age of 57. yeares. The yeare 71. Ignatius was ordeined the second Bishop  of Antioche. And in this time all Mathematicians were driuen out of Italy. Fabius Quintilianus was drawne from Spaine by the Emperour Galba, and brought to Rome. Vespasian the tenth Emperour of Rome raigned nine yeares:Ʋespasian. a man wise, prudent, loyall and affable, modest and patient: one onely vice brought dishonour vnto him, namely Auarice,Couetousnes or inordinate desire. and couetousnesse of siluer, yea euen to impose tribute vpon vrine, saying. That of all things the smell of gaine is good. As he died he said; that an Emperour should die sitting.
Vespasian.The yeare 72. the Citie of Ierusalem was besieged by  the Romanes.Suetonius. There hath bene no Nation (that we can gather by any Historie) that hath bene so much tormented as that of the Iewes. So much the more familiarly the Lord declared his mercies towards this ingrate and hard hearted people, so much the more was it needful he should visibly shewe horrible signes of his anger vpon it. No woe nor trouble could be imagined, whereof God gaue not some proofe vnto this miserable Nati∣tion. The recitall whereof may serue vs for a glasse to shewe vs what end such may attend as are obstinate and mockers of the grace of God, such also as enhardē themselues against his boun∣tie. After their reuolt which was the 12. yeare of Nero, the Ro∣manes ceased not by the space almost of sixe yeares to powre horrible euils vpon the Countrey of Iudea. Although a man speak not of the waste of the country, who can possibly esteem as belongeth therevnto the onely miseries of that Towne? For before it was besieged by the Romanes, it was horribly af∣flicted by domesticke enemies, with so many factions of auda∣tious Theeues which fought one against an other which of thē should commit most rapines,Three bands in Ierusalem. murthers, oppressions: And not one of al those bands (which were diuided into three principal: that is to say Zelators, 1. such as followed Ilion, & thirdly them of Simon the Gadarean, and of his sonne Eleazar) thought he mainteined his place well, but in surmounting one an other in all manner of wickednes. And finally, their rage was so ouer∣flowne, that there needed no more but only to haue an opini∣on of modestie and true religion, for to be put to death. They sought one with an other who should be the first to sley the Rich, to robbe them of their goods. To sley the common peo∣ple, such as were poore and of base condition, was but to take away such as were vnprofitable, and such as were like to be but a charge to the Towne alreadie threatned with a siege, and to prepare the Towne to sustain a longer siege. To giue to know by any one word, or to shew any countenance of griefe at such vnbridled licence to all euils which were then, this was called treason, and to complot with the Romanes. When any lamen∣ted his parent or friend wrongfully slaine, hee was straight
brought to some greeuous torment. To pollute the Sanctuary by slaughters and murders, this was to combat for the conser∣uation of the Temple and the Countries Religion. To take a∣way the sacred money out of the Temple and dispend it vpon dissolute villaines, was to borrow their necessaries for the de∣fence of the Ceremonies ordained of God. It was held a crime worthie of death, to seeke to withdrawe himselfe out of the middest of these euilles. And they which remained in the Towne besides other miseries and publike griefes, were con∣strained to see before their eyes, their wiues, their children, and their goods, to serue the appetite of all sorts of villains. Finally, this miserable people needed not feare any new oppression of the Romanes, wherwith before they had not bene tormented euen by themselues, which called themselues their defen∣ders. But after the Towne was besieged by the Romanes,Horrible fa∣mine. there was so horrible a famine that during the siege eleuen hundred thousand men dyed. Besides such as were slaine by the ene∣mies at assaults, and such as were slaine when the Towne was taken: and during that warre, there was about 97. thousand taken. Some part of them were solde, others were carried to great Townes to serue for Princes pastimes, in exposing them to beastes to bee torne in peeces: Others were put into some paled parke, where they fought till they slewe one an other: Others were led into ands, there to spend their liues. The 14. day of Aprill of the foresaid yeare, Titus laide siege before Ierusalem, during the feast or Easter, the yeare of Christ  73. vpon which day in respect of the solemnitie, there were infinite people assembled. The 22. of that moneth hee made platformes and Rammes, and beganne to beate the Towne. The 7. day of May he tooke the first wall, and the new Towne called Bezeth. The 12. day of the said moneth the second wall was again taken, with the base part of the towne,The taking of Ierusalem. from whence the Romanes had before bene chased. The 21. of the said mo∣neth hauing gotten 2. parts of the towne, he gently inuited thē to require peace, but seeing they would not, he caused his plat∣formes to be set vp against the fort called Antonia, nie the 3. wal which the Iewes burnt: but a new wall was made by ye Romans,
enuironed all the Towne to hinder the lewes from flying and seeking victualls. The first day of Iuly Titus mooued with compassiō for the people which suffered and endured so much by the hard obstinacie of some, beganne to beate Antonia and the third wall. The sixt day fell one part of the wall of the Fortresse, on that side where the Iewes had a conueyance out of the Towne. The eight day of the moneth of August, the Iewes repressed by great outrages and blowes of arrowes, He∣raulds were sent by Titus to make them harken vnto peace, that the Temple might haue bene spared. The temple was ta∣ken by force, and against the Edict and defence of Titus, it was burnt. The 20. day he began to batter the high Towne, which is called the Citie of Dauid, after the Iewes had againe refused peace. The seuenth day of September this high Towne was taken, whereof the Temple was the Fortresse, as Antonia was the defence of the Temple. The eight day of the said moneth, all the Towne was put to fire and bloud. The 24. day of October, Titus celebrated the day of his brother Domitian his Natiuitie, in a Taritine Towne of Cesa∣ria: and there he made pastimes of diuers sorts, wherein were brought about three thousand Iewes Captiues. Some were dispatched by beasts, others were set in order of battaile to sley one an other. The like was done in Berith, a Towne of Siria, the 27. of Nouember. Where Titus celebrated the Natiuitie of his Father Vespasian. When we heare this Summarie recitall (which is not the tenth part of the euils and fearefull calamities that this misera∣ble Nation endured,Rom. 10.) let vs not stray into foolish imaginations, but thinke with our selues, if God spared not the naturall braunches, what shall become of vs. Let vs behold the benig∣nitie and seueritie of God. His seueritie vpon them that are fallen: his benignitie vpon vs, which are planted in the place of the Iewes. This same yeare Vespasian caused them to be sought which were of the family of Dauid: for that there was a great perse∣cution against the Iewes. Cesennius Gouernour of Siria, chased Antiochus King of
Comageniens out of his kingdome, & sent him captiue to Rome.Titus. In this time Lucilius Bassus was sent Embassador into Iudea. There happened a sedition in Alexandria, wherein many Iewes were slaine. Achaia, Licia, Rhodes, Bizantum, Samathrachia, Cilicia, and Comagene, which before were free and vnder the iurisdiction of Kings, friends, and confederates of the Romanes, were made seruants and reduced into Prouinces. Ascanius Pedianus an Historiographer flourished at this time, who in the 73. yeare of his age became blinde, and liued yet 12. yeares in great honour. An Earth-quake ouerthrew three Townes in Ciprus. Titus the eleuenth Emperour Vespasians sonne, raigned  two yeares and twentie dayes. Hee was liberall and gentle, eloquent in the Greeke tongue. Hee vsed to say that none ought to goe from the presence of a Prince sad or desolate. Linus Bishop of Rome by the commaundement of the Consul Saturnine was beheaded vpon false accusation for Art Magicke.Linus. Naucler. The 2. yeare of Titus, horrible things happened in Cam∣pania (which is now called Terra Dilauoro, the Land of labour.) The mount Vesnue which lookes toward the Sea on Naples Coast, and hath comming out of it as it were great springs of fire, burst in sunder at the top, and cast out so great flames that it burnt the Townes adiacent, with the men therein. There came also at Rome a litle time after when all men were ignorant of that which happened in Campania, great and horrible calamites, in so much that many were of opinion that all things would be ouerthrowne and the Sunne would fall on the earth, for the multitude of ashes and smoake which were dispearsed in the ayre. The yeare following Titus went to see the calamitie which was come, and in the meane while many things were burnt at Rome, and the fire came out of the earth. For the Bathes of Agrippa, the Temple of Serapis and Ifis, the
Theatre of Balbus,Cletus. the Pantheon, the Parkes and many other places were altogether consumed with fire, whereby may be coniectured of others which perished by the same fire. Dion reciteth all this at large. Chro. Euseb.The Amphitheatre was now builded at Rome by Titus. These things are recited, to the ende that by the knowledge of such iudgements of God, we may learne to feare him. Cletus a Romane Bishop of Rome, gouerned a 11. yeares.  He approued the visitation of Saint Peter, saying that such vi∣sitation was much better then a fasting two yeares. This was the first Bishop that put in his Letters Salutem & Apostolicam benedictionem. There are none of the Elders which make mention of this Cletus, neither do they sufficiently expound, if Cletus and Ana∣cletus were two, or both one. Onely Damasus speaketh, but yet so confusedly, that there can be no agreement of the time. Titus the Emperour, of the age of 42. yeares, nigh to his death lamented sore; Saying, must I die and neuer deserued it? He was deified by the authoritie of the Senate after his death. There you may see how the Panim Gods came, created, and for∣ged by the wills of men. Iosephus an Historiographer and a Iewe, flourished at this time. He was Duke of the Hebrewes Hoast, and being Titus his prisoner, was set at libertie: which hee vsed, in composing seuen bookes of the Iewdaicall Historie, which he presented to Vespasian and Titus, who set vp an Image of him at Rome. The 72. yeare, which was the second yeare of the raigne of Titus, Linus hauing gouerned the Church of Rome 12. yeares,  resigned the office to Anacletus, who was the second Bishop of Rome. Ireneus and Eusebius doo witnesse this, without ma∣king any mention of Cletus,Anacletus. which some say was the successor of Linus. Domitian the 12. Emperour, raigned 15. yeares and sixe moneths. This man was exceeding wicked, cruell, adulterous,
chollericke, a coward, proud, a rauener.Domitian. He committed Incest with his brothers daughter, whom he rauished and tooke out of her husbands hands. Three Virgin Vestalls were buried aliue for whoordome.Euseb. Domitian hauing by publike Edicts commaunded that he should be called Lord and God, caused Images of himselfe of gold and siluer to be erected. He cast out of Rome all Philosophers:Fasc. Tem. he sent into exile many Senators and Nobles, and some he slew. He builded the Pantheon at Rome. He stirred the second persecution against the Christians,The second persecution against the Christians. and caused all such to be put to death as he found to be of the stocke of Dauid. For he feared the comming of Christ. After∣ward he caused the persecution to cease. S. Denis, Rusticus, and Eleutherus, preached the Gospel in Fraunce. The yeare 87. Albilius was constituted the second Bishop  of Alexandria, and was Bishop 12. yeares. The yeare 88. Domitian by the conduction of Fuscus pas∣sed ouer Danaw, and ledde his Army against Dorpaneus, King of the Gothes or of the Dares. The Gothes ouercame the Ro∣manes, and Fuscus was slaine, and the Campe pilled or spoiled. Clement a Romane the fourth Bishop of Rome, ruled nine  yeares. He instituted notaries to write the acts of the Martirs,Notaries and pronotaries, their constancie and patience, for example and perpetuall re∣membrance. Domitian of the age of 45. yeares was slaine in his Pallace by the coniuration of his familiar friends, & consent of his wife. He was buried without any honor, & all his Images cast down. The Senate disanulled all his ordinances, and called againe  such as he had exiled. S. Iohn the Euangelist from his exile of Pathmos (which is an Ile in the sea Egea: which is betwixt Asia the great,The death of S. Iohn the Euangelist. & the lesse) returned into Ephesus, where he died of the age of an hundreth yeares or there abouts, and was there buried. Nerua Cocceius now olde, was made the 13. Emperour,The Chron. of the Emper. and raigned one yeare, 4. moneths. He died at the age of 71.
yeares.Clement. Being Emperor, he pronounced al Christians absolued, whether accused or banished, and called them backe. Hee was wont to say that men must rather respect a mans vertue then his race or country. He was by the Senate deified. Now rose there many heresies in the Church after the death of the Apostles. Traian a Spaniard the 13. Emperour, raigned 19. yeares, 6. moneths, and 15. dayes. Hee was greatly praised of Historiographers as a debo∣naire and gentle Prince, yet he persecuted the Christians. Vn∣der him was Clement martyred. Eusebius.Foure Townes perished in Asia, and two in Greece, with Earthquakes. The third persecution. Suppl. Chro. The third persecution made against the Christians in the time of Traian. He feared some hurt should haue come to the Romane Empire by the encrease of Religion. There were each day a great number of Martyrs slaine. In so much that Plinie the younger hauing then the admi∣nistration of a Prouince, namely Bithinia, and seeing the great number of men which then dyed, writ to the Emperour how each day many thousands of persons were put to death, yet was there not found that they committed any fault, neither did any thing against their Romane lawes: but only for that they sung certaine Hymnes and Psalmes afore day,Singing of Psalmes aun∣cient. to a cer∣taine God they called Christ. And finally, that Adulteries, Homicides, Thefts, and other crimes, were prohibited them, and did keepe themselues from such faults, liuing carefully ac∣cording to common Lawes. Wherevnto the Emperour gaue answere and commaundement to make no more any Inquisi∣tion against Christians. Yet was not thereby the occasion ta∣ken away from them, which had a will to shew cruelty against Christians. Fasci. temp.Timotheus a Martyr in this time. Anacletus 5. Bishop of Rome borne in Greece, an Athe∣nian, ruled two moneths and ten dayes. We now enter into the times which were incontinent after the Apostles, and take their beginning in the kingdome of Traian.
Anacletus ordeined that no Clarke should weare a beard,AnacletusNaucle, Now none but the Priest communica∣teth.Suppl. Chro. and commaunded all the faithfull that were at the admini∣stration of the Lords Supper, either to communicate or to be driuen out of the Temple. Eusebius placeth Anacletus in the place of Cletus, after Linus; and after Clement, immediately he makes mention of Euaristus, which is the cause of the discord that is found amongst Historians in this place. Anacletus ordeined that the Cleargie two times in the yeare should haue Sinodes or Congregations,Sinode. for the affaires of the Church. In his writings amongst other things he admonisheth the people to carrie honour and reuerence to their Ministers, and to support them. He that speaketh euill of a Minister saith he,In the first volume of Councell. speaketh euill of Christ; and he iudgeth him to be seperate from Christ. He was put to death vnder Traian. Heresies at this time grieued the Church within,Heretickes. and pub∣licke persecutions without. 1. Cerinthus the Hereticke,Suppl. Chron. held that Moyses lawe must bee kept alone. Also that Christ was not risen againe,S. Aug. but that hee should rise againe. He made the Kingdome of Christ carnall.Eusebi, Sup. Ch. 2. Ebion held Christ to be a pure man, engendred as o∣thers: And he called S. Paul, the Apostle of the Lawe. 3. Menander, a Nigromancian, &c. 4. Basilides,Eusebi. these did infinitely spread their imaginations touching the procreation of their Gods and Angels. And to yeeld the more astonishment, they vsed disguised and barba∣rous words. 5. The Nicholaites would women to be common.Histo. Ecclec. Lib. 3. cap. 26. 6. Saturnin following Simon Magus, said also that men might vse women indifferently, as the Nicholaites. Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, Policarpus Bishop of Smirna, Ig∣natius Bishop of Antioche, good and Catholicke Pastors,
Disciples of S. Iohn the Euangelist.Euaristus. See how God destituted not his Church of true Pastors to withstand Heretickes. Anno. Christ. 121.Euaristus the 6. Romane Bishop ruled 8. or nine yeares. He ordeined that seuen Deacons should be chosen in eue∣ry Citie,Euseb. which should marke and keepe by the Bishop as hee preached and taught the people. He appointed them also for witnesses of the word of God,Fasci. Temp. that none might impose that he had preached euill against the truth. He ordeined that marriages should be publikely solem∣nized in Churches.marriage pub. like. That the Church should obey his Bishop, and that the Bishop should not leaue his Church during his life, no more then the woman her husband. There be two Epistles found of him. In the first he makes that Apostolicke seate head of the Church: wherevnto he wils that all doubtfull affaires should be brought: yet in his second Epistle he contradicts it. In Gallatia three Cities perished with an Earthquake. Eu∣sebius. Euaristus was Martired the last yeare of the Empire of Traian. The Pantheon of Rome burnt with lightning. Euseb. Lucian.Lucian the Apostate and Atheist composed his dialogues vnder Traian. The towne of Antioch was so shaken, that euen the Moun∣taines nigh did shake and quake, yea euen the Mount Cassius, the highest in Siria, the Flouds there dried vp, and the earth sounded in a strange maner. Tiles falling clattered in such sort, and the cries of men ouerthrowne were so fearefull, and with dust the obscuritie was so thick, that there was neuer seene or heard speake of so straunge things. The Emperour Traian was then there, and likewise people of all Nations of the Romane Empire.
Dion writeth this horrible confusion,Alexander & the calamities which proceeded this Earthquake which happened at Antioch. Ignacius Bishop of Antioch was led prisoner to Rome to be cast vnto beasts, and so to be aspectacle vnto the people.Euseb. As he went from Siria to Rome, and passed through the Coun∣trie of Asia, in all places where he came he preached to the peo∣ple and Churches the Christian faith, exhorting them to per∣seuer and keepe themselues from the infection of Hereticks which then began to spring, in carefully keeping the doctrine receiued of the Apostles. The cause was, that in Antioch hauing reprehended the I∣dolatrie of Traian, he was apprehended as one seditious & guil∣tie of treason, & was giuen in charge to 10. souldiers, or rather tormenters, to be led to Rome and be put to Lions: wherof Ig∣nacius himselfe saith. I haue had to fight with beasts from Siria to Rome, by sea, by land, night and day amongst 10. Leo∣pards, &c. Ireneus in his fift booke speaking of Ignacius, beeing condemned to beasts, he said (saith he) I am the wheat of Iesus Christ, and shalbe grinded with the teeth of beasts, to the end I may be made the bread of God. Alexander the 7. Bishop of Rome, was a Romane, and go∣uerned 10. yeares; namely from the 12. yeare of Traian, til the third of Adrian. Many things are spoken of the integritie of his life, wher∣by many of the Romane Senators were drawne to the Chri∣stian faith, seeing in him vertues truly Episcopall:De cense. dist. 2. cap. in Sa∣cramento. Dist. 10.102. to. Si quib. 10, Dist. cap. Relatum. yet it is attri∣buted vnto him, that he should first bring in new ceremonies of the Church, as the holy water so keepe in houses and Churches against the diuell, and for remission of sinnes: Also to mingle wine and water together at the Lords supper: Also the Asper∣ges vpon the people: Also that Bread should be without Lea∣uen, and not commō bread as before. They make him the first, which by decree excommunicated them who resisted Aposto∣licke messengers.The first ad∣dition to the Lords Supper. He ordeined that no Clarke should be accu∣sed and drawne before a secular Iudge: he is said to be the first which added to the Lords supper (Caena pridie quàm pateretur,) &
made that ouerture to his successors to adde thervnto:Adrian. which haue not since ceased vntill the whole Supper of the Lord was corrupted and chaunged.2. Tess. 2. de conse. dist. 2. cap. Sufficit. Also he ordeined to celebrate but once a day. The Popes af∣terward for∣ged their de∣cretalls.Note heere generally for the Bishops which were first at Rome, that many Epistles haue bene attributed vnto them, which mention greater number of Ceremonies then there is in other Churches, and such as were vnknowne to them which writ in that time, which made them then suspected. For the Popes which came after, haue made those first Bishops their buckler for authors of their lyes and dreames. Alexander receiued the Crowne of Martirdome vnder the Emperour Adrian, by the commaund of his Gouernour Aurelian, who demaunded of Alexander why hee held his peace when the fire was lightned about him to burne him. He answered that he was speaking to God (signifying that he pray∣ed) and therefore it was not lawfull for him to speake vnto men. Honorius and Nauclerus Dion rehearseth of the Empe∣rour Traian, that before he died his members were retracted, and al his body senslesse. His sences also were dulled, and after that, he became to be full of the dropsie, and greatly swelled. He finally died in Selinion, a Towne of Cicile. Some say his body was brought to Rome and deified by the Senate after his death, after the maner of the Romanes. Although this Prince had great politicke vertues, yet is he to be placed in the third ranke of the cruel enemies and per∣secutors of the Church of God. Anno Christ. 101.Adrian the 16. Emperour, raigned 22. yeares, gentle, and cunning in all knowledges. He persecuted the Christians. But when he knew the truth of their life, he caused the perse∣cution to cease. Suppl. Chro.Quadratus Bishop of Athens, the Apostles Disciple, pre∣sented an Apologeticke booke to the said Adrian, in defence of the Christian Faith. Aristides a Philosopher of Athens, a faithfull man, made a
like Booke: wherevpon Adrian sent to Minutius Fundanus,Sixtus. Proconsul of Asia, that he should no more persecute the Chri∣stians. But if they did any thing against lawes, he would that he should therein deale according to the qualitie of the crime. And if any slaunderoufly accused them, he commaunded such should be chastised for their malice. Nicomedia and Nice were ruinated by an Earthquake, and afterward restored by the liberalitie of Adrian. Euseb. Chro. All euils which came to men were laide vpon the Chri∣stians, saying they came all for their cause, whether they were Earthquakes, warre, or other calamities. Sixtus or Xistus a Romane, 8. Bishop of Rome, ruled a∣bout 10. yeares.Not to touch Challices. He decreed that none should touch the con∣secrated ornaments, Vessels, Challices, &c. vnlesse they were Church-men. He added to the Communion of the Eucharist. Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus Deus Sabaoth. He graunted this priuiledge to Clarkes, that they might appeale from their Bishop to the Apostolicke Sea. In his Decretalls he is called Arch-bishop of the Romane Church. Item vniuersall Bishop of the Apostolicke Church. About this time, those words Arch-bishop, Metropoli∣tane, and Clergie, beganne to be vsed in Epistles. He appointed certaine punishments for Priests or Mini∣sters that were negligent in baptizing Children before their deaths. At this time the Supper of the Lord was called Eucharist: The words Sacrifice or Masse were not yet brought in. And al∣though Ireneus sometimes called the Eucharist, Oblation, hee declares his meaning therein in his 4. Booke and 34. Chapter.The word Oblation. We make vnto him an Oblation saith he: not as to him which stands in need thereof; but as giuing him thankes for the good he hath done vnto vs. And againe he willes also that we giue offerings at the Aultar: and often, and without ceasing. But the Aultar is in heauen (saith he) and thither must we addresse our prayers and Oblations.
It may well be that then this word Oblation was in common vse, because the custome then was to offer Loaues of bread in great abundance for the vse of the Supper: wherewith the Ministers liued, and the poore were nourished. The last de∣struction of the Iewes.The Iewes surprised with a new rage, beganne againe to take armes against the Romanes. Dion saith the occasion there∣of was for that Adrian had builded there a Temple to Iupiter, and placed there Idols of the Gentiles. The Iewes chose for their Captaine,Barrochabas the Iewe. Barrochabas, who named himselfe the sonne of the Starre. This man exercised great crueltie against Christi∣ans, because they woulde not ioyne with the Iewes: But Adrian repressed those seditious people, and famished them, and tooke away their waters, and finally discomfited them nigh to Bethera, a little Towne by Ierusalem, and in one onely battaile hee slew fiftie eight thousand men. After Ni∣cephorus Ancelme, speaketh of fiftie thousand Iewes slaine, fiftie holdes taken, and nine hundred eightie fiue Villages destroyed, as well by famine, as by fire and bloud, and all the rest of the Iewes miserably driuen from Ierusalem into far Countries, and sold ouer all the world. The Emperour Adrian would not that the Citie of Ierusa∣lem should any more retaine his auncient name, but hauing a∣gaine made it, he called it by his owne name Aelia Capitolina. Honorius and Eusebius say that hee made Edicts be published, whereby it was not lawfull for the Iewes, no not so much as to regard a farre off their Country of Iudea. The first so terrible a destruction might haue sufficiently taught them that the kingdome was taken from them as the Prophets had foretold. But God would that a second time they should feele a punishment almost as horrible as the first. The Christians after dwelt in Palestine with some assu∣rance, and there had Churches. Sixtus sent many to preach the faith in France, hee was
afterward martyred vnder Adrian.Telespho∣rus. Pernitious heresies now did spring, Saturnin, Basilides,Heresies in the Church. Carpocrates, Valentia, and Tatien, tore in peeces the doctrine of God, forging many Gods, & denying the humanitie of Christ. Valentine and Martian forged that Christ brought from heauen his humane flesh. Martian saide there was two beginnings, the one good, and the other euil. Montanus denyed the Diuinitie of Christ, and affirmed of himselfe that he was the holy Ghost. They admitted and allowed whoredomes and villainous filthinesse against marriage.Epiphanius. Many were turned from the true doctrine by these here∣sies & blasphemies which proceeded from those horrible mon∣sters, Instruments of Sathan. Telesphorus 9. Bishop of Rome a Grecian, ruled sixteene yeares of the time of Adrian and Antonine. It is attributed vnto him that he should enioyne Church-men to abstain from flesh 7. weekes before Easter. The Decretall likewise attributed vnto him, makes mention of Clarkes, but not of laie people; yet after by succession of time, Lent became obserued of all. He in∣stituted three celebratiōs of Christs natiuitie, one at midnight, an other at the point of day, and the last at three. He added Gloria in excelsis Deo &c. Some say it was S. Hillary others Sym∣macus. This hymne seemeth to haue bin writtē against the Ar∣rians, as shall be said hereafter. And the fourth Councel of To∣ledo, Chap. 12. makes mention that this Cauticke was made by the Ecclesiasticall Doctors. Henry Bullinger Lib. 2. of the begin∣ning of his Decad. Chap. 7. He ordained also that none should presume to celebrate in the morning before 3. a clocke. In this Decretall hee is called Arch-bishop of Rome. Carpocrates an hereticke, was the inuentor of a Sect & man∣ner of people called Gnostici:Gnostiques. For he taught them secrets of Ma∣gicke, & dreames of loue, which came by diuellishillusiō. Many hereby were deceiued & led to destruction. They which were not yet instructed, seeing the execrable life of those villaines which called thēselues Christians, would therefore abolish the
Christian faith as if all were alike.Adrian. And all the slaunders wher∣with they charged the Christians, namely that they were cru∣ell, and that they medled with all women carnally without a∣ny regard of bloud or parentage, yea that they did eate little children, came not but from those pernitious heretickes. So it falls out at this day: For the errours of Anabaptists and Libertines are without difference attributed vnto such as fol∣low the Gospell, and with a common name they are wrongfully called Lutherans. Adrian builded a Temple and a Sepulchre vnto Antinous, whom hee had wickedly abused in his life, and ordeined that men should euery yeare celebrate the playes and pastimes cal∣led with his name Antinoens. He also founded a Citie of the said Antinous name,A Buggerer, worshipped as God. which hee called Antinoe. Where for feare of the Emperour, Antinous is worshipped as God, although men knew what a man he was. Adrian died very miserably; There came vnto him a great fluxe of bloud: hee was also taken with great paine and fell to the dropsie: he assayed by Arts Magicke to drawe that water out of his body: but nothing helped him, neither ceased the bloudy Fluxe. Sopartianus reciteth, that hee called of his Phisitian for poyson, and seeing he would not giue it him, he demaunded a knife, promising great things to him that would deliuer him one.The death of Adrian. He dyed of the age of 62. yeares, hauing no member in his body which was not vexed with torments. Au∣relius Victor. He was punished with bloud, for the bloud he shead. The persecutions in Asia were exceeding great. See Euse. Lib. 5. Chap. 15. where at length he describeth the Martyrdome of Policarpus. Lib. 4. Chap. 23. The Athenians offended at so great persecutions wherein they had lost Publius their Bishop, almost reuolted from the faith. Torments and cruelties against Chri∣stains.There was no torment nor punishment that the Instru∣ments of the diuel could deuise, whereof the Christians were
not iudged worthy:Pius. for they were espied in and without their houses. They cried against them in all publicke places. They whipped them, trailed them, stoned them, pilled their goods, imprisoned them, plates of yron were applyed to their naked flesh: They locked them in an Instrument of Torture euen to the fift point, they were put in obscure and lowe places in pri∣son: Some strangled them, some exposed them to beasts, and other infinit torments. The dead bodies in prison, after they were cast into the fields, they set Dogges there to keepe them that they might not bee buried. In these hard torments Christians gaue courage one to another, and were very carefull to take such order as none should fall from their profession, either by infirmitie, or for want of abilitie to endure the torments. The number of Martyrs of this time were too great to be recited in this litle Treatise. But Iustine, Eusebius, Basile the great, and other auncient Doctours, haue carefully set them downe in writing. These examples ought to encourage vs constantly to maintaine the truth of the Gospell. Antonius Pius a Gentile,An. Christi. 123.In the booke he writ to Strapula. Emperour 16. raigned 23. yeares or thereabout, a man benigne and modest. He said often that he had rather saue a Citizen, then to sley a thousand of his ene∣mies. Tertullian witnesseth that hee was not altogether gentle towards the Christians, and especially in the beginning of his raigne: When Arrius Antonius (saith hee) ceased not to perse∣cute in Asia, the Christians assembling in a company, presen∣ted themselues before the Iudiciall seate. And after hee had sent some fewe of them to the Iibbet, hee said to the rest, O miserable men, If you haue an affection to die, haue you not cords to hang yourselues? or high places to cast your selues downe? Higinius an Athenian, a Philosophers sonne,Higinius. gouerned the Church of Rome 4. yeares.
He ordained that Churches should be dedicated by so∣lemne ceremony. Item that the number of Temples should neither be augmented nor diminished without the consent of the Metropolitane. See the Decretall. De conse. dist. pri. ca. Om∣nes Bacilicae.Pope. This was the first who entituled himselfe Pope, in his second Decretall. De conse. dist. 1. ca. Lignae. He for bad that Summers, Sparres, Tyles, and other mat∣ter of Temples, should be after applied to any prophane vse, but burnt or giuen to other poore Churches and Monasteries, and not to the vses of Laie men. He instituted that at Catechisme, Baptisme, and confir∣mation, there should be a Godfather or Godmother. De conse. dist. 4. ca. In cat. 36. Hom, 10. cap. 1. Si qua nud.He ordained that if any woman came to the secōd marriage by whom shee had issue, that that issue could not be married to the consanguinitie of the first husband vntill the fourth de∣gree. Item, that no Metropolitane except the Pope, shall con∣demne any of his Cleargie, Priest, Suffragane or Bishop of his Prouince, vnles first the cause be handled and knowne in the Councell of other prouinciall Bishops, otherwise the sentence not to be vailable. 8. q. 3. c. Salus in omnibus. Galen the Phisitian flourished at this time. Valentine the hereticke a Platonician, denied the resurrecti∣on of the flesh. S. August.Hee affirmed that Christ tooke no humane flesh off the Virgines wombe, but that hee passed through it as through a conduit. Cerdon the Stoike, said at Rome that the holy Ghost des∣cended not vpon the Apostles, but vpon himselfe. Note here the saying of Tertullian, namely, that the Philoso∣phers are Patriarkes of heretickes. Martian the Stoike a follower of Menander, made two contrary principles. This Pope (seeing hee named himselfe so) was a learned
man,Anicetus.Supp. Chro. and made a booke intituled De Trinitate & vnitate Dei. Pius first of that name 11. Pope of Rome, an Italian of  Aquilia, ruled at Rome a 11. yeares. Some say hee ordeined that Easter should be celebrated vpon the Sunday, by the perswasion of Hermes,Easter cele∣brated vpon a reuelation made to Hermes. who said it had bene reuealed vnto him by an Angell, in likenes of a shep∣heard. And this ordinance was after confirmed by many Pope. That hee decreed punishments for Ecclesiasticall persons which administred the Sacraments of the body and bloud of Christ negligently. That is to say, that he that by imprudency & negligently, let fal vpō the earth any of the blood of Christ (so speakes he) should do penance 40. dayes. If it fell vpon the Aultar, 3. dayes. If vpon the Chalice cloth, 4. dayes. If on any other cloth, 9. dayes. And that the said bloud so falne, should be licked, scraped or washed, and after all burnt, and kept for the Sacristeres. By litle and litle then the Romane seate beganne to forge or∣dinances. Also that Virgins or Nunnes should not take vpon them the vaile before the age of 25. yeares. Item,Swearing and blaspheming. that if any Ecclesiasticall person did sweare or blas∣pheme he should be deposed, and euery Laie person excom∣municated. Anicetus 12. Pope a Sirian, ruled 10. or a 11. yeares, wise, and of good life. Some attribute vnto him that hee ordained the Crowne for Priests.Priestes Crowne. He was martyred vnder Marcus Aurelius. In his time Egesippus an Hebrew came to Rome, & dwelt there vntill Eleutherius. Iustinus a Christian Phylosopher, writ a booke in defence of Faith and Religion, to the Emperour Antonius Pius, who also was much enclined to maintaine it. He writ against Martian.
Marcus Aurelius.Policarpus Bishop of Smyrna in Ionia, which is in Asia the lesse aboue Ephesus, came to great age. Ireneus saith that he was ordeined Bishop by the Apostles, and it is likely that he began his ministery the 2. or 3. of Traian. S. Ierome in his Catalogue saith he was placed there by S. Iohn the Euangelist, who dyed the yeare 68. after the passion of Iesus Christ as most say. Ireneus reciteth of him, that one day as Marcian encountred him and said vnto him; Take knowledge with vs. Policarp. an∣swered him: I know thee for the first sonne of Satan. And Ire∣neus saith further: There are some haue heard him say that Iohn the Disciple of Iesus went into Bathes to wash himselfe, and seeing Cerinthus the hereticke there,The compa∣ny of here∣tickes daun∣gerous. he went out, and wa∣shing himselfe saying: Let vs flie from hence least this house fall vpon vs, where Cerinthus enemy of the truth washeth. Note how the Disciples of the Apostles had this rule, not to communicate with them which falsifie the truth of the Gospell. Whilest Policarpus was at Rome, he withdrew many from their heresies. Marcus Aurelius, Antoninus Verus the brother of Anto∣nius Pius, obtained the Empire 18. yeares. Lucius Ʋerus his sonne in lawe, gaue himselfe to dice, and to haunt the Stewes. Therfore was he sent into Siria, by Mar∣cus Aurelius,Chro. of Em∣per. and at last as some say poisoned. After some, he dyed of an Apoplexe. So Marcus Aurelius Antoninus raigned alone. The fourth persecution after Nero was stirred against the Christians by Marcus Aurelius.The fourth persecution. And as Eusebius saith, many euils happened in Italie: great pestilence, warre, earthquakes, Invndations of waters, and a multitude of Grashoppers. In the meane while by the persecutions as it were continu∣all, the Christians affaires encreased from day to day by the doctrine of the Apostles Disciples. Wherof yet many then did liue: that the Christian Religion tooke strong roote being thus bedeawed with the bloud of Martyrs.
We must not here forget the sentence of Iustine spoken in a colloquie with Trypheus. Hee saith thus;Soter. Men may each day perceiue that we which beleeue in Christ cannot be astonished nor turned backe. Let them cut off our heads; Let them cru∣cifie vs: Let them expose vs to beasts, to fires, or other tor∣ments: and so much more as men torment vs, so much more do the number of Christians encrease. Euen as when a Vine is cut, it is but to make it more fertile: So the Vine which God hath planted and the Sauiour Iesus, that is his people, cannot but multiply by torments, &c. Melito Bishop of Sardis, writ to the Emperour for the Faith and Christian Religion. Apollinaris Bishop of Hierapolis, was at this time. Theophilus Bishoppe of Antioche, writ against Mar∣tian. Denis Bishop of Corinthe. Iustus Bishoppe of Ʋienne, a Martyre for the Faith. Attalus, Blandina, Photin Bishop of Lions, a Martyr also for the Faith. Persecution in Asia. The end of the life of Policarpus was at this time. Marcus Antonius Verus, and the chiefe Gouernours of the Empire, caused such a persecution that it came euen to the Christians which dwelt in the Towne of Smyrna, where∣of Policarpus was Bishoppe, and had beene a long time, and was there burnt, hauing serued the Church of God about three score and tenne yeares, which was the seuenth of this Emperour. Some say hee was of the age of foure score and sixe yeares. The Prayer of Policarpus before his death, is in the Ec∣cleciast. History, Booke 4. His bones taken out of the fire were laide in a Sepul∣chre. Pionius Martyre. Soter an Italian, 13. Pope,Anno Dom. 169. helde the seate about tenne yeares. He endured many aduersities, and in the ende was Martyred.
Montanus.He ordained that none should celebrate without two men present. That Nunnes should carry Vailes on their heads. Not to touch Chalices.That they might not touch sacred Ornaments, as Cha∣lices, Corporalles, and that they should not Incense in the Temple, nor about Aultars. In his second Decretall he calleth himselfe Pope. 7.9.1. ca. Illud Diuini.Hee instituted that each Priest doing his Office should haue with him an other Priest: If there chaunced some sud∣daine necessitie to happen. 22. q. 4. ca. 51 quid.Hee saide that an oath made imprudenly which redoun∣ded to an euill ende ought not to be kept. For it were better saith he to periure himselfe, then for keeping his oath to fall into a greater crime. At this time Peregrine a Philosopher, did publickely at Pise cast himselfe into the fire vpon vaine-glorie. CataphrygesAt this time beganne the Cataphryges heretikes by Mon∣tanus with Priscilla, and Maximilla. S. Augustin. They vsed in their Sacrifices a Childes blood, which they mingled with Flowre or with Breade. If the Childe whose blood was drawne out dyed, they held him for a Mar∣tyr. If he liued, for a great Priest. Montanus was of Phrygia, of a Towne called Arda∣ba. Hee called himselfe the Paraclet. Hee forbadde marri∣age, and inuented and instituted Fastes. Against those Heretickes writte Apollinaris Hierapoli∣taine, and before him Milciades and Apollonius. Appelles the Disciple of Marcian, (whome Theodotius, called the great Hereticke) put a beginning to God. Also that Christ appeared in a fantasticke bodie. Tatianus and his followers, Encratites and Seuerians, in this time. These abstained from all kindes of flesh, and drunke no wine.
They blamed Marriage as well as fornication. They cast off the Epistles both of S. Paul and S. Peter. The Doctrine of Christian libertie beganne at this time to bee greatly obscured, and by little and little the errour tooke encrease. For although yet there was no forbidding to vse the good thinges or God,The vse of things indif∣ferent. yet the Historie of Alcibiades recited in Eusebius, Booke 5. Chap. 3. sheweth that by little and little men beganne to place a certaine Religion in seruices forged at pleasure. This Alcibiades was one of the Martyres which suffered death in Gaul, vnder Marcus Antonius Verus the Emperour.Alcibiades. Hee vsed to liue so austerely as hee did eate onely bread, and drunke water. In so much that beeing in prison hee would vse no other diet. Attalus a Romane (a man renowned amongst the Mar∣tyrs) being also imprisoned, shewed Alcibiades a better way, and brought him to this point, that after hee vsed indifferent∣ly the creatures of God, without scruple and with thankes∣giuing. Eleutherius borne in Greece at Nicopolis,Anno Domi. 179. ruled at Rome 15. yeares and more. Hee made a commaundement against the heresie of the Seuerans which then raigned, that no Christian for any ce∣remonie should reiect any sort of meates whereof there is an accustomed vse. Also that none should be dismissed of his Office, vn∣lesse first hee be accused and conuinced of crime. That Bi∣shops should finish nothing in an accusation intended against a Bishop, without knowledge of the Pope: but they might determine by Sentences the causes of other Church peo∣ple. That a Clarke may not be drawne into any cause but be∣fore his Bishop, from whom (if there were cause of suspition) he might appeale. Christian Religion then greatly augmented, and came
into farre greater suertie then before.Commodus Lucius. Naucle.Lucius King of England and his Countrey, receiued the Faith. Many Nobles of Rome with their wiues and children were conuerted and Baptized. The said Lucius left his Kingdome, and went to preach the Faith first in France, after in Almaine, where hee was mar∣tyred. Chroni. Euseb.Smyrna in Asia, whereof Policarpus was Bishop, was ouer∣throwne by Earthquake: and for the repaire of it, tributes and tallages were laid. Naucler. Chron. of the Empe.Commodus the 18. Emperour, raigned 13. yeares, cruel, luxurious, incestuous of his owne Neeses: hee held in his Pal∣laice three hundreth Concubines, and three hundreth bugge∣ring boyes. In a wicked rage he slew Lucilla his sister. Being at the hot houses, and but pricked with a Flea, he cast the maister of the house into the Furnace. Ireneus Bishop of Lions, flourished. The Temple of Serapis burnt in Alexandria. The Capitoll at Rome, and the Librarie, burnt by light∣ning. Chro. Euse. Sup. Chro.Apollonius a Senator of Rome, accused to be a Christian, presented to the Senate a booke, conteining a defence of the Christians. He was beheaded, because the Imperiall lawe had so ordeined it. Heereby appeares that Popes or Bishops of Rome were not as at this present they are. Apollonius a man of authoritie could not shunne the sentence of death: onely because he was a Chri∣stian, hauing so many friends at Rome. Edict Impe∣riall.The Imperiall Lawe then was, that such as were in Iudgement conuicted to be Christians, should be punished with death. Persecution.Commodus made die many Noble persons.
It is recited in the History of the Martyrs of Gaule,Pertmax. that the Painims sollicited, and by torments constrained the ser∣uants of Christians to confesse of their maisters things impos∣sible once to be imagined. Namely, that they did eate the flesh of litle children: that they committed paldiardizes and whore∣domes, such as is vnlawfull to name. In so much as they which before had vsed some moderation in Christians causes, gaue themselues greater licence to exercise crueltie against them. This happened at Lions, and at Vienne. Eusebius reciteth it in his Epistle of the faithfull of Lions, and of Ʋienne, in Chap. 1. of the 5. booke. At Rome the Pallace and the Temple of Vesta, and of  Peace, and the greatest part of the Towne was consumed by fire. Commodus the 13. yeare of his Empire was strangled, of  the age of 32. yeares, by the counsell of Martia his chiefe Concubine, who fauoured the Christians and other her friends which he had condemned to death, because they shewed him certain his insolencies, but they by this meanes preuented him: and little there wanted that the bodie of this Tyrant was not drawne into Tyber by the common people. Aelius Pertmax the ninteenth Emperour, held the Empire by the space of sixe moneths. His couetousnesse caused his death for retaining his souldiers wages. He was of the age of seuentie yeares. Didius Inhanus of Millaine, 20. Emperour, raigned foure,Didius. or seuen, or two moneths as some say. Hauing slaine his prede∣cessor, hee was slaine of his Successor of the age of 56. yeares. For his auarice he was hated of all. Some say he was slaine by a souldier of little estimation within his Pallaice. Victor Bishop of Rome, borne in Affricke, ruled tenne yeares. He ordeined,Reconciliatiō that such as would not reconcile them∣selues should be depriued of the Table of the Lord. Hee instituted, that vnlesse it were in cases of necessitie, Catholicke Baptisme should be celebrated in the time of the feast of Easter. As we may see in the first Decretall Epistle
attributed vnto him.Seuerus. It were incredible (if all Historians did not witnesse it) that for the day of celebratiō of the feast of Easter, so great a schisme should happen in the Church, that of a dissention and questi∣on thereof, so terrible a warre should come, and all by this Vic∣tors meanes, who would needs haue the feast of Easter celebra∣ted on the Sunday, because of the mysterie of the resurrection: and would not haue the Fastes broken but on that day. Ʋictor writ to Policrates, who was a Ruler amongst the Bishops of Asia, and gaue commaundement in his Letters, whereat all the Bishops of Asia were greatly offended. Seuerus.Septimus Seuerus Pertinax borne in Affrica, 21. Empe∣rour, raigned 18. yeares, and dyed of the age of 70. yeares in England. Many Sinodes were held in diuers Prouinces touching the Feast of Easter, vpon what day it should be celebrated: and by common accord it was agreed that the saide Feast of Easter should be celebrated vpon the Lordes day, on which was his Resurrection, and on no other day. But the Bishops of the Countrey of Asia were of a con∣trary opinion: saying that they should keepe the customes of of their Auncestors touching that. Which Ʋictor seeing, would needs haue depriued ge∣nerally all the Churches of Asia, and the nigh Prouinces ther∣of, of the Churches communion and societie, and sent out Letters to declare them excommunicated:Ireneus Bishop of Lions. whereof hee was greatly blamed and reprehended. And especially of Ireneus Bishop of Lions, by Letters which hee sent vnto him. That there was great folly for the difference of a Ceremonie to breake the peace and vnion of Churches, and to stirre vp Schisme therein. Alleadging to his purpose that the diuer∣sitie of Fastes neuer broke the vnion of Churches, and so no more should they in this. Eusebius in the Ecclesi. Hist. Lib. 5. Chap. 5. With this warre the tranquililtie of Churches are trou∣bled, and the doctrine of Christian libertie obscured. The Romanes ceased not to molest them of Asia to subscribe
to their opinion, and they became so outragious therein, that they which obserued the Feast of Easter the fourteenth of the Moone, were called Quatorzian Heretickes,Quatorzians. condem∣ned as Nicepho. reciteth. Lib. 4. Chap. 39. This Schisme gaue Montanus and other heretickes occa∣sion and ouerture to lift vp themselues at this time in Phrygia. They published certaine lawes touching Fasts. Also to breake marriages. Affirming that the holy Ghost had not taught all to the Apostles, and that he had in himselfe the gift to conferre the graces of the holy Ghost. And other such blas∣phemies whereby hee looked to come vnto some Prima∣cie. The Romaine Bishoppes now became more audacious to forge new Ceremonies, yea and that to force them vpon other Churches. The authoritie to excommunicate, conuerted into a∣buse, and so became despised, because of not obseruing cer∣taine humaine traditions. The dissention touching the obseruation of Easter, cau∣sed sixe principall Councells to be assembled. Euseb. Lib. 5. Chap. 23. Victor in his second Decretall calls himselfe Arch-bishop of the Romane and vniuersall Church.In the volume of Councells. Of Tertullian Tertullian a Priest of Carthage, who otherwise did well serue the Christian Church, finally reuoulted, and drewe him selfe vnto the enraged Prophecie of Monta∣nus. Saint Hierome alleadgeth this the occasion: That Tertullian beeing ledde with enuie and hatred of the Church of Rome, could not at the last endure the arrogancie there∣of. He held one errour touching the Kingdome of Christ, and the voluptuous life of the faithfull in this world before the consummation of all things. Hee maintained the superstitious and ridiculous Fastes of Montanus, calling him in many places the Comfor∣ter.
He brought in extreame vnction after Baptisme, the signe of the Crosse, offering for the dead, and for feasts of Natiuities, and other the like dreames of the Montanists. His writings witnesse that he was very desirous of Martyrdome, and that a Christian man ought not only to beare it constantly, but to purchase and seeke it also. Ammonius the Phylosopher, Origens Schoole-maister, perswaded in the Christian faith euen vntill death. Although Porphirius say of him that he reuolted. Victor with good cause depriued of the communion of the Church, an hereticke called Theodotus, who was a blasphemer and prince of the heresie, which afterward Antemon followed, and Paule Samosathonus reuiued. For hee was the first that durst say publikely at Rome that Iesus Christ was but pure man, of mans seed procreated as well as others. See Nice. Lib. 4. chap. 21. A Schisme by the occasiō of Montanus.An other Schisme or diuersitie of iudgements touching the heresie of Montanus and his companions, and also of Prisca and Maximilla Prophitesses, which Montanus had filled with his fury. Some said they were taken with a Spirit of Prophecy, and that, that they said were Oracles. Others maintained that contrary to the custome of true Prophets, they were transpor∣ted and carried away in their mindes, and taken with furie and extasie; they were also giuen to couetousnesse and ambition, contrary to the scripture, which forbids Prophets to take gold or siluer. The faithfull of Asia assembled many times to exa∣mine those doctrines, and so newly forged Prophecies. The faithfull of Gaul writ their opinion touching the furious errors of Montanus, and sent Ireneus into Asia with Letters. See Eu∣seb. Lib. 5. Chap. 4. This Schisme as it was to the condemnation of Montanus and his complices: so the true Church was aduertised more neerly to trie spirits whether they were of God or no. Whatsoeuer heauie chastisements the Iewes before had, the Lord forgat not his mercy, but gaue sufficient witnesse that he calleth his enemies to repentance.
He preserued Doctors and Pastors, and a litle number of faith∣fuls in Ierusalem, which honoured the true God. From the sac∣king or destruction that Titus made, vntill that of Adrian,The Bishops of Ierusalem. The Church of the Gen∣tiles in Ierusa∣lem. the Church of Ierusalem had successiuely 15. chiefe or high Bi∣shops. Euseb. numbreth them. Lib. 3. Chap. 5. After the de∣struction made by Adrian the Emperour, there was no more any Church gathered of the Iewes at Ierusalem, but onely of the Gentiles, and of them were there Bishops ordeined. Al the Iewes were driuen away (as it is said) by Adrian. Marcus then issued of Gentiles, was chosen the 16. Bishop, the 10. yeare of the Emperour Antoninus, after Cassianus the 17. Publius the 18. Maximus the 19. Iulian the 20. Gaian the 21. Symmachus the 22. Caius the 23. Iulian 2. the 24. Capita the 25. Thus dooth Eusebius rehearse it. Lib. 5 Chap 12. And in this time wherein we now are (that is vnder the Emperour Commodus, Maximus the 2. was the 26. Antoninus 27. Valens 28. Dolichian 29. Narcissus 30. Elius 31. Garmani∣an 32. Gordius 33. Narcissus. 2.34. or rather Narcissus the first returning from the Desart, whither he withdrew himselfe (for that his enemies had accused him to liue vnchastely) of whom Eusebius saith, that he had the gift to worke miracles, and that his false accusers were punished according to the Imprecations which euerie one made. As for the time of all these Bishops, Euseb. saith that he could not well discerne, namely in what time euery one of them gouerned the Church. Seeing then the Church of the Gentiles had already their habitation in this place, the Lord would declare that the true Messias was come, and so we need looke for no other. This numeration here made of the Bishops of Ierusalem, sheweth that other Churches may well number their Bi∣shops, as that of Rome glorifieth her selfe in the continua∣tion of hers. After the fift persecution raised by Seuerus against the Christians, came ciuill warres amongst the Romanes.The fift per∣secution. Ireneus had liued long inough in the middest of so many
persecutions.Zephyrim. The greatest renowne that he had was vnder the Emperour Commodus. As for the contention concerning the feast of Easter, the time in the which it was most lighted, was the 4. yeare of the Empire of Seuerus. He then bore the Office of a Minister 23. yeares. The errour of the Chiliastes was attri∣buted vnto him, yet it is not expresly seene in his writings we haue at this day.The death of Ireneus. The manner of his death is vncertaine. They which haue written of the Martyrs say that he and a great mul∣titude of his sheepe were finally slaine for the confession of the name of Christ, vnder Seuerus. Leonides the father of Origenes, martyred for the Faith: vnto whō Origenes his sonne being but of the age of eighteene yeares said; O good father take heed that for vs you chaunge not your purpose. This Origen after his fathers goods were confiscated for the Faith, he nourished his mother and 6. bre∣thren by being a Schoole maister. Zephyrim a Romane, the 14. Bishop of Rome, ruled seuen∣teene yeares as Eusebius saith. In the first Tome of Councells we finde two of his De∣cretall Epistles, one vnto the Bishops of Cicilie, the other to them of Egipt, which represent vnto vs no other forme of go∣uernment then that we see described almost in all the Epistles attributed vnto the Bishoppes of Rome. In the first hee makes mention of iudgements, which ought to be constituted by 12. Iudges, in causes of Patriarkes and Primates. Not to admit indifferently all such as accuse Priests. He sought to establish the Supremacie, and that men should ap∣peale vnto the Apostolicke seate of Rome: And therefore he called himselfe Arch-bishop. In the second hee establisheth certaine ceremonies in Priests orders, to elect such as were wise and approued, and in the presence of all. Damasus attributed vnto him the decree to vse in the Eu∣charist Cuppes of Glasse or Tinne, and not of wood. Also to receiue the Eucharist once at the least in the yeare, from the age of 12. and aboue.
It shall afterward be shewed what estimation men ought to make of those things, and of the Epistles called Decretalls,Bassianus. which are attributed vnto the Romane Bishops. He excommunicated Natalius the Confessor for ioyning with Heretickes; ouer whom he suffered himselfe to be made Bishop. Zephyrim would not receiue him to his repentance, vnlesse openly he shewed good tokens thereof. Bassianus Antoninus surnamed Caracalla, the 22. Emperour  of Rome,Execrable Incest. raigned sixe or seuen yeares (after some) Incestuous and cruell, he tooke his mother in lawe to wife, called Iulia: and slew his brother Geta, and his Vncle. Of his Cousin called Saeuis or Seua, or Semyamira, or Seulasyra, he engendered Helia∣gabalus, who was after Emperour. He was slaine of the age of 43. yeares by the Ambush of Macrinus his successor as he discended from his horse, and drew aside to make water. Papinianus a Lawier was slaine by the Emperour, be∣cause he allowed not the murder commited against his brother Geta. Macrin Optius the 23. Emperour borne at Marusia, raigned a yeare and two monethes, a man lasciuious,Macrin. shame∣lesse in words, impudent, sacralegious, and bloudie: hee was slaine with Diadumenus his sonne, of the age of 50. yeares and more. Heliogabalus called Varius Heliogabalus the 24. Emperour,Helioga∣balus. raigned foure yeares. He was rather a Monster then a Prince, as giuen to al vncleannesse & filthinesse, a contemner of all Re∣ligion, except he reuerenced the Sunne, whose high Priest hee had bene, and therefore called himselfe Heliogabalus. Hee di∣ed of a death worthy his life, slaine by a military tumult with his mother, and their bodies were drawne through the streets, and after cast into Tiber. He raigned two yeares, eight moneths, and adopted Alex∣ander Seuerus. He builded a Citie called Oresta, where he commaunded
to sacrifice humane Hostes and reasonable creatures.Calixtus. Calixtus or after Eusebius, Calistus a Romaine, the 15. Bi∣shop of Rome, ruled sixe or seuen yeares. The Epistles attributed vnto him, shewe the forme of his gouernment. One vnto Benit the Bishop, and the other vnto the Bishops of Gaul. There is attributed vnto him an Edict common to all Bishops, that no accusation should be receiued against Clarkes: and commaunded that each one should take heed they made no conspiration against Bishops. It is credible, in the time wherein persecutions were conti∣nually kindled, that such an Edict should be commaunded the faithfull, which scant durst shewe themselues. Item that none might communicate with such as were ex∣communicated. And that marriages of Cousin-germaine should not bee admitted, and if they were made, to breake them. A place of S. Paul euill In∣terpreted.In one of his Epistles there is an euill exposition; that the wife of a Bishop is interpreted a Church or a Parish, of which it is not lawfull during his life to dispose any thing without his will, nor to enioy the company; that is to say, ordination of an other. The first decretall, instituteth the Fast of the foure times and seasons of the yeare. Damasus saith that he ordeined a Fast of three times, be∣cause of Corne, Wine, and Oyle. And further: That Calixtus made three times orders in December, and ordeined sixteene Priests, foure Deacons, and eight Bishops in diuers places, and finally, that hee suffered Martirdome vnder Alexander the Emperour. It is vncertaine whether it was this Calixt that made the ordinance for the single life of Priests. For concerning this, the two Decretalls attributed vnto him, make no mention thereof, neither is it found in the first volume of Councells. Againe in the Councell of Nice, there is nothing alleadged
of the said ordinance: yea and that more is;Alexander. there was made there a statute to the contrary, at the exhortation of Pa∣thuntius, as shall be said after. Alexander Seuerus the sonne of Mamea, the 25. Empe∣rour, was excellent and vertuous, he raigned 13. or 14. yeares, a friend of the Christians: his mother had beene instructed by Origen: he was slaine with his mother of the age of 19. yeares by treason, by Theeues which in the time of Heliogabalus ha∣uing bene in honour, had bene cast out from their dignities and offices. He caused to be published this lawe, to be inuiolably kept. Doo to an other no other thing, then thou wouldest should be done vnto thy selfe. Porphirius of Cicile a Philosopher, left the Faith,Porphirius. and was an Apostate in despite of the Christians, of whom he said hee had bene iniuried. Vlpianus a Lawier in this time. Vrban a Romane, Bishop of Rome, ruled eight or nine  yeares. Damasus saith he, was of an holy life. So that he drew certaine Gentlemen, as Tiburcius, and Ʋalerian, S. Cecile her husband, to the Christian faith. Some attribute vnto him a Decretall Epistle to all Bi∣shops speaking of a common life, such as was in the time of the Apostles, but he speakes not as it was. Some attributes vnto him Edicts to assure the Gods of the Church, as they call them. And he speakes a litle of the vowe of such as promise to pos∣sesse nothing of their owne. He Instituted the confirmation after Baptisme by imposition of the Bishops hands to obtaine the holy Ghost, and that they are made full Christians, &c. There is none but he may see herein not onely a Sacriledge but also an execrable blaspemie forged in the shop of this slauish Decretists. Damasus attributeth vnto him the ordinance, that the Com∣munion Cuppes should be no more of Glasse, but either of
Siluer or at the least of Pewter.Maximin. Wherevpon Boniface Bishop of Magunce said. In old time goldē Priests vsed wodden Cha∣lices,Wodden Priests. but now wodden Priests vse Golden Chalices. That Confirmation ought to be with Creame. That the foure times Fast ought to be obserued. That Churches should haue lands, medowes, and posses∣sions, and their goods should be common, and distributed to nourish Ministers,Notaries, and Protonota∣ries. the poore, and Notaries called Protonotaries which writ the Acts of the Martyrs. Origines the tenth yeare of the Empire of Alexander, fled from Alexandria into Cesaria of Palestine, for a popular sediti∣on there. Some say hee was marteried vnder Alexander. For al∣though Alexander fauoured the Christians, yet were many martyred by his Officers. For he made no Edict to prouide for the affaires of the Christians.Pontian. Pontian a Romane, Bishop of Rome, ruled 6. yeares, or nine, after Damasus. Two Decretall Epistles are attributed vnto him, which haue this common argument with many others, not to molest nor accuse Priests. By Damasus it is attributed vnto him, that hee should ordaine sixe Priestes, 5. Deacons, and 6. Bishops. Martian the Scottish Historiographer saith, that Pontian was sent into exile into Sardinia, the first yeare of Maximin. At this time at Rome were 36. Priests, Cardinalls (that is to say,The begin∣ning of the Cardinals. eminent and principall amongst others) which especi∣ally had care of the saluation of soules. Of which they say Marcellius ordained 15. to bury the dead and to baptise Chil∣dren. Our Cardinalls of this time would heere take their originall. But indeed they beganne in the time of Innocent the fourth, about the yeare of Christ, 1244. Iulius Maximin, borne in Thrace, 26. Emperour, without authoritie of the Senate, but by the Souldiers: because he was  a great and puissant man: he raigned about three yeares. A man inhumane and furious, he was slaine of the souldiers at the age
of 60. yeares, with his sonne of the age of 19. yeares, and their bodies cast into the Riuer. He raised the sixt persecution against the Christians,The sixt per∣secution. and especially against the Doctors of the Church, for hatred to Manea the mother of Alexander his Predecessor, of whose death he was culpable, and with his owne hands murdered the houshold seruants of the said Alexander. The Romane Senate for hatred it bare vnto Maximin, chose new Emperours to maintaine the Common-wealth, namely, Pupian, Balbin and Gordian. The two first were slaine in the Pallace at Rome by a sedition of warriors, and Gordian re∣mained alone Emperour. In this time some Historiographers of small authoritie, say that Syriacke was the successor of Pontian as Fasciculus tempo. Henry de Hereford, Bergomensis and Naucler: yet is there not one approoued Author or Historiographer which makes any mention of this Siriake. They say that he occupied the state a yeare, three moneths and 13. dayes; and that after he went to Almaigne into Co∣longue, with a great number of Virgines, and that there he was Martired with them. And the reason why he was raced out of the Catalogue of the Bishops of Rome; they say it was because that willingly he forsooke his dignitie, against the will of the Cleargie. Let euery one iudge what faith such Historians merite, or such authors or forgers of Decretall Epistles attributed to Romane Bishops. Celsire an Epicurian Philosopher,Celsus the Heretick. writ then a booke which he Intituled, The Truth: wherein hee pursued the Christians with villanies & lies. Origen writ eight bookes against him. Anter Damasus saith, that by Nation he was a Grecian. Is∣narda writeth that he came to be Bishop of Rome, because Pon∣tian going away substituted him. There is great difference in the supputation of the time of his gouernment. Euseb. giueth him a moneth. Damasus 12. yeares and a moneth.
Fabian.A Decrerall Epistle is attributed vnto him, vnto the Bi∣shops of Betique and Toledo, wherein hee pronounceth it law∣full for Bishops to remoue from one place to an other if neces∣sitie require it, and the profit of the Church: he was Marti∣red vnder Maximin. Fabian Bishop of Rome after Anter. a Romane, gouer∣ned 13. or 14. yeares. His election is described too miracu∣lous; namely by a Doue. See Eusebius. 51.6. Chap. 19. Three Decretall Epistles are attributed vnto him, that the Constituti∣ons of the seuen Sub-deacons, which ought alwaies to be with the Notaries which gather together the deedes of the Mar∣tyrs. Hee was Martired and his wife Darfosa vnder Decius, vnto whom he was married before his being Bishop. Gordian.Gordian chosen by the Senate, was a Prince of a noble heart: wee finde not that hee made any cruell Edicts against the Christians. After he had raigned sixe yeares he was sub∣tilly slaine by Phillippes, which succeeded him. Proclus an hereticke.Many heresies which rose vp in former times renewed at this time. At Rome Proclus mainteined the heresie of the Ca∣taphrygians. Berillus who otherwise was an excellent Doctor in A∣rabia, fell into the heresie of Artemon, which denied Christ to haue bene before his Incarnation. Origines disputed against him. Vnder Gordian there was so great an Ecclips, that the day∣light seemed an obscuritie as darke as the night. There was also so terrible an Earthquake that some whole Townes were swallowed with the ouerturne of the earth. Sapor King of the Persians.Gordian obteined many victories against the Persians, and chased Sapor King of the Persians euen to Antioch, which then was held of the Persians. He recouered both Cares and Nisible, and by this meanes came it to passe that the East was brought subiect vnto the Romane Empire, Iulius Capitolin re∣hearseth it in Gordians life. The Coun∣cell of PhiladelphiaTo confute Berillus, a Councell was held vnder Gordian at Philadelphia in Arabia, where Origenes was, who ouercame
him and brought him into a good way.Phillip. M. Iulius Phillippus an Arabian, with his sonne also cal∣led  Phillip, succeeded Gordian in the Empire.The first Christian Emperours. They were Chri∣stians conuerted vnto the Faith by Pontian or Pontius a Ro∣mane Senator, and baptized by Fabian. Hee, his mother Se∣uera, and his sonne Philip, desirous to resort into the company of the Christians, Fabian would admit them vnto the last Vigiles of Easter, although he had great desire to persist in the congregation and prayers of Christians vntill he had confes∣sed his sinne (which was a murder as is thought) and ioyned himselfe with them of whose sinnes Inquest was made, and so placed amongst the Repentants. Eusebius. Lib. 6. Chap. 34. This Philip refused not to do, but accomplished whatsoe∣uer was enioyned him by the Bishop. In the raigne of this Philip there were Heretickes in Ara∣bia, which mainteined that the soules die with the bodies, and that together they shall rise at the day of Iudgement. Ori∣gines went towards them beeing sent thither, and confoun∣ded them. There are at this day certaine Anabaptistes which say that when man dyeth, his soule sleepeth vntil the day of iudge∣ment, which is an execrable heresie. There were other Heretickes called Helchescites,Helchesites Heretickes. as Eusebius saith, Lib. 6. Chap. 38. or Elsecians after Epiphanius and Saint Augustine, which dwelt in Arabia in the Region of the Moobites; They reiected the Epistles of Saint Paul, and mainteined that in the time of persecution it was no sinne to renounce the Faith with the mouth, if so bee the heart remained faithfull. This Heresie was before sowne by Basilides, and confounded by Agrippa Castor, an excel∣lent Doctor. O what great hurt this wicked heresie hath brought to the Church in persecution.
Phillip and his Courtiers receiued the doctrine of the Gos∣pell, and renounced all Painim Idolatries. But this felicitie en∣dured not long for the Church.The death of Phillip. For as Phillip did to his prede∣cessor, so was done vnto him by his successor Decius: yea and to his sonne who was slaine at Rome, and the Father at Ʋe∣rone. This was their ende after they had raigned 7. yeares. Decius Phillip Decius borne at Bubalie a Towne of base Panonia, was chosen after Phillip. Hee was a Prince worthie praise, but that hee stirred the seuenth persecution against the Christians, because of the euill will hee bare to his predecessor Phillip. Euseb. Lib. 6. Cap. 39. This hatred as Sabellicus and Bergomensis say, proceeded hereof, that the two Phillips being in perill of death, gaue their treasures to Fabian. Saint Ciprian rehearseth other more vrgent causes. And these be his words in his fourth booke and fourth Epistle.The cause of this seuenth persecution vnder Decius. We must needs con∣fesse that this waste which hath pilled our Flocke, and the theft yet at this day practised, comes because of our sinnes: for that we hold not the way of the Lord, but giue our selues to gaine, to pride, to enuies and dissentions, &c. Of this persecution Nicephorus saith in Lib. 5. Cap. 29. that it was as possible to number them that suffered in this persecu∣tion, as to account the sand of the sea. Alexander Bishop of Ie∣rusalem.Alexander Bishop of Ierusalem honoured for his pietie, once was drawne before the Gouernours seate in Cesaria, and after hee had made a confession of his faith he died in pri∣son. Babilus Bishop of Nichomedie, Asclepiades of Antioche, Ger∣manie, Theophile, Cesarius, Ʋital, Polychronius Bishop of Babilon, Serapion, Apollonia a Virgin, and infinit others, were martyred in this horrible persecution. Aboue all other Townes Alexandria then was as a scaf∣folde when the faithfull mustered. See Eusebius Lib. 6. Chap. 40. The torments of the Mar∣tyrs.Diuers kindes of torments were vsed against the Mar∣tyrs, as Eusebius saieth. As sharpe needles against the face and eyes, bursting betwixt stones, burning, pearsing the en∣tralles, casting downe from high places to lower, tearing in
peeces by cardes of Iron, plates being applied to their sides, the rage of sauage beastes, condemnation to digge met∣talls, &c. Saint Ciprian beeing in exile, writ verie consolatorie Letters to them which suffered such euilles. And as Ter∣tullian, in his time defended the Christians against Sca∣pula: So also did Saint Ciprian the like against Demetri∣an a Painim Gouernour, shewing thereby that the cala∣mities of the world are fully imputed vnto the Christi∣ans. Denis of Alexandria writ, that after the publication of De∣cius Edict confirmatiue of this horrible persecution, many of the most excellent shewed themselues so fearefull, that of their owne motion they made abiurations and sacrificed vnto Idols. Ciprian made a Sermon of such as fell, namely of such as perseuered not in the confession of Iesus Christ. There hee sets downe examples of Gods punishment of such as abiured; hee affirmeth that many of them were tormented with euill spirits. Hee saith one became dumbe incontinent after hee had renounced. An other also after his renouncing, com∣ming to take the Supper with others, found in stead of bread, ashes. Also a maide taken with a diuel, bitte off her tongue with her teeth. Many things are attributed to Fabian conteined in Gra∣tians decree, which are not worth rehearsing, and as vnworthy that Bishop. Beda and Eusebius write, that Fabian suffered Martir∣dome at the beginning of Decius raigne. For he bare him euill will, because Phillip gaue him his treasures. Eusebius in his Chronicle saith that Fabian gouerned the Romane Church, 13. yeares. Damasus and Marian the Scot say, 14. Origene writ to Fabian touching the puritie of doctrine, as Euseb. Lib. 6. Chap. 6. Decius died miserably before hee had raigned two whole yeares. Pomponius writeth,The death of Decius. that in a warre against the Gothes hee was swallowed vppe of a Gulphe, into the
which he cast himselfe,Gallus. that he might not fall into his enemies hands. Hereupon note the saying of S. Cyprian. Cyprian in his booke against Demetrian toucheth it saying: Certaine we are that all that we endure shall not long be vn∣punished: And so much more as the outrage of persecution shall be great, so much the greater shall the vengeance be for that persecution, and so much the more manifest. Although we keepe not in memory things of olde, yet the doctrines of things newly happening do suffice, that in very little time and so suddenly, so horrible a vengeance hath followed, &c. Gallus and Ʋolucian his Sonne, ioyntly succeeded in the Empire. Hee was otherwise called C. Verus Trebonian of Gaul. This persecu∣tion counted the eight. The death of Gallus.Hee was happie enough at the beginning as Denis wri∣teth, but continuing the persecution which fell into his hands by his predecessors, he prospered not. For before two yeares were passed, hee and his sonne Volusian were miserably slaine in a warre against Emilian,The Romanes tributaries. hauing before gotten an oppro∣bry vnto the Romane people to make thē tributary vnto the Scythians by an alliance he made with them, as Eutropius and Pomponius Laetus write. Cornelius a Romaine, was three yeares Bishop of Rome. By the Epistle of the Romane Cleargie written to Saint Cy∣prian, we may knowe that the Romane seate was vacant cer∣taine time, and that Cornelius succeeded the Bishop Fabian, at the beginning of the raigne of Gallus and Volusian. Saint Cyprian defended his election against the calumnia∣tions of Nouatus the hereticke, saying in his fourth booke and Epistle to Antonian, that he occupied not his Bishoppricke by bribes, nor of his owne desire, neither by violence, as many doo, which are swelled with their owne pride: but that hee came thither by the will of God, then, when the Tyrant en∣venomed with mortall hatred against Priestes the seruants of God, vttered horrible menacies.
The things then attributed vnto Cornelius in his Decre∣tall Epistles: how can they agree with so excellent a Doctor,Lucius.Decretalls examined. who alwaies was at the combat? As that which is written in his first Epistle; that at the request of a noble woman he caused to be transported the body (or rather the rotten bones) of S. Pe∣ter and S. Paul, which long time had bene kept in a Sepulchre. The second Epistle is to Ruffinus a Bishop of the East, touching the maners of Priests. Eusebius and Saint Hierome who most diligently writ of this holy person, make no mention of those Epistles, but they mention his determination to haue a Councell held at Rome a∣gainst Nouatus. Damasus and others haue written that Cornelius was ba∣nished, and finally Martired vnder Decius: but S. Hierome transferreth his administration to the time of the Emperours Gallus and Ʋolucian, whose authoritie we haue followed. Eusebius 51.7. cap. 2. writeth that Cornelius gouerned the Church of Rome three yeares: yet in his Chronicle he gi∣ueth him but two. Lucius succeeded Cornelius, he was a Romane. Eusebius saith he, was not a Bishop 8. whole moneths. Nauclerus, Platina and Sabellicus giueth him 3. yeares and more. Gratian attributes vnto him this decree; that Priests,Decretalls at∣tributed vnto Lucius. Dea∣cons, and other Ministers of the Aultar, ought to bee cho∣sen such, as they can keepe themselues without marrying, and that no Clarke should frequent the company of wo∣men. There is attributed vnto him an Epistle written to the Bishops of Spaine and Fraunce: wherein is proposed a kinde of gouernment, which seemes not to agree with the time of Luci∣us. Therein is ordeined that in all places there should be two Priests, and three Deacons, with a Bishop, to keepe him com∣pany wheresoeuer he went, as witnesses of his life. As if then there had bene so great tranquilitie, as a Bishop might goe take his pleasure or shewe himselfe with great companies.
The yeare 257. the heresie of Noetus and Sabellius after Theodoret,Noetus and Sabellius. got a passage, although before it had beene deba∣ted in Affrike by Praxeas and Hermogenes. They said that God the Father suffered, and therefore S. Augustine saith, they were called Patripassians. Many Histories make mention of an horrible pesti∣lence in the time of Gallus; the infection whereof came in∣to Aethiope, and after it had consumed the Southerne people it came into the East, and there laid holde on the other parts of the world, so that many places were left desolate. And this wound endured so long time, that scant it finished before the end of tenne yeares. Of this so terrible and extraordinary an euill, S. Ciprian tooke an argument to make his booke, Intituled Of the cru∣eltie. Emilian succeeded Gallus and Volusian after he had slaine them. Hee was a man of base condition, issuing from Mau∣ritaine, and was Emperour but three moneths. Ʋalerian Licinius Valerianus chosen Emperour, a man of noble race, excellent in knowledge and honestie, an examplarie of a true Censor and Senator in all his life. But in him all these vertues were defaced. First for that he ioy∣ned with him in the Empire his sonne Galien, who was a mon∣ster in all abhominarion. Item by the persecution that he stirred against the Chri∣stians. Of all the Emperours there was not one before him which at the beginning hadde beene so soft and milde to∣wards Christians, yea familiar, in so much as his Court was full of them. But after he gaue himselfe to Deuines and Aegyptian Enchaunters, hee was perswaded to put to death the seruants of GOD,The Art Magicke ouerthrew Ʋalerian. as they which hindered those wic∣ked Enchaunters; to kill poore children, and to offer vppe the sonnes and daughters of theyr miserable pa∣rents. A litle after hee had begunne to persecute the Christi∣ans, hee went to make warre vppon the Persians, and in a
battaile hee was taken aliue.Lucian.The miserie of Valerian. Sapor King of the Persians v∣sed such crueltie towards Ʋalerian, who was of the age of seuentie yeares, that when hee mounted on horsebacke, hee serued himselfe with Ʋalerians backe to get vp. Eutro∣pius, Pollio, Aurelius Ʋictor, Sabellicus and Laetus, doo recite this, and say hee vsed his age in this miserable seruitude, Eusebius in the Oration which hee made heereof to the whole congregation of the faithfull, saith that Sapor commaunded that Ʋalerian should bee scorched and sal∣ted. Gallienus raigned then alone and gaue himself to Idlenesse, dissolution, and whoordome. In his time there was no place in all the Romane Iuris∣diction, except Italie alone, wherein there were not sediti∣ons and rebellions. Trebellius an Historiographer, accoun∣teth thirtie, all which at one time were named Emperours; some in one Region, and some in others. Cilicia, Cappadocia, and Syria, were pilled and wasted by the Persians, vnder Sapor. The Almaines after they had tormented the Gaules, en∣tred by force into Italie. The Gothes pilled Pontus, Asia, Macedonia, and Greece. See the Romane Histories. Vnder his rule monstrous things came to passe, hor∣rible ouertures and Earthquakes, whereof many there were which died of excessiue feare. Rome was shaken, Libia trem∣bled. Aurelius Ʋictor saith, that Gallien was slaine with his sonne at Millaine, or with his brother Valerian, as Eutropius saith. They which haue set downe in writing the Romane affaires, were of opinion that these mischiefes happening to the Romane Empire, came by the wicked gouernment of the Princes. But we thinke that the iudgement and vengeance of God prouoked by the former persecutions, as well of others as of himselfe, fell vpon them.
Lucius.Ed. 9. The death of Saint Ciprian.S. Ciprian hauing bene sent into exile vnder Ʋalerian and Gallien, by Paternus gouernour of Affrike, and vnder Maximus, who succeeded him in the gouernment, was finally beheaded in the time of Lucius after Sabellicus. Marianus Scotus saith, that Lucius Bishop of Rome was ba∣nished for the confession of Christ in the persecution of Vale∣rian and Gallien,The death of Lucius. and that afterward he was permitted to return vnto his Ministerie; and that finally he was beheaded, and so might he be Bishop the space of three yeares and more. Atheno∣dorus Gregor, of Neo∣cesaria.Theodorus and Athenodorus, Bishops of Pontus in this time. Theodorus was after called Gregorie, as Eusebius saith, Lib. 6. Cap. 30. These two hearing the great renowne of the learning of Origine, came to Cesaria, where Origine read publikely, ha∣uing forsaken Alexandria, and were perswaded by Origen to let goe their Philosophie, and to apply themselues vnto the holy scriptures. The heresie of Sabellius buried.Basile the great said, that the heresie of Sabellius was ex∣tinguished by this Gregorie the great. If Nicephorus deserue credit, Theodorus or Gregorie liued very long, namely vnto the time of Dioclesian. Yet Basile in his 62. Epistle, which is to the Neocesarians, writeth that hee was not very olde when he died. Paul Samo∣satane.Paul called Samosatenus of the Towne of Samosate, which is in Mesopotania of Siria vpon the floud Enphrates, was ordei∣ned  Bishop of Antioch after Demetrius, the thirteenth yeare of Galien. The Bishops which assisted the Councell of Antioch to refute his wicked doctrine and blasphemies against God and the Lord Iesus, haue sufficiently witnessed of him. The end of Origenes.We may not here let passe the Historie of Origines end: that is, that after the yeare wherein Demetrius ordeined him in the office of Catechist, vntil the time he died, it seemeth he trauelled fiftie two yeares and more, and the most part of that time hee employed in teaching, writing, busie in the affaires of the Church, and refuting of heresies; In so much that Athanasius saith of him, that hee was admirable of great
labour. Finally,Stephen.Suidas. counteth this of Origen and Nicephorus after him. after he had constantly endured many gree∣uous torments, he was led before an Aultar, vnto which they had brought a wicked Aethiopian, and there was proposed vn∣to him two things, the one, either to offer vp sacrifice vnto the Idoll, or else abandon his body to the villainous Aethiopian. Origen made a signe that hee had rather offer sacrifice.The fall of Origenes. Then they thrust a Sensor into his hand. For which Impietie he was after excommunicated out of the Church of Alexandria, from whence hee retyred into Iudea, and being come to Ierusalem, the Priests and Elders requested and after constrained him to speake in the congregation of the faithfull, because he was a Priest. Origen rose vp as if he should make a Sermon, but hee only recited his Theame of the 50. Psalme. And God said to the Preacher; Wherefore preachest thou my Iustifications? And wherefore takest thou my Testament in thy mouth? &c. And in∣cōtinently shut the booke, then sat he downe sheading teares, and lamenting with great cry being not able to speake, and all that were present wept with him. Suidas addeth, that hee was buried in the Towne of Tyre. Euse. Lib. 7. cap. 1. saith it was vn∣der the Emperour Gallus, 255. or thereabouts: and then was it betwixt the yeare 50. of his age, or 69. after Nicephorus. And as it may be thought he dyed in great pouertie and mise∣rie, if not in dispaire. S. Ierome although he sometimes handled him rudely, yet he admireth him, and praiseth him, because of his great know∣ledge, in the Epistle to Pammathus and Ocean. He praiseth his spirit, but not his faith. This should make vs walke in feare and care in our vocation. Stephen borne at Rome, was Bishop of Rome, and the suc∣cessor of Lucius. The greatest paine that he had in his gouernmēt was that he opposed himselfe forcibly against S. Cyprian and all the Coun∣cell of Affricke,The differēce of rebaptizing heretikes. touching the difference that then was moued to rebaptise heretikes, as it is recited by Eusebius. Lib. 7. ca. 2. & 3. The contents of the two Decretall Epistles attributed
vnto him deserue no credite. The one to Hilarie Bishop, and the other to all the Bishops of the Prouinces touching accusa∣tions made against Priests. For it seemes not that the Romane Church was in such prosperitie then, that Stephen Bishoppe thereof, had no other thing to do and ordaine, but with what reuerence a man must handle the Chalice and holy garments, or (as Isidore and Polydore witnesse of him) that he was the first Inuentor of the Couerings of the Aultar. Damasus attributes vnto him two ordinances, in which sixe Priests, fiue Deacons, and sixe Bishops were ordeined: and saith that after he had gouerned seuen yeares and fiue moneths he was martyred. But Euseb. Lib. 7. cap. 5. sheweth that hee was but two yeares in his office. S. Cyprian writ vnto him certaine Epistles which are in his workes. The death of Denis Bishop of Alexan∣dria.Denis Bishop of Alexandria, excellent in doctrine, al∣though he suffered not martyrdome but watched in the midst of the Church, therfore God preserued him from Martyrdom as Niceph. speaketh. Li. 15. ca. 28. Notwithstanding he endured terrible afflictions & diuers banishments in two violent perse∣cutions vnder Decius, and after vnder Valerian. He died very olde, and it hapned at what time the two Councells were held against Paul. Samosaten. An. 12. of Gallien, and of Christ, 288. hauing gouerned the state of Alexandria 16. yeares, and the Church 17. About this time many Nations cast themselues vpon the marches of the Romanes. The Countrey of Denmarke was ta∣ken out of their hands. Likewise the Almaines came euē to Ra∣uenna, putting all to fire and blood. This was the first waining and decreasing of the Ro∣maine Empire: For the Countrey was neuer after recouered. Egipt reuolted, France was lost: Macedonia, Pontus, Asia, wasted by the Gothes: Pannonia by the Sarmates. Zenobia Queene of the Persians ruled in the East. To vnderstand all this diminuti∣on and fall of this Empire, See Trebellio Pollia, a Romane Hi∣storiographer. Phillip Bishop of Alexandria martyred, and his daughter Eu∣genia at Rome.
The great Temple of Diana in Ephesus,Sixtus. was pilled and burnt by the Gothes. A second Cerinthus hereticke,Chiliastes renewed. promised in the kingdome to come, great store of meates and women, and that after a thou∣sand yeares should bee the resurrection, and the kingdome of Christ should be on earth. Xistus or Sixtus, the second of that name, succeeded Stephen, he was of Athens. He was ordeined Bishop of Rome by the ele∣ction of the Cleargie comming from Spaine where he was prea∣ching. There are attributed vnto him two Decretals, the one to Gayus Bishop, the other to the brothers of Spaine: the which containe nothing but the forme of the common gouernment which they make vs beleeue was thē. Item touching the vowes of Priests. But we may easily see that all is forged at pleasure. Damasus after his maner reciteth that hee made orders twise, ordeining, Priests, Deacons, and Bishops. Bergomensis & Sabellicus recite, that Xistus trauelled much to take away the heresies of the Sabellians, Cerinthians, and Ne∣potians. Finally, that he was accused by them before Gallien: and vpon his commaundement beheaded, and with him 6. Dea∣cons. S. Ambrose in his Offices li. 1. cap. 41. reciteth, that as he wēt to death,Laurence a Deacon of Rome. it is said that one Laurence a Deacon spoke to him in this sort. Father wilt thou goe without thy sonne? And Xistus answered him. My sonne I shall not leaue thee. There are grea∣combattes for the Faith prepared for thee: thou shalt follow me three dayes after. In the meane while if thou hast any thing in thy treasure distribute it to the poore. This Laurence was the chiefe of the seuen Deacons of the Church of Rome, which had the handling of the goods depu∣ted for almes. The Gouernour of Rome being hungry of siluer, and per∣swaded that the Church had gold, siluer, & moueables,The history of Laurence. as Can∣dlesticks, Chalices, and such like things, would needs haue for∣ced Laurence to haue tolde him where those treasures were. Laurence to do this hauing taken the terme of three dayes, di∣stributed it all to the poore whatsoeuer he had. Then hauing gathered together on an heape all the poore, lame and diseased, which were maintained of almes,
At the day assigned,Denis. hee prayed the Gouernour to goe with him to that place, and shewing him al those poore and diseased people he said. Behold the vessels of siluer, yea the Talents in order, receiue them, and thou shalt adorne the Citie of Rome, and enrich the Reuenewe of the Emperour and thine owne. The Gouernour seeing himselfe mocked, commaunded hee should be stretched on an Iron grate red hotte, and soone after the tormentors laid him on it, who with great courage endured that cruell and long torment, and finally prayed and inuocated the Lord, and so yeelded his happie soule. Prudencius a Christi∣an Poet in his booke of Crownes describeth this martirdome. Denis succeeded Xistus, and as Damasus saith of a Monke, was made Bishop. But it appeareth rather by that which Euse∣bius Lib. 7. Ca. 7. and S. Hierome, say, that he was a Priest of the Church of Rome, the yeare of our Lord 266. and the 10. yeare of Gallien. Two Decretall Epistles are attributed vnto him. In the first he exhorteth Vrbain to follow the true Religion. The se∣cond distributeth and makes partitions of Churches into Pari∣shes and Diocesses. Item that two seuerall times he held orders. But Eusebius saith, Lib. 7. Cap. 30. that Denis died with∣out martyrdome, hauing gouerned 9. yeares. Others say sixe yeares, and sixe moneths. The Coun∣cell of Anti∣oche.The Councell of Antioche against Paul Samosetaine was celebrated in his time, wherein the said Paul was condemned, and cast out of the communion of the vniuersall Church, and Donus a man accomplished with vertues was ordeined in his place. He was the sonne of Demetrian, who had ruled in that Church without reproach. Hist. Eccle. Lib. 7. Chap. 17. Married Bi∣shops. Hist. Eccle. Lib. 5. cap. 15.Note how the Sonne succeeded the Father in their Bishopricks. And so in Victors time Polictates a Bishop of Asia, said that he himselfe was the 8. Bishop of his Auncestors. Some say that Galien seeing the long & horrible seruitude of his Father vnder Sapor King of Persia (as is said) caused to
cease the persecution by publicke Edicts,Claudus. permitting euery one to liue after his owne lawe. Hee was so giuen to his pleasures, that when it was tolde him that many Countries were reuolted from him, hee did but laugh. In so much that his souldiers slew him at Millaine, at the age of 50. yeares, hauing raigned 15. yeares: that is to say, seuen with his Father, and eight alone. Thirtie Tyrants rose vp which sore afflicted the Romane Common-wealth. Ignatius saith it. Claudus the Emperour raigned almost two yeares. Trebel∣lius saith that in his kingdome the Gothes and diuers other peo∣ple of Scythia, pilled the Romaine Prouinces, and that there were three hundreth thousande men of barbarous Nations, which by force entred into the Romaine Territories, against which people as well by sea as by land, the Emperour Claudus obteined victorie the first yeare of his kingdome, and finally chased them away. After him Quintilius his brother was chosen of the Ro∣mane Senators, and raigned but seuenteene dayes,Quintilius. and was slaine: or as some say, he caused his owne foote to bleed in wa∣ter, hauing vnderstood that Aurelian was chosen Emperour. Aurelian the Emperour,Aurelian. is rather to be numbred amongst necessary Princes then good: for so much praise as his milita∣rie Art deserueth, so much his domesticke crueltie takes from him, which he exercised euen against his sisters sonne. Vopiscus witnesseth, that the Emperour Aurelian the first yeare of his kingdome recouered Gaule, after hee had vanqui∣shed Tetrike who before occupied it: this was in the yeare of Christ, 274. after Eusebius. He also deliuered from the Barbarians the Inhabitants of Auspourge, which were besieged by the said Barbarians. After this he tryumphed ouer Zenobia, and the Persians, hauing van∣quished them. Some say hee founded Orleans and Geneua, renowned Townes. Eusebius saith of him, that he was towards Christians ve∣ry peaceable at the beginning, but soone after he chaunged
his good opinion at the perswasion of wicked people:Aurelian. Inso∣much that he determined to persecute the Churches: and let∣ters of his Edict were written, and wanted but his signet and hand for to send them vnto the Prouinces: but God by his  diuine clemencie hindered it. For hee dyed suddenly before he could execute his will. Some say a Thunderboult light nigh vnto Aurelian and such as followed him, euen when he began to persecute the Christians, and that soone after he was flaine by one of his houshold and familiars, as hee was going the se∣cond time to warre vpon the Therikes. Herein would God giue his to know, that his chosen are not exe∣cuted at the pleasure of men, but when it pleaseth him. The ninth persecution.This was the ninth persecution against the Christians, which endured not long for the death of the said Tyrant. It should also be noted, that euen whilest Aurelian the Em∣perour raigned, foure Tyrants inuaded the Empire, namely Firmian, Saturnin, Bonosus, and Proculus. As Ʋopiscus saith. After the death of Aurelian, the Empire was voyd seuen moneths. Tacitus.And after him Tacitus was chosen Emperour, a wise and graue man, but he was slaine the sixt moneth of his Empire. Florian.Florian his brother tooke from him his Empire, not by the Senates authoritie but of his owne will, thinking it belon∣ged vnto him by hereditary right; yet notwithstanding a while after he was slain nigh Tharsus, hauing raigned 60. daies. Some say he caused his owne veines to be opened. Probus.Probus issued from Dalmatia, was declared Emperour, a man excellent both in peace and warre, hee raigned 6. yeares  and foure moneths. The first yeare of his raigne he recouered Gaul, which the Barbarians and Almaines had againe occupi∣ed, and brought them vnder the first obedience of the Ro∣manes. He reduced all Germanie into a Prouince. He tooke away olde Tyrants and brought peace into the world: So that he said there should be no more any need of souldiers, which caused them so to malice him, that they conspired to sley him.
Manes the hereticke at this time composed many bookes,Felix. and almongst others, one hee Intituled, The Misteries of Ma∣niche. He was a Persian by Nation. And seeing many abhorred his lyes and blasphemies, sought all meanes to giue authoritie to his doctrine. He made the King of Persia beleeue that he would heale his sonne, who was greeuously sicke. But after the Kings sonne was taken from the Phisitians and put into the hands of Manes, he died. The King of Persia caused him to be apprehended, and made him to be broyled aliue vpon an hot Iron. Suidas and Epipha. recite it. Hee was a great Magician, and S. Augustine saith, that the bookes of the Maniches are full of fables of Astronomie. S. Ierom in the preface of the Dialogues against the Pelagians saith, that the Manicheans affirmed that when they are come to the high∣est degree of perfection, they can no more sinne, no not in thought, nor by ignorance. Felix borne at Rome was ordeined Bishop after Denis, the  yeare of Christ, 280. after Eusebius, and the first yeare of the raigne of Probus. The last Authors attribute vnto him two Epistles De∣cretals, without authoritie of the Elders. The first is written to Paternus Bishop. The 2. to all the Bishops of France: wherein he declareth that he had determined in a Councell that Messes should be celebrated vpō the memory of Martyrs, least it might be quenched. The word Messe, doth manifestly enough shew the deceit and for∣ging of those decretals. For it was not yet vsed, neither are there found any Authors of that time which haue written thereof. Felix finally suffred martirdom after he had bin bishop of Rome 5. yeares: after Euse. But after Dama. 4. yeres, 3. months & 5. daies Eutichian a Tuscā of the towne of Lunes, succeeded him, the  year of Christ, 284. & the 1. yeare of ye raign of the Emp. Probus. Two decretal Epistles are attributed vnto him: the 1. to them of Boetia, cōtaining certain doctrines of ye Incarnatiō of Christ, of his body, of his Crosse, of his death, of hell, & of our saluatiō. Damasus attributeth vnto him, a ceremony touching the oblation of Gummes & fruites, as Beanes, Pease, Raisons, and such like.
Probus.The same Damasus saith of him (if we must needs beleeue him) that with his owne hands he buried 342. Martyrs, and that he ordained that none should bury any Martyr without a Damaltike or a Sacerdoll coate, and without fire. Whosoeuer vnderstands the horror of the persecutions of this time, way easily coniecture the lyes of such ceremonies. Gratian the great Forger, reciteth that Eutichian made ma∣ny constitutions: That Abbesses and Nunnes should not put vailes vpon widowes or maydens which should be Nunnes. Item that such as came to Councells about deliberation of the Churches affaires, ought to take oathes: and after he reci∣teth others: He suffered Martyrdome after he had gouerned the Ro∣mane Church almost ten moneths, as Eusebius witnesseth, Lib. 7. cap. 32. Damasus and Platina say one yeare and a moneth. Ʋolareran, 8. yeares. Many things are recited of the conquests of Probus the Emperour, which the Romane Historiographers describe. Carus succeeded him the yeare of Christ, 284. and asso∣ciated his two sonnes in the Empire, Numerian and Carinus. He beganne new warre against the Persians, which Pro∣bus had left imperfect. He sent Carinus to the Gaules, to main∣taine them, and led with him Numerian. He recouered in that warre Mesopotamia, and hauing wasted all the Region of the Parthians, he got all the kingdome of the Persians. See Vopiscus. Carus strooken with lightning dyed suddenly. Numerian was of great modestie, giuen to study, especially of Poesie. His Fa∣ther in lawe hauing laid ambushes,Numerian slaine. Carinus. slewe him as hee was in his Coach. His brother Carinus a man giuen to all wickednes, de∣filed himselfe with the bloud of the faithfull, hauing the Em∣pire alone. These three then raigned not long. For all their times endured not three whole yeares, as Eutropius Victor and Latus recite. The gouernment of those aforesaid Emperours brought some release to the Christians, and so things happened fauou∣rable
vnto them:Dioclesian. Insomuch that some of them were aduanced to Offices and gouernment vntill the raigne of Dioclesian, and shall be seene in his place. Caius Bishop of Rome was of Dalmatia, of the family of Dioclesian the Emperour after Damasus. Eusebius saith he was ordained Bishop the same yeare that Eutichian was, who with much adoo remained but ten moneths Bishop. There is attributed vnto him a decretall Epistle, wherein he speaketh but meanly of Christ the Mediator, and of Iusti∣fication. Hee after saith, that to ascend vnto the dignitie of a Bishop, men must goe by degrees, and by Ecclesiasticall or∣ders, as first hee must be Portier, then Lector, &c. Damasus witnesseth, that he liued during the time of Dio∣clesian the Emperours persecutions, from which he hid himselfe and dwelt vnder vaultes; yet finally hee was drawne to death the 12. yeare of the said Dioclesian, after he had gouerned the Church 15. yeares after Eusebius, or eleuen and foure mo∣neths after Damasus. The Lord (as hath beene said) gaue some release to his Church, vntill the kingdome of Dioclesian, as Euseb. Lib. 8. Cap. 1. Dioclesian Emperour, borne at Dalmatia, the second yeare of his kingdome, associated to the Empire, Maximiam Hercule∣an, in which yeare he brought vnder the Empire the Gaules, which had bene occupied by the Rustikes, which were called Bagaricles, from thence he went into Affrike, and vanquished the Gentians. These two seeing the affaires of the Empire might be bet∣ter decided by many, named two Cesars to gouerne vnder thē, namely Galerian, and Constantinus, who was Father vnto Con∣stantine the great. Euery of them were imployed in conquering that which was lost; & aboue all to recouer Egipt, which Achil∣las had gotten. And this was the yeare of Christ, 298. The East  also which Narsus had gotten. They brought vnder the yoake fiue Prouinces beyond the floud Tigris, which reuolted from the Romanes since Traians time. Also Britaine (which is now England) ten yeares after her reuolt, and after hauing chased
away Garesius or Cranssius,Marcelline. who had made himselfe King. Eu∣seb. and Pomp. Laetus. Dioclesians pride.After that things were thus ordered, in the place to ac∣knowledge this good of the Lorde, Dioclesian caused him∣selfe to bee worshipped as GOD. Laetus in his Abridge∣ment of Romaine Histories saith; Whereas the first Empe∣rours contented themselues to be called Consuls, and to be salu∣ted of the people by that name, this man was the first that wold be adored, naming himselfe brother of the Sunne and of the Moone. Before Emperours gaue to kisse their hands to No∣bles,Kissing of shooes. and their knees to the common people. But Dioclesian made an Edict that all men without difference of whatsoeuer race, should kisse his feete: vpon which also he placed certaine markes of adoration, and had his shooes garnished with gold and pretious stones, which also Caligula had done as is said. The Popes and Antichrists of Rome haue bent Imitators here∣of, and haue well held this ordinance of Dioclesian to conserue their dignitie. The tenth persecution.The tenth persecution raised against the Christians, en∣dured tenne yeares in the West Countries. This was the grea∣test and cruellest persecution of all. For in lesse then thirtie dayes, through diuers Prouinces were martyred about 18. or 20. thousand persons, as well men as women. Marcelline borne at Rome, succeeded Caius in the gouern∣ment of the Romane Church, his Father was called Proiectus. During this persecution hee was very greeuously pressed by the Tormentors, vnder Dioclesian and Maximian Emperours, wherein being taken, with feare of torments and punishments, he offered a graine of Incence in the honour of Idols, but after∣ward he acknowledged his fault in a full Synode assembled at Sinnesse, & did penance: and after came euen to reprooue Dio∣clesian, and voluntarily presented himselfe to death. Hee was martyred with Claudius Cyrinus and Antonius, after he had go∣uerned the Romane Church nine yeares after Damisen, eight after Marianus, and foure after Ʋrsperge. This was the yeare of Christ 303. There are attributed vnto Marcelline as to others, two
decretall Epistles. The first written to a Bishop called Salomon.Dioclesian. And the other vnto the Westerne Bishops. Dioclesian was of opinion that there was no meane more meere to pacifie the world, and to bring the Romane Empire into the face and brightnesse of his auncient maiestie, thē to a∣bolish all new religions. His determination then was to begin to take away from the middest of the people the dissimilitude of the Christian Religion: and many Sophisters and Philoso∣phers drew him on herevnto. As for the faithfull, Euseb. in his 8. Booke, Chap. 1. saith, that the too great peace and libertie of the Church made them degenerate, and brought debates and questions about words, so that at last they came to flames, and there could not be found a more singular meane to extinguish and bring it to nothing then this persecution. Dioclesian might haue bene numbred amongst the Princes worthy of praise, if he had not contaminated and obscured the vertues he had, with the Christians bloud he shead. His com∣panion in the Empire, was Maximian Herculeus, a man meete to exercise all cruelties. The chiefe seate of the Easterne Emperours was then at Nichomedia in Bithinia; wherein the Imperiall Pallace was con∣sumed by fire. This being imputed to the Christians, he sent commaundements all ouer to persecute them, yea & to burne the bookes of holy scripture, & to take from the place of Ma∣gistracy with ignominy all them that were Christians. Dioclesian persecuted the East, and Maximian the West. Crueltie was sharpe in Syria, and it began at the Bishops. See Euseb. lib 8 cap. 6. This fury spread into Mesopotamia, Cilicia, Pontus, Phrigia, Armenia, Egipt, yea euen to the Iles of Lesbos, as witnesseth Sabellicus, Enne. 7. lib. 8. Arithimus Bishop of Nichomedia, after he had made a con∣fession of his Faith, hee was beheaded with a great troupe of Martyrs. Serena, Dioclesians wife, endured constantly martyrdome.The Empresse Martyred. This persecution was so cruell that none were spared. Herma∣nus Gigas. In Europe, at Rome aboue all places was there greatest
number of Martyrs. The Prouost Rictiouarus in Gaul, made a great massacre, especially at Cullaine, at Treuers, and towards Moselle. Beda writeth, that this persecution came euen in∣to England, and then that Saint Alban, a man very renow∣ned, receiued the crowne of Martyrdome. From this time they beganne to finde out diuers kindes of torments, but how much the more horrible they were, so much more exquisite appeared the constancy of Martyrs. Eusebius saith he beheld the persecution made at Thebaida; and saith that the glaues, axes and swordes of Tormentors were blunted and turned a∣gaine with so great slaughter, and were altogether tyred, when the Christians with ioy of hart singing Psalmes presented them selues to death. Sulpitius in the holy history, li. 2. saith that Chri∣stians then more ardently desired martyrdome, then the am∣bition of the Cleargie afterward demaunded Bishopprickes. Beda de temptat. and Orosius lib. 7. cap. 25. Dioclesian crooked with age, after he had assaied all cruelties that could be deuised to extirpate the Christians, willingly dis∣missed himselfe of the charge of the Empire, and went to Ni∣chomedia, and being tossed with rage and fury led a priuate life. Maximian his companion, who obeyed him, as the lesser the greater, deposed himself at the same time in the Towne of Mi∣laine. Dioclesian at Solone passed his time as a Gardener. This change was made after they had raigned together the space of twentie yeares. What deaths they had shalbe told hereafter. Marcel borne at Rome, one Benets sonne, was chosen Bi∣shop, about the 20. yeare of Dioclesian, after the Chronicle of Henry the first. He was a true Pastor of the Lords Church. In the booke of Councells there is attributed vnto him two Epi∣stles. The one to them of Antioch, wherein he exhorteth to fol∣low the Romane Church, and that without authoritie thereof no Sinode can bee called. But any bodie may see it is but a counterfeyt, and not agreeing with the time which then was. The other written to Maxentius, is altogether imper∣tinent: wherein after he hath commended Christian charitie, hee reciteth things which are as pertinent so the time of that Church, as conuenient to haue bene written to a Tyrant who afterward
was named Emperour.Cōstantius. Such Epistles doo sufficiently shewe that they wore forged by them which after thrust themselues into the sheep-folde of the Lord, not to feed, but to rule. He confirmed in the faith, Maurice, as hee came from Syria to goe into Gaul, with the Legion which was called of Thebes. Constantius Chlorus and Galerius Maximin, or Maximian, were made Augustes to goe through with the warres which their predecessors Dioclesian and Maximian Herculeus left. Eu∣tropius the Father of Constantius a Romane knight, of a noble house was discended from Aeneas. The Empire as thus parted, that Constantius gouerned Gaul, Spaine, Italie, and Affrike: and Galerius, which Dioclesian had adopted (giuing him his daugh∣ter Valeria) the rest, namely Slauonia, Greece, and the East. Yet Constantius who was neither ambitious nor couetous, refused Affrike & Italie, cōtenting himselfe with Spaine & Gaul, which he gouerned well and peaceably, was well beloued of his sub∣iects, and no enemy of the Christian faith. He had two wiues: the first Helena, which was of base condition, of whom he had Constantine the great: which wife he was constrained to leaue, and take Theodora, the daughter of the wife of Maximian Her∣culeus. He died of a mallady in England, two yeares after Dio∣clesian had deposed himself from the Empire: for long time be∣fore had he bene made Caesar, and adopted by Dioclesian. Some attribute vnto him those two yeares of raigning, beginning from the natiuitie of our Lord, 505. See Pomp. Laet. During his raigne there was stirres of warre. He was called Chlorus, for the colour of his bright shining face. Ignat. Lib. 1. He had of his wife Theodora, Constantius, who was father of Gallus and Iulian. Maximian Herculian solicited Dioclesian to take again the Empire: Some say Dioclesian answered, if he once vnderstood the pleasure of Gardens hee would neuer thinke of raigning. The Historiographers write that Dioclesian dyed in a rage and fury, feeling an infection in all his members.The death of Dioclesian. See Nicepho. lib. 7. cap. 20.
Some say hee poysoned himselfe tenne yeares after he depo∣sed himselfe from the Empire, fearing Constantine and Li∣cinius who bitterly reprehended him as a fauourer of Max∣entius. See Eutrop. lib. 9. and Bapt. Igna. lib. 1. Seuerus was adopted and made Cesar by Galerius, when Constantinus had left the administration of Italie and of Affrike, and to Seuerus was giuen the charge of the saide Countries. But at Rome Maxentius was made Emperour by the Preto∣rian souldiers, and without contradiction of the Senate, Seue∣rus not thinking himselfe strong enough to resist Maxentius, thought to retire into Slauonia to Maximin, but hee was en∣trapped and ouercome at Rauenna. Pompon. Laet. Maxentius sonne of Maximian Herculian, being chosen Emperour by the Pretorian souldiers in a tumult, and hauing gotten the victory vpon Seuerus, waxed proud, and gaue himselfe vnto pleasures & cruelties. Then Maximin or Maxi∣mian the sisters sonne of Galerius, who also by him was made Cesar with Seuerus, and had once the charge of the East, adop∣ted Licinius which he left in Slauonia, after comming to make warre vpon Maxentius was tolde of the treason of his peo∣ple, and so retyred. See Pomp. Laet. in the life of Constantine and Galerius. Galerius then hauing made Licinius Cesar as is said, a litle time after fell into a terrible disease which fretted his entralles, whereof he died. This was because of his exceeding great le∣cherie towards all, and horrible crueltie towards Christians. For an vlcer he had in his bladder did eate his priuy mem∣bers, and as all that part of his bodie rotted, wormes came out, and no remedie could be found for it. So the Phisiti∣ans abandoned him: For the stench was so intollerable, that neither Phisitian nor other durst approach vnto him. Wherefore in the ende hee dyed of a death worthy such a man,The ende of Galerius. after hee had raigned two yeares alone, and with the Cesars and companions of his Empire the space of 16. yeares. In the persecution moued by Maxentius, Marcel Pastor of the Church of Rome was apprehēded to sacrifice vnto Idols, and to renownce his office, but hee despised all threatnings,
and smiled, which the Tyrant Maxentius seeing, commaunded he should be beaten and chased out of the Towne. He retyred into an house of a widowe named Lucine, and there secretly maintained a Church. Which the Tyrant hearing, made a sta∣ble of it for horses and other beastes of the house, & there loc∣ked vp Marcel. Being thus condemned, he left not to do the office of a true Pastor, by Epistles which he writ to many. But finally being tormented by the filthinesse and stench of the place, in the end he yeelded his spirit to God, the yeare 308. Eusebius a Gretian by Nation, a Phisitians sonne, after Da∣masus succeeded in the gouernment of the Romane Church, in the great persecutions in the time of Maxentius the horrible Tyrant. The Authours of the Ecclesiasticall history make no mention of this Eusebius. The booke of Councells attribute to him three Decretall Epistles. The first to the Bishoppes of Gaul. The second to the Egiptians. The third to the Bishoppes of Tuscane, and Campania. His ordinances contained in those Epistles are these in effect. That sheepe shall not draw their Shepheard or Bishop into Lawe, vnlesse he denie the Faith. That a mayd which shall be espowsed only by words of the present time, may enter into Religion. That the Sacrifice of the Aultar be consecrated, not in cloath of silke, but in linnen cloth, and such like bables which the infamous fauourers of the seate of Popes, haue not beene ashamed to assigne to those good and faithfull Ministers of the Lorde, to disfigure and defile with their orders this honest face of the primitiue Church (which follow his head Iesus Christ in continuall per∣secutions) to establish their seate of perdition, and to pollute the bloud of those holy Martyrs. But contrary Eusebius trauailed much in the haruest of the Lords word, as well at Rome as other where in the time of persecutions vnder Maxentius, vntill that (as Christianus Mattoens saith) hee finished his life by martyrdome, the yeare of the Lord 309. But amongst Histogoriographers, there is great diuersitie for the number of yeares. Licinius born in Dare, was made Augustus, & companiō of the Empire with Maximin Galari, after the death of Seuerus, the
yeare of our Lord,Constantin the great. 308. He was a warlike man, and Slauonia was first giuen him to gouerne after the East: he was noble, al∣though he came of a pesant: he shewed himselfe cruel towards the children of Galerius, his ally. He was an enemy vnto letters, as hauing no knowledge, no not to write his owne name. And he called the liberall Arts a publike poyson and pestilence. Eu∣seb. lib. 4. ca. 13. He deserued praise, in that he repressed abuses, the boldnesse & insolencies of the brauest of his Court, which he called the Moathes and Rattes of his Pallace. He raigned 14 yeares, liued 60. See Pomp. Laet. Constantine the great, sonne of the Emperour Constantius and Helena, S. Ambrose in his funerall Oration of Theodosius saith, that hee was a seruant in a stable, and was borne in Eng∣land. Hee was instructed in the Militarie Art vnder Galerius. He tamed the Sermates a fearce Nation & barbarous, brought their Duke captiue to Galerius, who cōceiued enuy at the glory of this yong Prince, whereof being aduertised, he retired from Rome towards his Father into England, who dyed soone after. By the fauour of Princes he was declared Emperour, the yeare 309. The Senate writ vnto him Letters to aduertise him of the euil gouernment Maxentius, for the great cruelties hee exercised at Rome, wherevpon he marched towards Rome, and pursued Maxentius, who retiring into the Towne, made couer Tyber with Boats, nye the bridge Miluius, which by subtil de∣ceit (as hee thought) he made ioyne together to deceiue Con∣stantine, and to haue drown'd him whē he followed him. But he himself as furious first comming out to flie, & not remembring his owne stratageme that hee practised for an other, entred on horsebacke with a fewe people vpon the bridge,The death of Maxentius. where he was drowned in Tyber, the 6. yeare of his Empire. For this happie deliuerance, honors were giuen to Constantius, so he acquited Italie and Affrike. For his Father had only left him the Gaulois and Spaine, and would so haue contented himselfe, had it not bene for the warre that Licinius raised, making himselfe Cesar, and was established in the East. The issue of MaximinianMaximian (as we haue said) with his great griefe had forsakē the Empire, being greeued so long to lead a priuate life, did his
best by the meanes of Maxentius his sonne chosen Emperour, to returne to the Empire, but because hee succeeded therein not well, he retired towards his sonne in lawe Constantine, vnto whom he had giuen his daughter Fausta, and sought by ambu∣shes to cast him out of the Empire. Which Fausta perceiuing well, reuealed to her husband, preferring him before her father. Wherefore the sonne in lawe besieged him at Marcellis,Maximian chose his owne death. tooke him aliue, and bad him choose whatsoeuer kind of death he would. He strangled himselfe with a cord or girdle. And so this wicked and bloudie man which had shead so much Christian bloud, vnluckily finished his life: of his age sixtie. Licinius at the first had some great familiaritie with Constan∣tine, and to please him made a shew to loue the Christians, in so much that he married Constance the sister of Constantine, and by a mutuall consent together, caused to publish lawes for the Christians, but afterward comming againe to his nature, and forgetting the honour that Constantine had done him, began to conspire against him, because Constantine so fauoured Christi∣ans, whose enemie he declared himselfe, alleadging this cause, that in their assemblies they prayed for Constantine, and not for him. Licinius then beganne the persecution by his owne house; after he stretched it farre by Lawes and Edicts, into the Prouinces of the East, forbidding, especially Bishoppes to make assemblies and Sinodes. Secondly, that men and women to auoyd scandalles and offence, not to assemble at prayers. Thirdly, that such as were appointed prisoners, as transgressors of Edicts, should not be visited nor succoured, in paine to in∣curre the like condemnation, &c. He then set himselfe against the Bishops, not openly for feare of Constantine, but made them die secretly by his Committees. Euseb. Lib. 10. Chap. 8. In the Towne of Sebasta, Losias killed in a poole fortie souldiers, whose Martirdome, Basile the great described, and other Martirs which were cruelly murdered. Licinius increased more and more his crueltie: but the Lord sent Constantine to represse him, who experimented a∣gainst him the Forces of the Gaules and Italie, hauing ouer∣throwne him in Hungarie, and pursued him into Macedonia,
where he repaired his forces. He was chased into Asia, and in the end yeelded himselfe, seeing he was vanquished by sea and by land, and was sent into Thessalonica to liue priuately, yet could he not so escape the true vengeance of his boldnesse, crueltie, and infidelitie: For hee was slaine by Constantines souldiers, about the yeare of our Lord three hundred twentie and foure, after some writers. Melchiades the thirtith Bishop, succeeded in the Church of Rome, and was of Affrike, after Damasus: A man of great pie∣tie, and a true seruant in the holy Ministerie of the Gospell, and in the affaires of the truth of God, vntill hee was put to death vnder Maximin Galerius, the yeare of the Lord, 314. Read herevpon the Ecclesiasticall History of Eusebius, where he reciteth diuers cruell kindes of death wherewith the Saints of that time were persecuted. Carsulan, Platina, Stella, and other of the Popes flatterers, attribute wrongfully to these holy Martyrs of the Lord Iesu, whole Chariots full of lying decrees; to the ende the diuellish ordinances of their ceremonies or rather blasphemies might be approued by their authoritie. They attribute vnto him the forbidding of Fastes on the Sundayes or Thursdayes, because on them the Painims cele∣brated the solemnities of their God Saturne. Item a decretall touching Baptisme and the Confirmation. De consecratione distinct. 5. cap. Spirit. sanct. & cap. De his &c. Note this for the Bishops of the Romaine Church, vntill Sil∣uester the first. But what man would thinke that poore and simple Mini∣sters of the word and Pastors of the Church, such as then were the Bishops of Rome, inhabiting in ditches and caues, atten∣ding nothing vnder those Tyrants from day to day, but only death, could haue thought vpon this pride & arrogancy, which after those Popes vsed in buildings and other ordinances, see∣ing they had neither Temples nor houses whether they might retire? Peace was not yet giuen to the Church. They yet
enioyed not that vnprofitable Idlenesse, nor the soueraigne delights of this world: nor that whoore which by litle and li∣tle rose vp, had not yet her bedde ready, yet such haue bene the inuentions of false Prophets, to set out the whoores body: and so is the Popes Sinagogue founded vpon so euident lies, as nothing more. Assuredly it were great folly to giue faith to such ridicu∣lous dreames of Sathan, forged for the gaine and profits of Priests. Better therefore it is in this case to prooue the spirits; namely, whether they be of God or not, as it is said, 1. Iohn. Chapter 4. seeing many false Prophets are come into this world. Vntill this time Pastors were as Starres in the Firmament of the Church, shining as well in doctrine as in good example: they were also garded by the right hand of him that walked in the middest of the seuen Candlestickes.Apocal. 1. li 16 Hitherto men estee∣med them as Angels, preaching the word of the Almightie God, without fiction, yea that more is,Apo. 1.2. hitherto they were fi∣gured by the white horse: because in the ministerie they car∣ried the victorious Iesus Christ, as well in their hearts as in their bodies, and as well in mouth as worke. Ceremonies in the celebration of the Supper. The memorie of the Lords Supper was not performed but in publike assemblies, and therefore the Synode of Gangre vn∣der the Emperour Constans, condemned Eustace Bishop of Se∣luste in Armenia, because contrary to the order of the vse of the Church, he permitted some which disdained to come into the Church to Communicate in particular houses. Socrat. Lib. 2. Cap. 43. Neither was it lawful to celebrate the Supper in a pro∣phane place, as appeareth by Athanasius in the Epistle to them of Antioche. Hierome against Iouinian reprehendeth the maner of doing in other Christians at Rome, which Communicated in houses. Wherfore said he entred they not into Churches? &c. Deacons distributed the Supper of the Lorde, Priestes beeing present, with one diuiding the Eucharist, and this
was after the Canon of the Councell of Nice. Epist. ad Rusticū. Momacū.The Priests distributed the Cup of the bloud of the Lord; Doctors of this time often call it Cup or Mistike vessell. S. Hierome writing of vessells to distribute the Lords Supper in, saith of a Bishop of Tholouze called Exuperius; There was no∣thing so rich as that which carried the body of our Lord in an Osier basket, and the bloud in a Glasse. By the first booke of Euseb. of the Euang. 92. Demonst. Chap. 10. One may easily knowe that Christians daily cele∣brated the memorie of the body and bloud of Iesus Christ. And S. Ambrose in his fift booke of Sacraments, Chapter. 4. reprehendeth the Easterne Churches, because they communi∣cated but once a yeare. Ʋigills.In the Churches of Affrike, they which should commu∣nicate, passed the night in watchings & prayers. As Athanasius reciteth in the Apologie of his flight: adding, that all mutual∣ly ought before to be reconciled together. And in the We∣sterne Churches, al communicated except the Catechumenistes, and such as did penance: as appeareth by Hierome vpon the 7. Chapter of the 2. to the Corinthians. About this time water was giuen with wine, as appeareth by S. Ambrose first Chapter of his fist booke of Sacraments. They put saith he into the Cup wine & then water, &c. which being mingled, was consecrated with the wine. The maner of the Churches was, to giue the Eucharist in the hand of him that tooke it, as appeareth by the words of S. Ambrose to the Emperour Theodosius. Reachest thou out thy hands which yet are bloudie, and which yet distill the bloud by thee shead, to take the holy body of the Lord? Darest thou apply to thy mouth the precious bloud of the Lord? &c. The Priest as he distributed the bread, said. Take the bo∣dy of the Lord: and in distributing the wine; Take the bloud of Christ: and at both, the Communicant answered, Amen. Ambrose in the 4. booke of Sacraments, Chap. 5. The Eucha∣rist giuen to sicke persons.To such as were nigh their deaths they brought the Eu∣charist. Horatius a Priest of the Church of Ʋerseil, carried it to Ambrose nigh his death. Paulinus in the life of S. Ambrose re∣citeth it.
May abuses began in this time to arise. Such as made any great voyage either by sea or land carried the Eucharist,Abuses of the Supper. as ap∣peareth in the Oration of Saint Ambrose vpon the death of Satyrius. Touching the ceremonies vsed in administring the Sacra∣ment, Denis hath left by writing that which followeth.Ceremonies in administra∣ting the Sup∣per. The Bishop hauing ended the prayers before the Aultar, began to perfume and compasse all the place, after returning to the Aul∣tar, he began to sing Psalmes, and all followed. This done, the Ministers in order read something of the holy scripture. That read, they caused the Catechumenistes with the Enenguinians to goe out, and such as were admitted to penance. One part of the Ministers kept themselues before the portall of the Tem∣ple shut, the others did such things as belonged to their charge; Such as are elected to minister with the Priests, presented the bread before the Aultar, and the Cup of blessing. Whilest all the Churchmen sung praises and Himnes to the Lord, the Bishop which said the praiers pronounced peace to all. And after euery one had saluted one an other, the Priests and the Bishop washed their hands with water. After the Bishoppe in the middest of the Aultar, enuironed with Priests and Ministers, began to praise and magnifie the workes of the world, and propose to the people the signes of the Sup∣per, and to declare them vnto them, and inuite them to the participation thereof, which finally ended in thankes-gi∣uing, &c. The word Messe was not found amongst the writers of this time.The word Messe vnused. And as for the two preparatiue prayers of the Priest meaning to say Masse, which are shufled into the workes of Ambros; Erasmus himselfelfe iudgeth them not to be S. Am∣broses. They containe also errors contrary to the doctrine of him: As the adoration of the Sacrament, the Inuocation of Saints, and chiefly of the Virgin Marie. The Emperour Constantine hauing ouercome all these ty∣rants, namely, Maxentius, Maximian, and Licinius, the Lord gaue rest to his Church, which was almost ruinated and tro∣den vnder feete; and gaue a gentle spirit to Constantine to re∣paire
by a Monarchy, the great dissipation and discord which the misgouernment of many had brought. Constantine was long ere hee could vnwrap himselfe out of his auncient and Ethnicke superstitions, his wife Fau∣sta maintaining him therein; but after hee sawe him∣selfe peaceable in his Empire, there was courage giuen vnto him to applye his power vnto the matters of the Church. True it is, as for Baptisme, that hee deferred it a long time, because hee alwaies determined to goe against the Per∣sians, and vpon deuotion without knowledge to be baptized in Iordain. Eusebius reciteth it in his life: yet after all, hee ho∣noured it, and authorized it by Edicts and Lawes which hee caused to be published. Hee had a burning heart to the Faith, and was maruel∣lous carefull to helpe the necessities of the Church: hee was of nature soft and benigne, and delighted in all good workes: and not onely reuoked the tyrannicke and cruel lawes that were before made against Christians, but gaue to Churches great priuiledges. It was not inough for him to account Ministers equall to himselfe, but hee honoured and preferred them before him, as representing the diuine Maiestie. And by such meanes hee was both loued, ho∣noured and cherished, not as an Emperour, but as a Father. Euseb. Siluester a Romane, was constituted Bishop of Rome after Melchiades, and gouerned the Church a long time. Being ordeined Bishop, he exercised not onely the office of a Pastor in teaching, but also in reprehending the vices of the Cleargie. There are attributed vnto him certain miracles, by which he drew many to the Christian faith. When Maxentius raigned at Rome, to shunne his crueltie, Siluester retired out of Rome, and remained a certain time at the Mount Soracte: and returned vnder Constantine, after the death of the said Tyrant. Constantine established many lawes. First that Christ
should be worshipped of all, as the true God. Item that whosoeuer should doo iniurie to any Christian, the halfe of his goods should be confiscated. Hee permitted all such as were vnder his Empire, not onely to be Christians, but also to found and build Temples. The word Martir, was vsed in the time of Constantine,Martir. then when in remembrance of the Martirs men builded Tem∣ples, and about the thirtieth yeare of Constantine, a Tem∣ple called Martirium Magnum, was builded in Ierusalem,Temple. in the place called Cranium. See Sozom, Ich. 2. Cap. 26. Constantine caused to bee made a Tabernacle in forme of a Temple, which he commaunded to be carried when he went to the warres, wherein he held the assemblies of the Chri∣stians. Sozom. Lib. 1. Chap. 8. Touching the Donation attributed vnto him:Donation of Constantine. that is to say, that he gaue Rome, Italie, and other Westerne Prouin∣ces to Siluester, as the Romane Bishops pretend, it is a mat∣ter inuented, or at least doubtfull: and euen the Popes owne decrees are against it. The two last Chapters make no mention of other Pro∣uinces, but onely of the Towne of Rome,96. Dist. c. Cōstantinus. c. Funda∣menta. De. electio. Lib. 6 12. q. 1. c. Futuram. no nor in the aunci∣ent volumes of decrees, is there any mention, nor any thing found in any Author of that time, as Antonine saith in his Chronicles. See Naucler. Of this matter see Laurencius Valla, and Iohn le Maire in his Treatise of the difference of Schismes and Councells of the Church. Constantine determined to build a Towne of his name, and elected Bizantium for it, which he compassed with ditches, and the Towne builded in the middest he called Constantinople of his name, there establishing the Emperial seat of his Empire. Bizanzium was an auncient Towne,Bizantium Constanti∣nople. which a litle before was destroyed by Gallien and Pertinax, but Constantine resto∣red it, and adorned it with rich ornaments, brought from all the parts of the world: in so much the Hierome writeth that
Constantine stripped naked as it were all the Townes of the world to embellish this new Rome. For he transported from the Castle which was at Ilion, the chiefe Towne of Troy the Palladium, and from Troas the Image of Apollo, which was of Brasse, and of a maruellous greatnesse. From Rome a piller of Porphire called Coclis, which he enuironed with diuers met∣talls, and placed it in the market place paued with stones. Before wee come to the successors of Siluester, wee will briefly touch the estate of the Church at that time. And first; Of the Ecclesiasticall degrees. Bishops Priests.There were of olde three Ecclesiasticall degrees; namely, the Bishop, the Priest, and the Deacon, with the Ministers and company of the faithfull. Ambrose in his booke of the Sacer∣dotall dignitie. Hierome to Nepotian saith, that Bishops and Priests were all one, sauing that the Bishop was a name of dig∣nitie, and Priest was a name of age: but in respect of schismes and necessities happening in the Church, there was made a distinction. Ambrose in the aforesaid booke witnesseth, that the ordination is alike; for both are Priests: but the Bishop is the chiefe Priest. Other names, as Subdeacons, Acolites, and Exorcists, came after. Cleargie.The name of Cleargie was receiued in this time, to signi∣fie all Ecclesiasticall offices and dignities. Euseb. Lib. 10. Chap. 2. Hierome to Nepotian yeeldeth this reason of the name. Cleros saith he in Greeke, signifieth Lot in Latine; therefore are Clarkes named,Clarkes. because they are of the lot and of the inheri∣tance of the Lord; or for that the Lord is their Lot, that is to say, their part and heritage. Afterward men called Clarkes such as euery Church nourished at the owne charge, to serue after for the ministerie of the Church. Metropoli∣tanes.Metropolitanes were so called by reason of the principall and chiefe Townes whereof they were Bishops, and so Zozo∣men. Lib. 3. Cap. 16. He calleth Basile Metropolitane of Cappa∣docea. And the same in Lib. 2. Chap. 8. saith the like of an Arch∣bishops name.
Patriarke was named the Bishop of all the Prouince, Socra∣tes Lib. 5. Chap. 8.Patriarke. The office of a Bishop was to teach the people,The office of a Bishop. as also the Priests. But in the Church of Alexandria, after the poyson of Arrius, the Bishop alone had that charge. Socrates lib. 5. chap. 22. The ordination of Ministers appertained to the Bishop,Ministers. which is all the right of preheminence that they had aboue Priests, as S. Ierome saith to Euagrius. Vicars of Bishops are found in the Canons of the Coun∣cell of Ancyra, Neocesaria and Antioch, Chorepiscopi,Vicars or Bishops par∣ticulers. and Ba∣sile vseth that name in the Epistle fiftie and foure. Amongst the generall Epistles, there is one found vnder the name of Damasus to Prosper, wherein Damasus beeing asked, an∣swereth, that Vicars called Chorepiscopi, were no more but Priests, and that they could not consecrate Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, nor Virgines, nor Aultars; neither dedicate Churches, or like things contained in the Epistle, whereof let each man iudge, considering that time wherein Damasus was. To Priests or Lords it appertained also to take vp de∣bates and controuersies. It appeareth by Epiphanius, Lib. 2. Tom. 2. Heresie 69. that they were also sent Embassadors to Councells to accuse Heretickes, The custodie of Ecclesiasti∣call goods belonged vnto them. Sozomen, Lib. 5. Chap. 8. saith, that Theodoretus a Priest of Antioche, was Gardian of the precious vessells. Deacons administred onely, and executed Ecclesiasticall charges. They were carried vnto publike disputations to play the Notaries, and gather together the Actes. As appeareth in the example of Athanasius, who came with his Bishop Alexan∣der then an olde man, to the Councell of Nice, and did greatly helpe and aide Alexander to discouer and confute the fallacies of heretickes. Rufin. lib. 1. chap. 14. The constitutions of Siluester (as is conteined in the 1. Tome of Councells, makes those degrees.Deacons. New degrees A commaunde∣ment of Subdeacons to obey Deacons and Acolites, Subdea∣cons, Exorcistes to obey Acolites: Lectors, Exorcistes:
Porters, Lectors: and to Porters, the Abbot: and to the Ab∣bot, the Monkes. Exorcists after Epiphanius, were such as in∣terpreted one tongue by an other, either at Lectors, or at Collo∣quies. Diaconesses.In the Code of Theodosius there are certaine constitutions which make also mention of Diaconesses, which was a ministry of women, for the visitation and inspection of bodies. Each Towne had his Bishop. Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 6. saith, that in the 10. Canon of the Councell of Nice, it was forbidden that in any Cities should be two Bishops: to the end that the order of Ecclesiasticall gouernment (as proceeding from one head) might be distributed into diuers actions to Priests and Deacōs, wherof the number was indifferent, although ordinarily it was of seuen, according to the 14. Canon of the Councell of Neo∣cesaria. The Eccclesiasticall administration. Diuers sorts of Auditors.Basile diuideth the Auditors of Gods word into two com∣panies: the one, of such as were rude: and the other, of such as had made some progresse therin. Ambrose distinguisheth them into Lay-men & Clarkes, in his booke of the Sacerdotall digni∣tie. chap. 2. Hierome vpō the expositiō of the 7 chap of the 2. to the Cor. diuideth them into 3. that is, Catechumenes, faithfull, and penitent. Prayers.Praiers were ordinarily made for all things necessary; for the prosperitie of the Empire, for the health of the Church, for publique tranquilitie, for enemies, and for such as were not yet conuerted. See Socrates, lib. 2. cap. 37. Confession taken from the common people.Nectarius first tooke away in the Church of Constantinople the ceremony ordained for penance and confession; wherein a Priest particularly applied absolution, & ordained that each one after the witnes of his conscience, should approach the cōmu∣nion. The occasion of this defence came of a woman of a noble house, who hauing confessed to a Priest that shee had had the company of a Deacon in the Church: the Priest reuealed this scandal to the said Bishop, and the ceremony of confession was abolished. Socrates lib. 5. chap. 9. Ceremonies inuented.In the time of Constantine, many ceremonies vnnecessary
and euill agreeing with the word of God, were brought in; as candles lighted in the day time; which this Costantine instituted in Temples, newly by him builded, and consecrated worthy or∣naments and other things altogether superfluous and supersti∣tious, which other Churches then tooke vp. Bishops also at this time denounced to their people Feast-dayes. As Basile rehearseth of himselfe,Feastes. that he denounced in a Sermon the feast-day of a Martyr Iulitta. One new thing not vsed in times past,The Immuni∣tie of Clarkes beganne. was now brought in. The Emperour Constantine gaue power to Clarkes, to ap∣peale from ciuill Magistrates to Bishops: which thing was the first that gaue occasion to Antichrist to chaunge & transforme the kingdome of Iesus Christ into a polliticke kingdome, & by litle & litle to lift himselfe vp aboue Magistrates, & of Mini∣sters and Doctors, to become Dictators and Kings, leauing the charge of soules. A new thing also of this time,Building of Temples. the care to build Temples was committed to Bishops. As Constantine cōmitted to Macari∣us Bishop of Ierusalem the building of a Temple, which he wil∣led should be builded in the place where the Sepulchre was, Sozomene in his 4. booke and 13. chap, rehearseth, that Basile builded the Tēple of the Towne of Ancyra in Gallatia. A new charge also was giuen to Bishops of this time, to con∣secrate Temples, to seeke out & transport frō place to place, re∣liques of Saints. As we may see in the 85. Epistle of S. Ambrose. Such graunts peruerted the true office of a Bishop, which is to teach and feed the flocke with the pure word of God. Of the goods of the Church. The Church of this time began to be enriched by gifts, lar∣gitions & munificēces of Princes. Maximin feeling himself ta∣ken with a greeuous disease made an Edict for the Christians,Edicts for the Christians. that the houses, lands & possessions takē away in times of perse∣cutiōs should be restored to the true possessors, Euseb. li. 9. ch 10. The Emperor Cōstantin, not only caused that which had bin takē frō the Christiās to be again restored, but also caused to be sold for the cōmoditie of the poore of the Church, all the most precious
Images of the Heathens. Sozomene, lib. 2. chap. 5.Reuenewes assigned to the Church. Moreouer he withdrew from the Reuenewes of euery Towne a certain Im∣post, and ordained it for the profit of the Church and cleargie thereof, commaunding by Edict that that gift should passe to them successiuely for euer. The same Sozomene li. 1. chap. 3. & li. 5. chap. 5. He commaunded further, to bring to the treasurie of the Church their goods who had bene martyred, which left no children nor kinsfolkes their heires. As Eusebius reciteth in the life of Constantine, li. 2. Hee willed also that men should distri∣bute Corne in common to the poore. Basile in his Epistle 104. witnesseth that many dedicated whole houses to the profit of Churches: yea some of their owne motion all their substance vnto Churches, which not being permitted daring the raigne of other Emperours, was permitted and lawfull by the consti∣tution of Constantine, contained in the lawe Ei eod. De sacro. sanct. Eccles. The vse of the goods of the Church.The vse of the goods of the Church, was applied to su∣staine the poore pilgrimes. Yet Ambrose in his first booke of Offices, chap. 56. excepteth such as had any goods and reuenues of their owne to maintaine them. And Hierome in the Epistle to Damasus, admonisheth that amongst Clarks there should be none but such as were nourished at the charges of the Church, and that had no patrimony, or that had no other meanes to su∣staine themselues. Immunities.Besides, the wages and oblations which Constantin gaue, he also granted in all places Immunities to Priests, which also the heires of Constantine ratified. See the Code, de epischo & cleris. The poore.After Ministers, the chiefe care was of the poore, whose Proctors the Deacons were. Cyrillus Bishop of Ierusalem, is praised, because in a great dearth for the succour and helpe of the poore, he caused the vessells, vailes, and other precious things of the Temple to be solde, Sozomene lib. 4. cap. 25. And Hierome ad Rusticum accuseth Bishops which vsurpe and make proper that which is common. If the liberalitie of Emperours failed, the Churches defrayed the charges of Bishops and all o∣thers that went to Sinodes. Theodoret. lib. 2, cap. 16.
Libraries. The bookes of the holy scripture, which for the most part were lost during the persecutions at this time by the benifi∣cence of the Emperour Constantine, were written in great dili∣dence, and with magnificence worthy of such an Emperour. By the witnes of Athanasius it is plain inough, that in the Chri∣ans Temples there were Libraries,Libraries. and therein he accuseth the impietie of the Arrians, which tooke out these bookes & burnt them. Hierome against Rufin makes mention of the Librarie at Cesaria. It appeares by the Acts,Notaries at Rome. of a Romane Sinode held vnder Siluister, that the Romane Church mainteined certaine Notaries to write the acts of the Martirs. Schooles. There were also Schooles of two sorts. Ethnicks or Phi∣losophicall, and Ecclesiasticall. Nazianzenus in the death of his brother Cesarius, makes mention of the Schooles of Palestine, wherein he learned Rhethoricke. Lactantius held that of Ni∣comedia. Ephiphanius a Sophister, kept that of Laodicea. That of Cesaria in Cappadocia was renowned, bicause Constantius cau∣sed Gallus and Iulian his children to be taught there. But aboue al, that of Alexandria was most famous, for blind Didimus, who ruled there. Rufin. Lib. 2. Cap. 7. And Basilius calleth it a good∣ly shape of all doctrine. In Europe that of Athens because of letters, was of most acount: wherin Iulian had for condisci∣ples, Basile and Gregorie Nazianzenus, as the said Gregorie wit∣nesseth in his Inuectiue against Iulian. Ʋictorinus Affrican, taught at Rome Rhethorike.Reward of profess. See Hierome in his Treatife of Il∣lustrious men. The Salarie or reward was to professors payde after the lawe of Constantine, conteined in the title de profess. & med. in the Code. At this time there was a man called Arrius,Arrius a professor▪ a professor in the schoole of Alexandria in Egipt, whose Heresie did mise∣rably torment and distract the vnion of the Church. He was a man swelled with ambition and presumption. One day hauing heard in the congregation of the faithfull, Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, subtilly and learnedly disputing of the diuine essence, after he had shewed that the vnitie thereof was in a
priuitie, Arrius Logician, rather then a Theologian, began to dispute and vomit out the pison he had long time gathe∣red. Epip. Lib. 2. Tome 2. Necesie. 69. rehearseth, that Arrius was now found in an errour: that Melitius a Bishop in Thebaide accused before Alexander his Bishop, who after that, looked to him more narrowly, and tooke heed to his subtilties. Such a care had Bishops at this time one of an other, that no euill should goe forward. Arrius.Arrius maintained the Sonne of God to be a creature, and the holy Ghost created of him. But with what arguments and babble of words he vsed to confirme his error, it should be su∣perfluous to rehearse. There are long Epistles of Arrius to A∣lexander, and of Alexander to all Churches, by which one may more at large know the spring of all this infection. Alexander at the beginning sought to stop this euill by silence. But seeing that Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia tooke vpon him the cause of Arrius in hatred of the Church of Alexandria, Alexander not onely published the Apostasie of Arrius, but also excommuni∣cated him and his adherents as Heretickes and Schismatickes, which would maintaine that God was sometimes without be∣ing Father, and that the Sonne was a creature and made, who knew not perfectly and exactly the Father. It is straunge how so cursed an errour should in so litle time subuert so many Bishops, yea the most learned, not onely of the East Church, but of the West also. Epiph. saith, that Ar∣rius being chased away, went into Palestine. But Alexander hasted Letters euery where to the number of seuentie, to aduer∣tise the Bishops of Arrius his doings, who was receiued of his Protector Eusebius. Arrius in the meane time sent Letters to Alexandria, naming him Pope and his Bishop. The great Councell of Nice. Anno domini. 320. These debates and contentions brought great dolour and care vnto the good Emperour Constantine, and incontinent to
giue order therefore, seeing this euill from day to day got the vpper hand, sent Hosius Bishop of Corduba in Spaine to Alex∣ander, a man of great pietie and authoritie, with his Letters Pa∣tents to the Church, to finde meanes to extinguish this fire whose flames were blowne all ouer. Eusebius reciteth the Tenure of Constantines Letters full of all pietie, in the life of the said Emperour. Lib. 2. Hosius furnished with these Letters came into Egipt, and did all that he could to agree Alexander & Arrius, but in vaine. Whereof the Emperour being aduertised, was more grieued then before, at the request of the Bishops, and instance of A∣lexander, as witnesseth Rufin. lib. 1. cap. 1. ordained at his owne charge an vniuersal Sinode at Nice, a town of Bithinia, the yeare of Christ. 320. after some, and the yeare of his Empire 17. At which Sinode, from all the parts of the earth came Bishops, and the number was 250. after Socrates. li. 1. ca. 8. besides Priests, Dea∣cons, A colites, & other multitudes. Theodoret. li. 1. ca. 7. saith 318. Bishops; and this is about the number wherof the most part of the Elders agree, that haue written thereof. Some say, that the Emperour before he assembled this ge∣nerall Sinode, had caused Arrius to come vnto him, and in the presence of some Bishops hauing enquired of his heresie, Ar∣rius with an oath answered that he bred no heresies, then straight the Emperour in the presence of all said: If thou hast sworne with a good conscience, & that thy oath be made with a full faith, then departest thou an Innocent. But if falsly thou callest God to witnesse, let him whom thou hast offended take vengeance. So many spake for him which he before had gai∣ned. Notwithstanding the Emperour writ large Letters that men should take heede of Arrius that they builded not their Faithes vpon his heresies. These letters beganne with these words. Constantine the great Augustus, &c. The place for the Sinode was in the Emperours Pallace, wherein hee had placed seates couenable and conuenient for each state and degree. The Emperours seate was in the first ranke, and it was couered with Golde, as Eusebius saieth in his life. Liber. 3. Hee himselfe made the first exhortation
to enter into the matter, wherevnto by consent of all, Eusta∣chius Bishop of Antioche had charge to answere. The Empe∣rour the better to agree with them, proposed the great crueltie and tirannie of the persecutions passed: that now peace was open vnto them, and that it should be a straunge thing, the out∣ward enemies being vanquished, to stirre vp warres within. Theodoret. Lib. 1. Cap. 7. Amongst the Bishops which were there assembled against Arrius was Macarius Bishop of Hierusalem, Eustachius Bishop of Antioche,Hist. Eccle. Li. 10. Chap. 4. Hosius Bishop of Corduba in Spaine, Pathuntius of Egipt, and Maximus, (these two had their eyes put out for the Faith) and many other persons which had suffered persecuti∣on vnder the aforesaid Titants.Spiridian. There was also Spiridian, Bi∣shop of Tremythe in Cyprus, and Nicholas Bishop of Mirme in Licia, a very graue man. Also Athanasius then a Deacon of the Church of Alexandria, Theophilus Bishop of the Gothes, and Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, &c. Spiridian was he that in Lent presented flesh to a Pilgrim as he passed by, and did eate himselfe, and caused him also to eate, saying that to pure Chri∣stians all things are pure. Hist. tripart. lib. 1. Chap. 10. After that license was graunted to the two parties, Eusebi∣us Bishop of Nichomedia, the Patrone of Arrius, presented a Libell full of blasphemies, conteining briefly that which hath bene before said. That God who is for euer, was not alwaies the Father. And seeing all things were created of God, the sonne also must be a worke made, and many other blaspemies. This Libell was recited and read with great sorrowe of most part of them which were there, because of the blasphemies conteined therein, and was torne in peeces, to the great confu∣sion of the Author. There followed a very sharpe contention of both parts, which the Emperour harkened vnto with great patience. But finally Eusebius and his consorts fearing to be banished, made a countenance to renounce their errours, and to subscribe to the determination of the Fathers, except Secundus and Theon, as Athanasius reciteth in the decrees of the Sinode of Nice. But the Bishops after they knew their fraude, and how they disguised the truth with words, began to vse the
word Essence and Homousios, that is to say, of one same sub∣stance. Then the Eusebians abhorred these words, Homousios and Essentiall, as straunge & vnvsed in the holy scripture. The Fathers declared, that necessarily they were constrained to vse these words, to signifie that the Sonne was engendered of the substance of the Father, according to which, bee was consub∣stantiall to the Father, that is to say, of one same substance and essence. A Philosopher who by no Arguments could be surmoun∣ted, was finally conuerted by a simple Bishop, who said vnto him: Harken Philosopher, there is one God which made all things in the power of his word, and by the sanctification of his holy spirite confirmed them. This word which we call the Sonne of God, hath redeemed mankinde, which was in the bottomelesse pit of hell, by his death and resurrection. Tor∣ment nor trouble thy selfe too much with thine owne ar∣guments and demonstrations in this matter which must be ap∣prehended by faith, and that Iesus Christ himselfe and his A∣postles hath taught vs. Answere mee, doost thou beleeue it is so? The Philosopher astonished said vnto him, I beleeue, and confesse to be vanquished, & after exhorted others of his pro∣fession, with him to beleeue the doctrine. At the said Councell, Constantine hauing receiued diffa∣matorie Libels, accusations, debates, and particular quarells of Bishops one against an other, caused them all to be cast into the fire, that none might vnderstand their debates or errours. God hath ordeined you Bishops (saith he) and hath giuen you power to iudge of your selues, by meanes whereof we yeelde our selues to your iudgement. Men may not iudge you but God alone, vnto whom we referre the deciding and determi∣nation of your controuersies. This humilitie of Constantine, afterward brought great da∣mage to his Successors. The said Councell would haue forbidden Priests and Dea∣cons to dwell with their wiues:Pathuntius. but Pathuntius whome Constan∣tine
had in such reuerence, that hee often caused him to come into his Pallace, and imbraced, yea kissed the place frō whence his eye was plucked out, rising vp, confessed that marriage was honourable amongst all men and the bed vndefiled: and said that the company of the husband with the wife was chastitie, and perswaded the Councell not to set out such Lawes which might giue occasion of fornicatiō both to them & their wiues. The Councell approued his opinion, and so dealt nothing vpō that matter, but left to euery one liberty to marry or not: ac∣cording as to euery one should seeme expedient: wherefore as before, so now also was it lawful for Priests to retain their wiues and to marry. But after Siritius & Gregorie the seuenth, forbad such marriage, and commaunded continency: which notwith∣standing the Easterne Priests neuer receiued. It is not then true which some write, that Calixus who was be∣fore this Councell, commanded continencie: For then there would haue bene some mention of him in the said Councell and of his de∣cree. Eusebius. Extract out of the Acts of the Coun∣cell of Nice. Hist. Eccle. Lib. 10. cha. b.We beleeue in God the Father Almightie, Creator of all things, as well visible as inuisible, and in our Lord Iesus Christ, the onely sonne of God, borne & engendered of him, that is to say, of his proper substance, and therefore God of God, borne and not made, of the same substance of the Father: by which sonne all things were made, as well in heauen as in earth: who also for the loue of vs men and for our saluatiō discended from heauen & tooke our humaine flesh & was made man. He suf∣fered death & passion, and after rose again the third day, then he ascended into heauen, and finally must come to iudge the quicke and the dead. We also beleeue in the holy Ghost. All such as say that there was a time that the sonne was not, and that before be was borne in the earth he was not, and that he was created of nothing, or of other substance then of the fa∣ther, or that he is the sonne of God, but cōuertible & mutable, the holy Catholicke and Apostolicke Church, excommuni∣cateth and anematizeth them.
It was also amongst other things ordeined in this Coun∣cell, that no Bishop ought to receiue any of them which an other Bishop hath excommunicated or thrust frō his Church, were he Clarke or Laie man. But if we vniustly, for hatred or anger were excommunicated or chased away, It was ordained that in each Prouince the Prelates there should assemble euery yeare twise, to holde their prouinciall Councell,Prouinciall Councels each yeare. to knowe and iudge of such matters: to the end that if any man had done a∣ny thing vniustly it might be retracted by others, and that if he had done well, it might be approued. That in Alexandria and Rome, the auncient custome should be kept; namely that the Bishoppe of Alexandria should haue care of the Churches of Egipt, and that of Rome, of such Chur∣ches as are about Rome. That if two or three Bishops striue or do not agree to con∣secrate one elected for some dissention: In this case they must hold themselues to the determinatiō of others of the prouince, and especially of the Metropolitane. That the prerogatiue which before times hath bene giuen to the Bishop of Ierusalem, shalbe kept for him, without preiu∣dice notwithstanding of the Metropolitans dignitie. That the Cathares heretikes called Nouatians, if they would repent themselues & come again to the Church & confesse the faith according to the beliefe of the church, should be receiued into the order thereof. And if their Bishop come with ours let thē sit with our Priests: And let the name of a Bishop remaine only to thē which haue alwaies held the catholike faith & to no others. That in one Citie there be but one Bishop. That if any of them which indiscreetly haue bene ordained Bishops, being accused of crime, do confesse it, or be by others conuicted, let them be deposed; and likewise such as haue erred in the faith, and by errour haue bin promoted, if after they be knowne. That such as in time of persecution haue receiued the faith, and with a good hart repent themselues, do 5. yeares make their penance with the Catechumenes, (that is to say, such as learn the faith) to cōmunicate with thē in praiers only: after which terme they may be receiued to ye Sacraments of ye Church.
That such as for the Faith haue renounced the Campe, and after returne thither againe, doo there penance 13. yeare, and after to be receiued to the Sacraments if a true repentance might be seene in them. And notwithstanding that it should be in the faculty & power of the Bishop to abridge the terme, if he see their penance to be fruitfull and hartie. That if that foresaid penitents come to peril of death be∣fore their penance be ended, that then the Sacraments should be administred vnto them: yet if they escaped, they should be bound to ende their penance. Catechu∣menes.That the Catechumenes which had likewise erred, should be three yeares seperated from others, and do their penance a∣part, and after be receiued with them. That no Bishop nor Clarke presume to clime vp from a little Church to a greater. That the Clarke which shall leaue his Church without lawfull cause, going vagarant and running heere and there, be not receiued to other Churches to the Communion. That no Bishop ordaine any who is not of his owne Dio∣ces without leaue of his Diocesan. Vnlawfull gaine.That none take any vsury, nor gaine or aduantage, vpon Wine or Corne, as customably men do, giuing new for old, or taking the sixt part of the gaine, or the tenth halfe, and if hee doo it, let him be driuen away as one that taketh vnlawfull gaine. That Deacons be not preferred before Priests, nor sit in their ranke, nor in their presence do distribute the Sacraments but only minister vnto them, and assist whē they do distribute: but when there are no Priests there, in that case they may de∣part them. That the Diaconesses because they are not consecrated, be accounted amongst Laie-people. There were many Canons made and discerned in that Councell and formes of confessions of Faith touching the di∣uine essence really distinguished, truly and eternally into three persons, the Father, the sonne, and the holy Ghost, which are one onely God, alone eternall, infinite, and all perfect in him∣selfe.
Which persons are coessentiall and coeternall, without confusion of properties and relation, and without any inequa∣litie, &c. But heere it should be too long to recite the said con∣fessions, which many good Bishops presented in this Councel. And for the most part they are found in the bookes they haue left vnto their posteritie. The Fathers then vnited in the true doctrine touching the person of the sonne of God, concluded this Article as is aboue said. The Emperour Constantine also gaue out a decree and ordinance thereof: And euen as Porphirius an enemie to Christian religion, in times past recei∣ued the salarie and reward of confusion for his impietie. So Arrius and his complices, true Porphirians, were to all an horrour, and abhomination. He added further, and denoun∣ced the paine of death to all such as hid the writings of Arrius, without discrying them and burning them in the fire. As for the other occasion and cause for which this Sinode was assembled: namely touching the celebration of Easter,Ordinances against Arrius. the Emperour being grieued that the inequalitie of the obserua∣tion thereof troubled so many Churches, proposed to the Fa∣thers, that the decision thereof was made, that all men should celebrate it on one same day. It seemed vnto him vnfit that so sacred a feast as that should be celebrated after the immitation of the Iewish nation, the enemies of Iesus Christ. So hauing made these remōstrāces vnto the Councell, he asked of Acesius Bishop, what he thought thereof: but Acesius durst not say cō∣trary to him. This question then was decided after they had ordained of things Ecclesiasticall, and it was agreed therevpon that the celebration of Easter should be obserued on one same day throughout all the world. The difference also which was betwixt Miletius Bishop of Licia, a Towne in Thebaide, and Peter Bishop of Alexandria, was agreed. Epipha. saith: Lib. 2. Tom. 2. Heres. 68. that the aforesaide Peter helde that they which in time of persecution were fallen into renouncement, returning to the Church and confessing their fault, if they demaunded pardon, that they ought not to be suspended from the communion. Miletius maintained that we may not receiue them vntil the persecutiō
cease, least others by too great facilitie of pardoning offenders, should be offended, or elfe thereby might be prouoked or in∣duced to fall into like infirmitie. Socrates saith, that for many other causes Meletius had bin deposed by Peter of Alexandria, and that for this ignominy, he alwaies after bare euill will vnto Peter and his successors, Achilles and Alexander: which Theo∣dorus also reciteth. Lib. 1. Chap. 8. This is briefly that which may be said in this history of the Councell of Nice, which although it was as a thunder-bolt to confound that wicked Arrian heresie, yet was it not so destroy∣ed, but after it lifted vp the head againe. And that more is, it was neuer more pernitious to all the Church, thē after the death of Constantine, when especially it had gotten for the defence some of the Emperours which lifted vp her head; notwithstan∣ding that which Athanasius in his Epistle to Epictetus, Bishop of Corinth saith is true: The faith which the Fathers haue expoun∣ded by the holy scripture in that Sinode, is sufficient to con∣found all impietie, &c. Eusebius in his chap. 27. lib. 3. reciteth that the machinati∣ons & ambushes laid by the sectaries of Arrius and Eusebius a∣gainst Athanasius, gaue occasion to the Emperor to conuocate in his time many Councells and assemblies of Sinodes. There was a Priest who got fauour of Constantia, widow of the Tyrant Licinius and the sister of Constantine: whom this Priest made beleeue that great wrong was done vnto Arrius at the Councell of Nice, and that his faith was not repugnant from that of the said Councell. A litle after, the said Constantia, taken with a mortall disease, sent for her brother Constantine, and gaue witnesse of the innocencie of Arrius, whereby this Priest hauing gotten accesse to the Emperour by the meanes of Constantia, hee himselfe then perswaded touching Arrius, namely, that hee thought no otherwise then the Councell did. Constantine then sent Letters to call againe Arrius, who came to Constantinople with Euzoius a Deacon,Arrius giueth in his confession. who also had bene deposed by Alexander. They by the Emperours com∣maundement gaue in a disguised and couert confession, the be∣ginning
whereof was. We beleeue in God the Father almightie, and in our Lord Iesus Christe his sonne, begotten of the Father before all worlds. God and Word, by which all things were created, as wel in heauen as in earth, who came downe and tooke humane flesh, and suffered death, was raised againe and ascended into heauen, & should come againe to iudge the quick & the dead, &c. The rest is in Sozomen. lib. 2. chap. 27. After Constantine had seene this confession, he asked them if with a good hart they thought as they spake? Arrius affirmed yea: Constantine mistrusting his owne iudgement, sent Arrius with his adherents to an assembly of Bishops which then was at Ierusalem, commanding them diligently to examine the cō∣fession of Arrius: that is, if he had reuoked his error, & if Alex∣ander did him wrong or no.Sinode of Ierusalem. The Sinode of Ierusalem aduertised of the Emperors will, sent Letters to the Bishops of Egypt, The∣baid, and Libia, exhorting them, that according to the witnesse of the Emperour, Arrius might be receiued into the Commu∣nion. The Arrians strengthened with these witnesses, came againe into Alexandria, and thrusting themselues into com∣pany, Athanasius who then hadde the charge of Alexandria, would not admit them. Arrius returned to Constantinople to make his complaints against Athanasius: there likewise hee sought to bring himselfe by force into that Church: but Alexander who had the gouernment thereof opposed him∣self against him, saying: that the author of such an heresie,A tumult of the Arrians. and a perturber of so many Churches ought not to bee recei∣ued. This came to a great contention, the Eusebians threat∣ning they would cause Alexander to bee banished. Certaine dayes following, the Arrians concluded to introduce Arrius by force into the Church. But Alexan∣der placing his force in the Armour of pietie, entred ouer night into the Temple, accompanied with two of his house∣hold, and with teares passed all the night in Orisons and prayers to the Lord, that hee would not suffer that rauishing wolfe lately couered with a Lambes skinne, to thrust into his flocke.
Some say that he added these words in his prayer: O Lord if it be thy will, and that by thy iust iudgement (which is inuesti∣gable) this wolfe be admitted into thy Church, deliuer mee thy poore seruant from this present life. The next morning of this determination, Arrius enuironed with a great multitude of Eusebians, was ledde to be brought into the Temple as in a triumph: but when they were come to the place called the Market place of Constantinople, Arrius was suddenly taken with a feare and an astonishment within him, which caused a paine in his belly, so that leauing the company, he was constrai∣ned to goe into a secret place to purge his belly: the company which should accompany him to the Temple, attended him in the meane while: but seeing him tarry long, some went to the easing place and found Arrius dead vpon the siege, his entrails being come out at his fundament. This was the end of Arrius, which greatly feared his companions; who to couer so foule and infamous a death, said he was suddenly suffocated and cho∣ked with a disease of the stomacke. Others, that he was poiso∣ned. Some said, that too great ioy had stifled him; yet none could say, but this was a iust iudgment of God vpon him. A∣thanasius, Lib. I. against the Arrians, and the Epist. to Serapion. Sedulius a Christian Poet reciteth it in his Verses. The names of dayes.Siluester called the dayes otherwise then before, for the day of the Sunne, le Dimanche: the other dayes, Feries, 2.3.4.5.6. and Samedi for the day of Saturne. Antonie being in Egypt in the wildernesse, Constantine writ vnto him,Donatist. 3. to pray to God for him, and for his children. Victori∣nus of Affrike an Orator, was also of this time, and Donatus, of whom came the Donatist heretickes, against which S. Augu∣stine writeth. The constitutions attributed to Siluester touching the consecrattion and vse of creame, to marke such as were bap∣tized, and annoynt such as were nigh death, and such other in∣uentions, are in the booke of Councels: whereof Luitprandus, Platina, and Sabellicus make mention in their bookes, and speak of them after their owne iudgement.
Councells in diuers places. After the Councell of Nice, Siluester at the commaunde∣ment of Constantine, made assemble a Sinode at Rome of 277. Bishops: wherin there was condemned Arrius, Photinus, Sa∣bellius, with one Calixtus, as the booke of Councels shewes. And againe by a Sinode following, the decrees of the Councell of Nice were confirmed, and the solemnitie of Easter establi∣shed to be obserued on the Sunday from the 14. of the Moone, vntill the 21. The multitude of Councels and Sinodes, multiplied tra∣ditions vpon traditions, and brought in great errours, and the good and holy constitutions of Nice were soone after by such meanes contradicted. 1. At Neocesaria in Pontus Polemoniake, betwixt Paphlagonia and Armenia, was instituted, that none should be a priest before the age of 30. yeares. 2. At Elebert in Spaine, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, were commaunded to abstaine from theyr wiues, and not to haue children, otherwise that they should bee deposed. That there should be no Images in the Temples of Chri∣stians. If any broke an Image and were murdered:Images chap. 60, because it is not written in the Gospell; neither is there read that it hath bene done by any of the Apostles, it pleased the Councell that such a one be not admitted nor receiued into the number of Martyrs. 3. At Rome it was ordained for Churchmen, that none should accuse them, nor draw them into lawe. 4. At Arles the first, counsell was giuen to young people by no meanes to marry againe, if by chance for adulterie they bee seperated from their wiues. 5. At Gangia in Paphalagonia, they excommunicated and  anathematized, such as condemned them that eate flesh, so that it were not offered vnto Idols, &c. Item, they excommunica∣ted such as iudged a married Priest ought not to excercise
his ministerie because of his marriage: and likewise such as ab∣stained from their ministerie. At this time vnder the shadowe of chastitie and virginitie, men began to despise marriage; as appeareth by the first, ninth, tenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth Chapter of the said Councell: where all such as blame marriage and leaue their children, or the wife her husband, or the husband his wife, to liue in conti∣nencie, are excommunicated. 6. At Arles the second, was ordained the contrary, that none should be admitted into the Ecclesiasticall estate, vnlesse he promised to renounce the bonds of marriage. The Iberians were conuerted to the faith (they are of Asia, vnder the climate of Pontus) namely, the King, the Queene, the Nobilitie, and al the people, by the preaching of a woman, a captiue there. Paul the Hermit the younger, hauing taken his wife in a∣dultry, left her and went into the Desart, and said to the adul∣terer: keepe her for thy selfe. Hist. trip. Siluester died without martyrdome, hauing 7. times made orders, at which he created 25. Priests, 36. Deacons, and 45. Bishops. He gouerned the Church 23. yeares: or after Maria∣nus, 24. Others giue him but 19. Marcus succeeded him, & gouerned the Romane Church 2. yeares, or 8. moneths after Ierome: Damasus saith he was a Romane. His father was called Priscus. Some say he gaue to the Bishop of Ostia that priuiledge a∣boue all others to consecrate the Bishop of Rome, and the right of the Archipiscopall pall, called Pallium. And would that the Creed which was made at the Councel of Nice, should be sung by the Cleargie and people, after the reading of the Gospell. Platina, Bergomensis, and Polidorus. If he builded Temples and adorned them with diuers gifts and presents, let their faith be examined which haue written thereof. Sinodes for the cause of Athanasius. The Emperour Constantine considering the number of
the accusers of Athanasius, and the crimes wherewith hee was charged, published a Sinode at Cesaria in Palestine, whereat A∣thanasius not appearing, there was doubted if was for feare of the Bishop of that place, or of the Eusebians; and for that cause hee caused a Councell of the Nations to be assembled at Tyre, calling Athanasius to it by Letters full of indignation. Socrat. li 1. chap. 28. Theodoret. lib. 1. chap. 27. Sozom. lib. 1. chap. 25. and Athanasius himselfe in his second Apologie. At the said Sinode were found 60. Bishops, the most part Orientalls.Athanasius called to the Sinode. Athanasius came thither accompanied with Timo∣theus a Priest. The Eusebians to begin their wicked part, brought in a woman of dishonest life, whom they had subor∣ned, who faining to haue vowed chastitie, maintained that Athanasius in the night would haue rauished her: beeing then pressed to answer to that accusation, he spake not a word. Timothius perceiuing why Athanasius held his peace, tur∣ned himselfe towards the woman and said vnto her. Had I euer acquaintance with thee? Did I euer lodge nigh thee? The woman cried more then before. And poynting at the said Timothius with her finger, shee said. It was thou and no other which by force hast violated mee. This calum∣niation beeing thus made knowne to the great confusion of them that inuented it: notwithstanding, the Iudges which gouerned and sufficiently knew Timothius and Athanasius, let the said woman goe, sauing the good right of Athanasius, who maintained that at the least she should haue named them of whom she was hyred. An other impudent accusation was againe attempted against him. The aduersaries brought forth the hand of one who was named Arsenius, whom they maintained to haue beene murthered by Athanasius. Hee demaunded if any amongst them knew Arsenius: to which question, many answered that they knewe him very well. Arse∣nius was then brought before theyr presence. Beeing againe asked if it were that Arsenius whose hand was cut off, they con∣fessed all that it was hee. Herevpon Athanasius discouering
his cloake, shewed hee was whole of both hands which God had giuen him. This so liuely a refutation made the aduersaries infamous: but their refuge was, to trouble the Sinode by tumult and sedi∣tion. Theodoret. li. 1. cap. 29. One of the said aduersaries called Achab, or Iohn, got from the Iudiciall seate, and escaped in this tumult. Socrat. lib. 1. chap. 30. Athanasius seeing that the tumult fell to great sedition, withdrew himselfe. The Sinode in his absence condemned him, and deposed him from his Bishopprick. Hee then got him to Constantinople, and shewed the Emperour the in∣iuries that this Sinode hadde done vnto him: And be sought him that hee himselfe would take the knowledge of the cause. The Emperour then by his Letters Patents called againe all the Bishops of the Sinode of Tyre to Constantinople, that they might yeeld a reason of the sentence giuen against Athanasi∣us. And as Sozomene. Lib. 2. Chap. 28. sayth, that Eusebi∣us. Theognes, and other heretickes arriuing at Constantinople, did assuredly affirme to the Emperour, all that they had deui∣sed against Athanasuis, and hyred witnesses which depo∣sed that all that which was brought against Athanasius was true. The Emperour mooued rather with a desire to pacifie the Churches, thē with the accusation of his aduersaries, banished Athanasius into Gaul, into the Citie of Herers. But the Empe∣rour by certaine Letters written to the people of the Catho∣lique Church of Alexandria, witnesseth himself to haue confi∣ned him thither only to the end his bloudy enemies should not grieue nor touch the sacred head of such a person (these bee his words.) And in the meane while all things necessary were sent to Athanasius. Iulius the first of that name was ordained Bishop after Marc. the 25. yeare of Constantine. After the Chronicle of Hierome, hee gouerned the Church about 16. yeares. Hee was the son of one Rustike; who had great combats to maintaine the quarels of Athanasius, and of other faithfull Doctors against the Arrians. The tripartite history saith, that the Councell of Nice
was in the time of Iulius. And is it possible that he was there as being Bishop of some other place? Howsoeuer it is, it is plaine inough that the last age of the Emperour Constantine, is repor∣ted by Ierome to be in the time of this Iulius. The ordinance is attributed vnto him, that a Priest should plead no where but before a Iudge Ecclesiasticall. That hee reprehended the Bishops of the East, that they assēbled coun∣cels without his authoritie. There is an Epistle gratulatory of this Iulius, for the restitution of Athanasius. Socrates reciteth it, Lib. 2. Chap. 23. & Sozo. lib. 3. cap. 20. The beginning of Pilgrimages. Vnder Constantine the land of Palestine being purged of Ethnicke Idolatries, began to be in deuotion for the memorie of the great and memorable things done in it. Constantine cau∣sed an Oratory to be builded in the place where the Sepulchre of the Lord had bin. Helena his mother went thither vpon de∣uotion to worship, and hauing found the Crosse,Temples builed in Palestine. caused to bee built two Temples, the one where the Lord was borne, the o∣ther where hee ascended into Heauen. Ruffin. Lib. 1. Chap. 7. After that, Constantine caused to be builded in the place called (Cranium) a Temple, with solemnitie and authoritie of a Si∣node assemble at Tyre, This gaue the first occasion of Pilgri∣mages, and anuuersatie solemnities. And it came to a super∣stition to haue seene the holy land and the holy places, as ap∣peareth by the Epistle of Gregory Nyssene, wherein he learnedly refuteth that superstition. The Romane and imperiall Eagle tooke the two heads, when Constantine after he had established the Townne of Con∣stantinople the new Rome, made it the seate of the Empire, and the chiefe of al people which acknowledged the Romane Em∣pire, and inhabited the parts Orientall, Northerne and Sou∣therne, and towards the Mediterranean sea. Sozomene lib. 2. chap. 3. Nicepho. lib. 8. cap. 4. saith that the Towne was dedicated by him the yeare of his Empire 28. and as he had taken the Em∣pire, diuided; and vnited it in his person: so he diuided it againe
as a paternall heritage,Constantin the second. and made a partition thereof amongst his children: whom whilest he liued he created Cesars, one af∣ter an other: that is to say, Constantine his eldest sonne. Anno. 10. Constantius the second, Anno. 20. and Constans the young∣ger, Anno. 30. Whose Empires were very turbulent, and endu∣red but 24. yeares, 5. moneths, & 12. dayes: according to the Chronicle of Hierome.The death of Constantine the great. Constantine the Father died at Nicomi∣cha, after he had liued 66. yeares, and raigned 31. yeares. Pom∣pon. Laet. Licinius the sonne of Constantia, sister of Constantine the great, and Crispus sonne of the said Constantine the great, with his said son Constantine the eldest, were created Caesars the yeare of the Lord, 316. But the wickednes of Fausta, the wife of Con∣stantine the great, caused the death of Licinius and Crispus, and many other noble personages. See Aure. Ʋictor and Pompo. Laet. Crispus was instructed by Lactantius. Constantine the eldest sonne of Constantine the great, was Emperour, with his two brethren, after the father the yeare of our Lord, 338. The Empire was thus parted, namely, that Constantine should enioy Gaul, Spaine, and England. Constance should haue Italie, with Slauonia and Greece. And Constantius should holde Constantinople, with the East. This partition con∣tented not Consantine: hee raised warre against his brother Constance, being proud of his Army of Gaul, but warring more couetously then warily, was ouerthrowne by an ambush nigh to Aquilea: and being wounded in diuers places, dyed there, hauing raigned but three whole yeares, and liued 25. See Bapt. Egnat. and Pomp. Laet. Constance after he had vanquished his elder brother, passing the Alpes, came to make warre in Gaul, and in two yeares with great difficultie conquered the Countrey which his brother had in partition. He at the beginning gouerned well, but after gaue himselfe to pleasures, and at last became odious to all men. So that in the end they conspired against him as he was at hun∣ting, and was slaine by the deuice and treason of Magnentius who vsurped his Empire, yet he had saued this Magnentius his life. Constance liued thirtie yeares, and raigned fourteene.
See Pomp. Laet.Constance. Cōstantius. Constantius had for his part the Empire of Constantinople, with the East. Hee vanquished Ʋetranio who made himselfe Emperour in Hungarie after the death of Cōstance. Moreouer, to reuenge the death of his said brother Constance, hee made great warre against Magnentius. In the first battaile there were slaine of one part and the other, 53000. fighting men:53000. slaine. Mag∣nentius had the worst. And againe making head, was ouercome nigh Lions. Constantius was suspected vpon enuie and ambition to haue made away Dalmatius his Cousin-germain, a vertu∣ous man, who better resembled Constantine the great, then his owne father; and who was appointed for a copartner with the said Constantius, when he had his partition. But Constantius li∣ued not long after. For as he was going the second time against the Persians, vnderstanding that Iulian had made himselfe Au∣gustus, he tooke a Feuer and dyed, the yeare of his age 40. and of his Kingdome 24. See Eutrop. Aurel. Ʋict. Pompon. Laet. and Bapt. Egn. The Sinode of Sardis in her Sinodall Letters, calleth Iulius their friend and companion. Theodoret. lib. 2. chap. 8. It followeth, that the Bishop or Archbishop of Rome had not the pretended superioritie. It seemeth that Iulius was dead, when Constantius hauing tamed the tyrannie of Magnentius and Syluanus, hee was in Italie to appease the discordes of Athanasius his cause. Liberius borne in Rome, his father being called Augustus, succeeded Iulius the yeare of Christ after S. Hierome, 352. a∣bout  the 12. yeare of Constance Empire: his confession was a∣greeing vnto the Catholique faith, and writ to Athanasius very Christianly of God the Father, God the Sonne, and God the holy Ghost, as may be seene in his Epistle, which is affixed to the workes of Athanasius. Athanasius in the Epistle to them which leade solitary liues, rehearseth how Liberius was subuerted.
The Emperour Constans sent to Rome one named Eusebius an Eunuke with Letters, wherby he threatned him exile, and on the other side tempted him with presents to induce him to cō∣sent with Arrius, and to subscribe to the condemnation of A∣thanasius. Liberius despised both his menaces and gifts as a sa∣crifice of blasphemie. Whereat the Emperour being excee∣dingly grieued, found meanes to get him out of Rome: and be∣ing come to him, threatned him with death. But Liberius man∣fully answered.The cōstancy of Liberius. I am ready to endure all, rather then of Chri∣stians we should be accounted Arrians. Why what art thou said the Emperour, that with one wicked man troublest all the world? The word of Faith (said Liberius) dependeth not vpon multitude. He was then banished by this Emperour Constans into Berrea, which is a Towne in Thrace. Where after hee had bene two yeares, he was called home (as saith Theodoret) his restitution after some, was accorded by the Emperour, at the request of many Romanes, and of the Westerne Bishops. The same saith Athanasius in the before alleadged Epistle. Also that Liberius after his two yeares exile feared with threatnings and apprehension of death, sealed to the condemnation of Athana∣sius. Ruffin saith the same: and Hierome (as Baleus saith) wri∣teth that by ambition Liberius fell into the heresie of Arrius, being once fallen from the integritie of faith. We finde some constitutions of Liberius, namely, not to make noises in fasting time, that times of fasting and Lent bee not polluted by the act of marriage: that in time of famine and pestilence, men should appease the Lords anger by fasting, almes, and prayers. An aduertisement. The principall felicitie and ornament of the Church of this time, was the multitude of excellent Doctors, which by their doctrine sought so farre as in them lay, to conserue & mul∣tiply the puritie of doctrine. But this felicitie was greatly ob∣scured, partly by the multitude of heretickes, and partly by the rage of seditious people, and schismatickes: In so much, that since the time of the Apostles, there was no Church that hath
endured more dissentions, combats and diuisions within it, then that of this world. Wherevpon by good right, Basile the great in a certaine poeme, writing of the iudgement of God, complaineth, saying. I haue liued the age of a man, and I haue seene great concord amongst the Arts and Sciences. But in the Church of God alone, for which Iesus Christ dyed, I haue obserued so many dissentions that it is altogether dissipa∣ted and wasted. And comming to the cause; As I searched saith he the cause, I remembred the place of the booke of Iud∣ges, where it is written; That then euery one did whatsoeuer hee thought good in his owne eyes. Great persecutions were vnder Constantius after the death of Constans, against the Catholike Doctors and Bishops,Heretickes cruell. by the Arrians. Many were put to death euen within the Temples, others were exiled, others put in prison, virgins imprisoned, and the houses of Christians pilled and sacked. S. Hilarie was sent into exile. At this time for the great persecutions without, and here∣sies within, many retired into the Desarts.Monkes at this time. They write of two which were called Amon. The one was the Father and chiefe of three thousand Monkes. The other Amon, with two hun∣dreth and fiftie Clarkes and Monkes, was slaine by the Arri∣ans. Eusebius. Sarmatha and Amathas Disciples of S. Anthonie, were slaine by the Painimes. Macarus the Aegyptian, an other Maca∣rus of Alexandria, Hylarion the Disciple of S. Paul, the Hermit Theodorus, Entichian, Pachomius, Moyses, Beniamin, Helias. Serapiō was the father of 2000. Monkes, whom hee made worke for the necessitie of their liues, and to helpe the needes of other poore, Paemen & other infinit. Martin renounced his military estate. Hist. trip. lib. 8. chap. 1. Iohn Cassian in the Collat of Fathers. Naucl, A coniuration was made by the Arrians after the Councel of Sardis, against two Catholike Bishops, Eufrates and Ʋincen∣tius. They caused an whoore in the night time to come into their chamber, and by Apostate people which suddenly went
after the said strumpet, and so profered to accuse them to haue bene surprised in whoordome. But the harlot disclosed the con∣iuration. A Councell was held at Millaine in fauour of the Arrians against Athanasius, the which resisted, Paulinus Bishop of Tre∣ners, Denis Bishop of Millaine, Eusebius Bishop of Ʋerceil, and Rhodamus: wherevpon they were cast out of the Church, and with them Liberius, Lucifer Metropolitane of the Iles of Sardine, and Osius of Spaine sent into exile, Anno Christi, 361. The said Osius in his age by many torments, beatings and wounds, was forced to cōsent to the exposition of the Arrians, and thervnto to subscribe in the first volume of Councels. Tri∣tenius saith, that Osius being rich, fearing either banishment or losse of his goods, consented to the Arrians, and being about to depose a Catholique Bishop called Gregory, he fell downe out of his Chaire, and so died. Hereby are we aduertized, that it is nothing to begin wel, vn∣lesse we perseuer vnto the end. Vnder Constantius many Councels were held, namely in Tyre, Sardis, and Millaine, as is said in Arimine, in Syrmion of Pannonie, in Nicea, which is in Tharse, in Seleucia, which is in Isauria, wherein the faith of the Fathers of Nice was condem∣ned. Felix borne at Rome, sonne of one named Anastasis, ha∣uing bene the Deacon of Liberius, was thrust into his place by the Arrians, hoping he would consent with them in doctrine: but hee became a true Catholique in the confession of the Councell of Nice, and gaue no place either to the heretickes, or to Constance himselfe, declaring him an hereticke, and was rebaptized by Eusebius of Nicomedia. We finde in the booke of Councels, an Epistle of the Bishoppes of Aegypt to Fe∣lix, and Felix his answere to them, with certaine constituti∣ons: namely, that none might accuse a Bishoppe before a ciuill Magistrate. Item, to restore a Bishoppe who is
cast out by force. Item,Liberius. not to admit witnesse of prophane people against religious persons. Item, that Bishoppes should frequent Sinodes, or send thither if they could not goe. Som say, that Felix gouerned with Liberius a certaine time: But Theodoret saith that Felix withdrew himselfe into an other Towne. Socrat. lib. 2. chap. 37. saith, that Felix was driuen away by the Romane people in a sedition, and that the Emperour thereby was constrained to send for Liberius thither. Others say, that Felix was beheaded with many others, for that hee prooued the Emperour. Hilary Bishop of Poiters was reuoked from exile:Hilarie Bishop of Poiters. and Paul Bishop of Treuers died in exile in the Countrey of Phrygia. Anno Christi. 363. Lucius Bishop of Adrianople, dyed in prison. Paulus Bishop of Constantinople sent into exile, was strang∣led by the way. Nicomedia by an earthquake was wholly subuerted, and the Townes nigh were also afflicted. After the death of Constance, Constantius againe pursued Athanasius, and then was the great persecution against the faithfull. Liberius returned from exile the yeare of Christ, 363. About this time three Sectes of Arrians rose vp. That is to say, Macedonians, Eunomians, and newe Arri∣ans. 1. The Arrians held the Sonne to be like vnto the Father but by grace, not by nature. 2. The Macedonians, that the Sonne is altogether like the Father, but not the holy Ghost. 3. The Eunomians, that the Sonne is altogether vnlike the Father. Eusebius Bishop of Ʋerceil endured great torments of the Arrians,Eusebius Bishop of Verceil. because in councell at Millaine he tore in peeces a sce∣dule, wherevnto the westerne Bishops had subscribed to the Arrians in the Councell of Arimine. Some say hee was seuen dayes without bread and wa∣ter in a Caue, and afterward was kept in a very straight place.
But after the death of Constantius he was deliuered and retur∣ned to Verceil,Iulian. into his Bishopricke vnder Iouinian. Finally, af∣ter the death of the said Iouinian, vnder Ʋalens, who was an Ar∣rian, he was stoned by the Arrians the yeare of Christ, 388. Note Reader, that at this time in each Towne there were both Catholike Dostors and Arrians. Temples for the one, and Temples for the other: so the Church was diuided. Achatius Bishop of Cesaria in Palestine an Arrian, was in great reputation with Constantius. Iulian borne at Constantinople, the sonne of Constantius, bro∣ther of Constantine the great, he was faire of face, subtill and of good spirit, giuen both to Letters and Armes: he set Fraunce at libertie, which the Almaines had wasted: hee tooke the King an the first cōflict, beyond the hope of all. Colleine was taken of him when he was very young: of which prize hee got great renowne, and reioyced the hearts of the souldiers. In so much that they named him Emperour in Paris. Whereof his Cousin Constantius being aduertised, died in dispite: about the age of 45. yeares,The death of Constantius. as he prepared to make warre vpon him. Yet when he died, he made him his heire. Anno Domini 363. Athanasius returned into Alexandria. George who ruled in his absence, was slaine, and his body burnt. A Sinode in Alexandria.A Sinode was in Alexandria of good & Catholique Bishops, wherein they that fel into heresie, were permitted not onely to returne into the vnion and communion of the Church, but e∣uen into their offices and Bishoppricks. There was also concluded and declared, that the holy Ghost is of one same substance with the Father and the Sonne, and that in the Trinitie there was nothing created or lesse, or after an other.Essentiall. Item that God hath but one essentiall sub∣stance,Substance. but reall subsistence of three persons. This word (Sub∣stance) differeth from the word (Subsistence) when we speake of the persons of the Trinitie. For substance cōcerneth the essen∣tiall nature of a thing: after which, the three persons of the Trinitie are but one alone, substance and nature. But this
word (Subsistence) sheweth in one same diuine substance three persons and different proprieties,Subsistence. not onely in name (as the Sabellians say) but really. Iulian was instituted in his youth in pietie, vnder Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, as Laetus saith: but after he had tasted the Schooles of Philosophie and Rhethoricke, vnder Liba∣nius the Sophister, and Maximus the Philosopher, (whom Va∣lentinien the Emperour after caused to be executed, for exerci∣sing Magicall Artes) all that godlinesse which he had learned,Iulian instituted in pietie. was chaunged into Ethnike superstition: yea, Eutropius saith, that Iulian in his youth was a Reader in the Church of Ni∣comedia. Moreouer, he was a man learned in humane Letters, and exercised in deeds of warre, ambitious and cruell: which he shewed, hauing bin cause of the death of his brother Gallus. Ierome in the Epistle to Nepotian saith, that Iulian denied Ie∣sus Christ in France. Beeing then altogether revolted from Religion,Humane Let∣ters prohibited hee was surnamed the Apostate. Hee first forbad Christians to keepe no schooles of humane Letters, nor bookes of Philosophie or Poesie. For he had often this word in his mouth. These Gal∣leleans (so called he Christians) will make warre vpon vs with our owne writings, if they be once armed. He liked better to proceed against Christians by long torments and insupportable griefes, then by great effusion of bloud. For he knew well inough, that the former persecuti∣ons were the cause of the multiplication and glory of Christi∣ans. Socrat. lib. 3. chap. 13. Theodoret. lib. 3. chap. 8. The chief persecution that he could deuise, was to doo the same in the Temples of Painims, that the Christians did in their Churches at their ordinary assemblies in Churches, Lectors, prayers re∣leeuing of poore hospitalls, and such like things which he op∣posed in the name of Painim Gods. Ʋalentinian entring one day into the Temple of Fortune with Iulian,Holy water. being angry at the casting of certain holy water vp∣on him, (saying that it rather defiled then clensed him) strooke him that cast it: But Iulian would haue constrained him to sa∣crifice vnto the Idolls: but he chose rather to forsake all, then
to commit such a villanie. Iulian then banished him the Court, alleadging this for a shewe, that he had negligently gouerned his souldiers. For Iulian the most that he could, dissembled that the crueltie he exercised was for the Christian Religion. He tooke from Christian Churches all their goods, Im∣munities, honours, and the prouision of reuenewes which Con∣stantine had assigned thē. He destroyed their churches & tooke away their treasures and vessels, and caused the Temples of the Painims to be repaired, he suffred not them to dwell in townes but banished them vnto the extreame and outward parts of the Empire, and gaue licence to vse vnto them all contumelies and shames. Wherfore in Ascolon and Gaza, townes in Palestine, great outrages were done vnto them. For Christians there were beaten euen to death.Extreame cruelties. They of Gaza stoned many of the faith∣full, opened women, and filled their bellies with barley, & then made them be eaten with swine. Theoret. li. 3. cha. 7. The sacred virgins were exposed naked, and after they had shewed vnto them all kinds of reproaches, they were cut in peeces, and then cast to beasts. In some places the Christians were laid, & aliue sacrificed vpon the Aultars of the Painims. It is recited by Ni∣cephorus, li. 10. chap. 13. And when the Christians by their em∣bassadors would haue shewed these iniuries vnto Iulian, to take order therefore, they had no audience allowed. And if at any time he made a countenance that he would chastise them that did such outrages, by countenance again, he rather incited then repressed them. Sozom, lib. 5. chap. 15. Yea he fell into such im∣pietie and malice to vexe the Christians, that the fountaines in Antioche by his commaundements were dedicated vnto Idols in sacrifices and oblations: thinking thereby to pol∣lute the Christians, and to make them to bee partakers of such abhominations whensoeuer they vsed these fountaine waters: yea the flesh that came to the Butchers stall, bread, fruites, and other such like things which were necessa∣ry for life, hee made them bee sacrificed to Idolls by the Priests. The Christians with great sorrowe were constrained to see a detestable and abhominable prophanation: yea and to
vse these fountaines and viands thus infected and polluted, beeing instructed by the doctrine of S. Paul to take with a good conscience whatsoeuer came to the Butchery,1. Cord. 10. fol. 25. and that which is necessarie to the common life. These were two excellent Captaines, Inuentius and Maximianus, who at a certaine banquet, deploring this prophanation of the goods of God, applyed the complaint of the captiue children in Babilon, to the time of Iulian. Lord thou hast deliuered vs vnto a wicked King, and wee are made slaues vpon the earth, &c. Which thing bee∣ing reuealed vnto the Emperour, he made them come before him. They there declared their iust complaint more at large then before, seeing they had the meane giuen them to speake vnto him. The Emperour condemned them to grieuous tor∣ments, not as Christians, but as iniurious and offering oppro∣bry and shame to his Maiestie:Iulians enuy for the name of Martyr. for he greatly enuied that word and honor of Martyr. And this enuy made him assay all means to torment them before hee would come to execute them by iudgement. Iulian burnt with desire to goe against the Persians who had cruelly afflicted the East, and affected the name of Par∣trike. But before he enterprised that Act which was his last, he promised his Gods, that at his returne from this expedition, he would yet commit more greeuous things against the Chri∣stians then before. Ruffin. Lib. 1. Chap. 36. Doret. Lib. 3. Chap. 21. Of this euill will he shewed sufficient witnesse; for in the middest and as it were in the heate of this Persian warre, hee tooke leisure to vomit out seuen bookes against Iesus Christ, although before he contented himself to write against Christi∣ans, as Eutropius saith. And indeed being in this expedition, he prepared a Skaffolde in the Towne of Ierusalem, at his returne to place there the Bishops, Monkes, and the faithfull of these places, and to expose them vnto beasts. Basile and other good Doctors did all their duties to goe hither and thither to comfort & exhort Christians, both publikely and particularly, nor did meddle nor pollute thēselues with the abhominatiōs of
the Gentiles,Iouinian. but to detest them, yea the gifts and honours which the Emperour proposed to such as renounced Christia∣nitie. Here we must not forget the Prophetike answere which a Schoolemaister in Antioche made to Libanius a Sophister, when Iulian went against the Persians. Libanius demaunded of him, mocking Christ; What thinkest thou doth the Carpen∣ters sonne at this time? The Schoolemaister answered: O Sophister, the Creator of al things whom thou calledst the Car∣penters son, makes a coffin to enclose Iulian. Soone after newes came that Iulia was slaine. But behold what was the end of this cursed Apostate Iu∣lian.The horrible death of Iulian. After he had passed the Sea Bosphore, he wintered in An∣tioche: As soone as the Spring came, passing by Hierapolis, hee went into Mesopotamia: and after he had passed the floud hee fought against the Persians, and receiued a mortall wound; and casting a full handfull of bloud into the ayre, hee vttered this blasphemie against Iesus Christ. Thou hast ouercome ô Gallelean. In the end thou art vanquisher: and as hee had lost much bloud, being in a burning Feuer, hee called for water about midnight, and dranke it colde, and expired the yeare of his age 31. hauing gouerned the Empire the space of a yeare and seuen moneths. Of the publike ioy they of Antioche made for his death, see the Tripartite historie. lib. 6. chap. 48. Iouinian or Iuuian borne in Hungarie, was created Empe∣rour with great ioy of the Armie, the next morning after the death of Iulian.A Christian Emperour. He was a Prince naturally liberall, and who vnder Iulian had shewed well, that he loued better to loose all dignities then to obey one wicked commaundement, and a∣gainst Christian religion. Beeing importuned by the souldiers to accept the electi∣on, he said hee was a Christian, and that hee would not bee the Emperour of Ethnicks and Idollatrous people. Hee accepted not the Empire, vntill all with a common voyce had protested they would bee Christians. Eutropius Lib. 10. Socrat. Lib. 3. Chap. 22. One called Lucius an Arrian, whom George Bishop of
Alexandria had promoted, accusing Athanasius when he re∣turned from exile. Iouinian would not heare him,Athanasius came from exile. but knowing Athanasius, commaunded silence to Lucius. Sozomen. li. 6. cap. 5. He customably said to flatterers, that they rather worshipped purple then God. The Church had rest vnder him, and he restored whatsoe∣uer Iulian had taken away. There was a Councell held at Antioche vnder him,Councell at Antoiche. to esta∣blish the faith of the Councell of Nice, Sozom. lib. 6. chap. 4. He made peace with the Persians to his great dishonour,Peace with the Persians. and to their great aduantage: yeelding them fiue Prouinces beyond Tigris: also he promised to giue no succours vnto the King Arsaces allied with the Romanes. He died soone after of an euill of the stomacke as he was in his chamber, wherein for cold he caused to be made a great fire of coles all the night. He liued 23. yeares, and raigned seuen moneths. The originall of Monkes and Monasteries. The Monastike life began first in Aegypt, Antonius and Macarus were the first and most renowned Authors of this maner of life, which incontinent was disperced into Palestine, Armenia, and Paphlagonia. Sozomen. li. 3. chap. 14. It is greatly to be maruelled at, how this world which in it had so many ex∣cellent Doctors, did straight admit this manner of life, which was neuer instituted of God: and not onely allowed it, but e∣uen themselues instituted it, and so made a new seruice of God by their owne traditions. It seemeth at the beginning there were two kindes of Monkes, some in sollititude, and others in Cities and companies:Two kindes of Monkes. Sozom. li. 3. ch. 16. Basilius at large writeth the Oeconomie and lawes of this Monkish life: namely, that a Monke before all things ought to possesse nothing, to be peaceable: that hee ought to haue an honest habit, a moderate voice, words well disposed, to take his refection peaceably, and with silence: and that his glorie ought to be patience in tribulation, humili∣tie and simplicitie of heart, watchings, teares in prayers, so∣brietie
in his speech and eating.Valentiniā. Ambrose in his 82. Epistle of his booke saith, that Monasteries were shops of vertue, ab∣stinence, fasting, patience and labour. Out of which they drew Bishops that were accustomed and trained in these ver∣tues. Hierome ad Ruffinum Monachum saith that the Monaste∣ries of the Aegyptians receiued none without dooing some la∣bour or worke. And this was their rule, and as it were their Sim∣bole. Hee that trauelleth not, ought not to eate. The same in his Epistle ad Eutychium, speaketh of three sort of Monkes in E∣gypt.Cenobites. The first were called Cenobites, Sansos in that countrey language, as we might say, liuing in common. The second Anacharites,Anachirites. Remoboth. because they dwelt alone in the Desarts, far from mē. The third they called Remoboth: these dwelt two with two, or three with three at the most, and liued at their discretion and of that which they laboured for; they nourished themselues in common, but often had they debates amongst them. Before the time of Hierome, it is not like there were any Monasteries in Europe: but that Ambrose (in whose time be∣gan persecutions of virgins) makes often mention of compa∣nies of sacred virgins:Europe had not yet receiued Monkes. otherwise there is no Latine Author of this time in whose writings the name of Monke is found. Cer∣taine it is, that Sozomen. lib. 3. chap. 14. affirmeth them of Thrace, the Illirians and they of Europe had yet no Monastike assemblies. Valentinian borne also in Hungarie, was made Emperour by the souldiers in the principall Towne of Bithinia, Anno. 366. Hee and Valens were the sonnes of Gratian, borne in Hungarie, of a meane place: and in fauour of him, Ʋalenti∣nian was chosen to the Empire, which hee refused, but after ac∣cepted and made his brother Ʋalens pertaker with him, who had the Countrey of the East, and made his sonne Gratian Augustus. In their time Procopius who vsurped the Empire, was by them discomfited. After, Valentinian chased away the Gothes and other barbarous people of Thrace: The Saxons were brought to their dutie and obedience accustomed: Germanie beeing tossed with continuall troubles, was set
at rest and quietnesse by the happie successe of Theodo∣sius. Ʋalens then being chosen a consort of the Empire, was at  first of like pietie and will with his brother as hee hadde also shewed vnder Iulian: but after hee was infected with the Ar∣rian heresie, at the perswasion of his wife, and of Eudoxius Bi∣shop of Constantinople, an Arrian, of whom he was baptised. During the life of Valentinian, the westerne Church was peaceable, and agreeing to the decrees of the Councell of Nice: But Valens did what he could to aduāce the Arrianisme, against such as were called Homousiastes: that is to say, the true Ca∣tholiques: and stirred great & horrible persecutions, and aboue all, in Antioche and Laodicea, his brother Valentinian reprehen∣ded him, and admonished him by Letters to desist, as Zonoras writeth: but hereby was he stirred so much the more, and de∣termined to chase away Basilius Bishop of Cesaria, because at his commaundement he would not communicate with Eudoxi∣us: but the Lord sent a disease to his onely sonne (who know∣ing it be Gods vengeance) turned him from his euill will, and certaine dayes he was an auditor of Basiles Sermons. Athanasius after he had procured the good of the Church 46. yeares, and sustained many persecutions in great constan∣cie and patience, died about this time. After his death, persecution in Egipt and Alexandria was mooued by Ʋalens, Hist. Trip. lib. 8. chap. 7. Damasus a Spaniard (some write him to bee of Rome) the sonne of one called Antonius, succeeded Liberius: his elec∣tion  was turbulent and bloudie, because of a competitor hee had called Vrsin a Deacon of the Romane Church. Hereby may you see a first fruite of the riches of the Church, and of the pretended donation of Constantine. Of the writings of Damasus, see Suidas and Hierome in his Epistle ad Eustochium. Tome. 4. makes mention of Damasus. Of Virginitie saith hee, read the bookes of that Pope Damasus composed in verse and prose.
Valens.He reuerenced the Sinode of Nice, and condemned Aux∣entius Bishop of Millan an Arrian. Theodor. lib. 4. chap. 30. saith that with S. Ambrose hee fought strongly against the Arrian heretikes, expresly condemning Sabellius, Arrius, Eunomius, the Macedonians, Photin, Marcellius, and the heresie of Apollina∣ris. Hierome writeth vnto him often, and in his Apologie a∣gainst Iouinian, he calleth Damasus a singular man, well in∣structed in the scriptures, and Doctor of the Virgin Church. Athanasius in his Epistle to the Bishops of Affrike, calleth Da∣masus his deare companion, praysing his diligence, that hee as∣sembled a Sinode at Rome against the Arrians. He was char∣ged to haue committed whoordome: whereof beeing accused by two of his Deacons, namely Concordius and Calitxtus, hee defended his cause in a full assembly of Bishoppes, and was absolued, and his accusers proscripted. Sabelli. Enu. 7. Lib. 9. Monkes.There were many vertuous Monkes in this time, as Pau∣lus, Pior, Isidorus, Apsius, Pierius, Enagrius, Ammonius, &c. Hist. Trip. lib. 8. chap. 10. One of the Monkes said: that the Monke which laboured with his hands, was like a theefe. Some were cruelly slaine by Valens, because they would not goe to warre. A Prophetike Dreame.Anthonie of the age of an hundreth and fiue yeares, died at this time. Hee sawe in a Dreame as it were swine which destroyed and plucked downe Aultars with their feete: and when he awaked, hee said that the Church should bee once dissipated and wasted by whoremongers, adulterers, and men disguised. P. Melancton noteth this Prophesie against the whoordome and voluptuos life of Priests and Monkes. Heretikes.Amongst other heretickes at this time, there was Pho∣tinus, Hebionite, Ennomius an Arrian, and Priscilian a Bishop in Spaine, who cōfounded the persons in the Trinitie. They which they called Donatists, said that Christ is lesse then the Father, and the holy Ghost lesse then the Sonne, and rebaptized the Catholiques.
The Luciferians and Apollinaries said that Christ receiued an humane body without a reasonable soule. The diuinity supply∣ing the place thereof. Athalarike King of the Gothes, persecuted greatly the Ca∣tholiques against his owne people. The Burgonions gathered themselues together in number 80000. towards Rhene, which afterward receiued the faith. Paul. Diac. In the Towne of Arras in the Countie of Artois, the 4. yeare of Ʋalentinian, fell wooll from Heauen with the rayne. Hierome in his Chronicle. Paul. Diac. and Orosius Lib. 7. Herman Gigas saith that it was in the third yeare of Ʋalen∣tinian. For (Lana) some Historiographers haue set downe (Manna) wherefore yet at this day they of Arras vnluckily do worship it for the Manna of Heauen.Adolatrie at Arras. The Hungarians cast themselues vpon the West Countrie  in great numbers. The Arrians made burne and drowne many faithfull and Catholique people. Hist. Trip. lib. 8. chap. 2. The Huns cast themselues vpon the westerne parts, and draue away the Gothes which were cōstrained to giue place and passe beyond Danubia, and came into Thrace, and from thence into Pannonie. Ʋulphilas a Bishop of the Gothes in Sarmathia,Vulphilas Hist. Trip. lib. 8. translated the Bible into the Gothike tongue for the vse of his people. As Ie∣rome did into the Dalmatike for his people. And in Creatia, which is in the lower Pannonie, the Churches there and the Bi∣shops, vsed the scriptures translated into their vulgar tongue. Auxentius an Arrian Bishop deceasing at Milan, there fell a great sedition betwixt the Arrians & the Catholiques, for the electiō of their Bishop The Proconsul his deputie then, was Ambrose a Citizen of Rome, who hearing such a noise,The electiō of S. Ambrose. by reason of his office, went hastily to the Church where the peo∣ple were assembled, and after he had made many reasons to re∣duce the people to concord, suddenly rose there vp a common and an agreeing voyce, that Ambrose must needs be baptized
(who was yet a Catechumene) and after be consecrated Bishop, whervnto he would not consent, but by the commaundement of the Emperour Ʋalentinian who incited him therevnto, hee accepted the office. And then the Emperour gaue thankes to God that hee had called this person from the gouernment of the body, to the gouernment of soules. Councells held at this time. 1. In Aquilege where S. Ambrose assisted against Palla∣dius, and Secondianus, Arrians. 2. In Valentia in Dalphine, wherein it was ordained that Bi∣gami might not be consecrated. 3. In Laodicea, whereof is before spoken, &c. 4. At Rome, against Apollinaris. Hist. Trip. lib. 9 chap. 16. Ʋalentinian, of the age of 55. yeares, died of a flux of bloud of a veyne breaking. He raigned 17. yeares, 6. with Gratian, and 11. after, his body was carried to be buried at Constantinople. S. Aurel. Vict. and Pomp. Before his death he againe declared his sonne Gra∣iian Emperour. Procopius the Tyrant vanquished by Ʋalens, was taken, and hauing his two feete bound vnto two trees and let goe, they tore him in peeces. Naucle. Ʋalens gaue a blowe vnto the Gouernour of the Towne of Edesse in Mesapotamia, because hee had not chased away the Christians which daily assembled in ths Temple of S. Thomas. It grieued him to put the Emperours commaundement in ex∣ecution, and to cause such a multitude to die: wherefore he se∣cretly sent thē word that they would assemble no more there. But leauing his counsell, and searing nothing the Emperours E∣dict, the next morning all assembled in the said place, as they accustomed to doo. So then as the Prouost of the Towne, with a great company of souldiers, went to the said Temple to put in execution Valens his commaund: hee encountred a woman who ranne with a litle childe of hers to the assembly of the faithfull; to whom he said, Whether runnest thou? Thi∣ther
said she whether all others haste to goe. How said hee?Gratian.The constan∣cie of the faithfull. hast thou not heard that the Prouost goeth thither to sley all he findes there? I vnderstand it said she, and therfore do I make so much haste to be with them. And whither leadest thou that litle childe? That he may also receiue the Crowne of Martyr∣dome quoth she. When the said Prouost vnderstood these things, and the courage of the Christians which ran thither, he returned towards the Emperor Valens, & shewed him this sto∣rie, how they were ready to endure death for their faith; & that he thought it very vnreasonable to sley so great a multitude of people. Vpon these words Ʋalens moderated his anger. So∣crat. lib. 1. cap. 18. Theo. lib. 4. cap. 17. Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 18. Affrates a very olde Monke, departed from Antioch, being sent into exile. Ʋalens seeing him from his Pallace said to him; whither goest thou? I goe said he, to pray for thine Empire. Thou shouldest haue done that in thy house said Valens. Yea, answered Affrates if thou wouldest permit it, and so did I when Christs sheepe were in peace. Ʋalens in the end fought vnluckily against the Gothes, Ʋis∣coths, Huns, and Scyths, who hauing passed Danubia, ran vpon Hungaria, Epire, and Thessalia, endammaging much the coun∣trey, and burning certaine Townes. He was ouercome, and fly∣ing, was wounded with a Dart, and so fell from his horse, and was put in a litle strawe-house to be healed. Alanus the Victor pursued him, & the house whereinto he went was burnt, none knowing he was retired thither. This was the reward of his tirannie and crueltie against the faithfull.The death of Valens. And this came to him three yeares after the death of his brother, hauing raigned fourteene yeares. This battaile was the beginning of great warre that the Ro∣mane Empire after sustained. Gratian sonne of Valentinian, raigned eight yeares, with his  Vncle Valens three, and with Theodosius 4. But his true King∣dome began after the death of Valens, the yeare of our Lord, 380. Hee reuoked from Exile the Catholique Bishoppes,
and put backe the Arrians. He made Valentinian his litle bro∣ther on the fathers side, his companion of the Empire. Hauing called Theodosius out of Spaine, hee gaue him part of the East Empire, establishing him as a Ram-part against the Gothes and Huns, which occupied Thrace and Daceas as their heredi∣tary countreys. Theodosius handled them hardly. At his com∣ming he obtained a great victorie against the Almaines. But as he cherished too much some of those barbarous Nations, which hee caused to come with him hyring them with Gold: his owne souldiers bare him euill will; insomuch that Maximus was chosen Emperour in England, and passing into Fraunce with the Romane Army, ouercame Gratian at Paris, who fled to Lions, where he was taken and killed trayterously by Andro∣gius. See Pomp. Laet. Aurel. Vict. Bapt. Egn. lib. 1. Paul. Diac. lib. 1. and Oros. lib. 7. chap. 33. Theodosius began his true Kingdome after the death of Gratian, the yeare 386. He was of the line of Traian, who was also sent by the Emperor Nerua to help the Common-wealth, Theodosius maintained and amplified the Empire: hee put to flight the Huns and Gothes in diuers battailes, which came ve∣ry farre into the Empire: hee also graunted peace to the Persians. Valentinian the second of that name, the brother of the a∣foresaid Gratian on his fathers side, being chased from Italie by Maximus, with Iustin his mother Arrian which had wrought great troubles to Ambrose, fled into the East towards Theodo∣sius, who receiued him and gaue him part of the Empire: after hauing shewed him his fault, and that because he rebelled a∣gainst religion, and persecuted the Catholiques, he fel into this perill. Valentinian was strangled seuen yeares at Ʋienna in Fraunce by his Chamberlaines, at the suggestion of Eugenius, and of Arbogastes: So that it seemed he had strangled himselfe. Theo∣dosius tarried not long before hee ouercame Maximus vsurper of the Gaulois, and Victor his sonne, and Androgius their Coro∣nell, which caused Gratian to die. Auenging the death of Ʋa∣lentinian: he ouercame Eugenius the Tyrant, and Arbogastes
his companion in a notable victorie:Damasus. For the time, the windes, the snowe and hayle ranged themselues on his side, who had fewe people in respect of the Armie of Eugenius. Claudians Latine verses with exclamation witnesse it saying: O wel∣beloued of God, who gaue thee a winter armed for thy suc∣cessors, and made come to thy wages the Tempests and the windes, &c. The said Iustin hauing drawne into her errour Ʋalentinian her sonne, sought also to haue deceiued Ambrose, but in vaine. One day she sent a sort of souldiers to enuiron the Temple to make Ambrose come out: who spake to them and said: hee would not so easily forsake his place, and that to wolues hee would not expose the sheepfolde, nor the Temple to blasphe∣mers. And that if they determined to sley him, let them do it within the temple, and so should death please him. Theodo. li. 5. chap. 13. Reliques. The beginning of adoration of Reliques, may be reduced to this time. Ruffin writeth of Theodosius, before hee enterpri∣sed warre against Eugenius, the tyrant himselfe went with the Priests visiting the Churches, and before the Sepulchres of the Apostles made his Orisons and Praiers. The contention betwixt Hierome and Vigilantius, prest Bishop of Bercolne in Spaine, doth sufficiently shewe that su∣perstition was then come forward. By the writings of Hierome (which are stuffed rather with iniuries & outrages then sound reasons out of the holy scriptures) we may know that Ʋigilan∣tius had reason to oppose himselfe to such Idolatry, rather then veneration of the Martyrs. The words of Hierome writing to Riparius, are: Thou saist that Ʋigilantius openeth againe his stinking mouth, and spitteth his infection against the reliques of holy Martyrs, calling vs (which receiue them) Cendrier Ido∣laters, which do reuerence vnto dead mens bones. And in the booke which he perticularly writ against Vigilantius, saith: One Vigilantius is risen vp, which with an vncleane spirit against the spirit of Christ, denieth that we must honour the Sepulchres
of Martyrs, condemneth Vigils, &c then addeth: And thou sayest in thy booke, that as long as we liue we may pray one for an other: but after we be dead, that the prayers are not heard, and yet they pray for the vengeance of their bloud and can∣not be heard.Apoc. 6 2.10.11. In which thou proposest vnto me an Apogry∣pha Booke, which thou and the like readest vnder the name of Esdras, where it is written, that after death none dare pray, &c. And thou darest out of the gulfe of thy brest, vomit so filthy a mockery, as to say the soules of Martyrs then loue their owne ashes, and flie about them: for being absent they cannot heare a poore sinner, who by chance resorteth thither, &c. Briefly he alleadgeth for great meruailes whatsoeuer Vigilantius said, but refuteth it not. Hee addeth also that Ʋigilantius heretike saide, that Al∣leluia should not be sung but at Easter. That continencie of single life commaunded, is heresie, and the seede of whoor∣dome: It is also reported vnto me (saith hee) that against the authoritie of Paul (vnto whom Peter, Iohn, and Iames, gaue the right hands) who commaunds to remember the poore, thou forbiddest that any should send any comfort of money to Ierusalem for the vse of the Saints, and maintainest that they doo better which vse their owne, and which by litle and litle distribute fruites of their possessions, then they which hauing solde their possessions, giue all at once. He saith yet: Thou fearest and turnest away (viperous tongue) Monkes from their application and studie, and sayest by way of argument; If all men should shut themselues vp, or goe into solitude, who should celebrate Churches, or who should gaine and winne seculer men? &c. Wee may know by this rehearsall, that Vigilantius and other good Doctors of this time, maintained that the adoration of Saints was drawne from the Ethnike superstition of the Gods, into the Church of the Lord. The abuse came first from the too great praise of Saints. It encreased afterward by the false perswasion of the inter∣cession,
confirmed by signes and lying miracles.Theodosus The same ceremonies which were at the burial of bodies,Translation & eleuation of the bodies of Saints. were also in this age obserued in the translation and eleuation of holy bodies. The Priests of Apollo heretofore made that Apo∣state Emperor Iulian (as he sacrificed in Antioche nie the foun∣taine Daphne) beleeue that the sepulchre of Babyla Martyr nigh vnto the said place, was the cause that Apollo gaue no an∣swere. Iulian then cōmaunded the Christians which he called Gallileans to take away the said sepulchre: then all the Church came thither, young and olde, virgins and mothers, and with great ioy drew out and conducted the Coffer of the bones of Babila, singing as high as they could. Ruff. lib. 1. chap. 35. And Toch. lib. 3. cap. 18. Ambrose in his 85. Epistle to his sister, shew∣eth how this manner of taking vp and translating of the Mar∣tyrs bodies, was obserued in the west Churches. The Reliques saith he of a Saint beeing found either aduisedly or by chance, first they are shewed the people, and declared it is by some, of what Martyr those reliques are: after, hauing laid them in order they are carried into some Temple,Vigils or wat∣ches of Saints. and there vigils & watches are made all night, then the next day a Sermon is made of the life of that Martir. See what Ambrose saith, who also witnesseth (if we must giue faith vnto him) that miracles were done there. Behold how a new deuotion transporteth not onely the com∣mon people, but also the Pastors and Bishops. The doings of many Painims of this time. As for the Gentiles of this time and their superstitions, we will heere touch one word, as we passe by. Certaine it is that Idolatry drew after it all kinde of wickednesse. From the Gods they haue drawne out all that infection: of Iupiter, adul∣terers, rauishments, and stuprations of children: of Venus, the art of whoordome: of Rhea, all filthinesse: of Mars, murders: and so of the other bodies. It is then no maruell if their man∣ner of dooings bee so straunge. In Phenicia women were prostituted before Idolls. Athanasius reciteth it the women
before marriage, being deliuered of proofe to their husbands. Sozo. li. 1. chap. 8. They also accustomed to chastice adultry with an other whoordome and publike constupration. Socrat. lib. 5. chap. 18. The Indians had many wiues. Hierom. lib. 1. contra Iouinianum. The schooles of Magitians had certaine prayers for the dead; whervnto they attributed so great efficacy, that the pow∣ers of the ayre by them appeased, let soules flye so into Hea∣uen. Arnobius. Lib. 2. From hence hath Antichrist drawne the hunting of his indul∣gences to set vp his seate and inrich it. Some Grecians on the dayes they call (Pandemi) that is to say Populary, carried viands and wine to the Sepulchres of their dead. They burnt the meate, and presented the wine, cal∣ling the dead by their names. Rise vp (cried they) and eate, and drinke, and be merry. Epipha. in Ancorato. And what other thing is this then the offertorie of the Masse for the quicke and the dead? Many Nations had no marriage nor lawfull coniunction, but rather brutall and common. And what is that single life which Antichrist would bring in, but a burning fire breaking into all abhominable whoor∣domes? Obseruation of dayes.In those dayes men superstitiously obserued the dayes of the Moone, and enterprised nothing the first day thereof. Am∣brose Lib. 10. Epist. 83. Obseruation of Letters.When there was a question to know who should raigne after Valens, Ianulicus, and Libanius, Sophisters and true suppor∣ters of Sathan, writ in dust the 24. letters of the Greeke Al∣phabet, and laid vpon euery one of them a graine of wheate and barley. After they caused a Cocke to come, and after the
recitall of certaine charmes they let him goe, to know by the Letters whereon he tooke the graines, the name of the succes∣sor. The Cocke tooke the graines vpon the Letters, . The Emperour Ʋalens after hee knew this, made many to be slaine whose names began with these Letters. Zonaras reci∣teth it. They vsed violence against Christians,Three argu∣ments against false religion. with calumniati∣ons and slaunders. The first defence of their superstition was, that it had bene of long time, and that their Elders had alwaies maintained it Arnol. lib. 8. against the Gentiles; and so did Simmachus argue against Prudentius. The second, that it had alwaies bene profitable to the Ro∣mane Common-wealth, and that thereby the Empire of the world had bene conquered, and therefore it worshipped all the Gods which were adored in the world: yea the vnknowne Gods, Arnob. Lib. 8. And so argueth Maximinus in Eusebi. Lib. 9. Chap. 7. The third, was of the discommodities that came by leauing the Religion of the Idolls. Maximinus the tyrant, in his Edicts impureth all publike calamities to the chaunging of sacrifices. Euseb. Lib. 9. Chap. 7. 1. And contrary, they calumniated the Christian Religion,Slaunders a∣gainst true doctoctrine. that it was new, and that their predecessors were ignorant thereof. Sozom. Lib. 1. Chap. 18. 2. That the Authors thereof were seditious and desperate persons. Arnob. lib. 1. 3. That the Christians were but heapes of poore Idiots, and women that vsed to slie the light, and onely loued night assem∣blies. 4. That by secret and hidde markes they loued before they knew one an other, and that to couer their whoordomes, they commonly called one an other brothers and sisters. 5. That they are without Aultars, without Temples, and without Sepulchres. In the said booke, 8. The Papists at this day, which shame not to change the truth with the same slaunders, what other thing doo they else but ei∣ther borrow or renew the olde Ethnikes arguments.
The Ethnickes also say of the Christian doctrine that which our mockers and Epicures say at this day, that it is con∣trary to all reason. For to say that God seeth and makes en∣quirie not onty of out affaires, but also of our most secret cogi∣tations,Accōmodatiō and that he is present euery where: this is not onely impertinent and euill becomming God: but also it is to grieue and trouble him, and to say he is curious and without rest. The same Author. That to say, God loueth not them who willingly come vn∣to him, but his Elect onely. This say they, is to doo iniurie to God, and to accuse him of iniustice. That Christians agree not in their doctrine. This same did the Philosophers obiect in the Councell of Nice against the Fathers. That the scripture is full of contradiction, and therefore vncertaine. Porphirius and Iulian the Apostate vsed this slaun∣der. Socrat. 3. chap. 23. That all sorts of calamities came vpon them, and that God punished them because they beleeued that man is God, and af∣ter he was crucified, to say hee liueth and raigneth. Arnob. Lib. 1. Such Princes as opposed themselues against Pa∣ganisme.Many Princes and Magistrates of this time opposed them∣selues against these Ethnike impieties. And after, Constantine the great and his sonne Iouinian, caused to shut the Idoll Tem∣ples which Iulian had set open, and forbad sacrifices. Socrat. lib. 3. chap. 24. Valentinian in Europe tooke away the seruice of Idolls. Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 20. He forbad that none should learne the Magike Art by the law: Culpasimilis. Cod. de maleficis & mathematicas. Finally the Lord ordained this Emperor Theodosius as a second Iosias, whol∣ly to roote vp all the Idols Temples. Thod. li. 5. ch. 20. On the other side, the Doctors of the Church were excee∣ding carefull to refute all this false religion of the Painims and Ethnikes. Arnob. Lactantius, Theodoret, and the most part of
them which writ in that time; vnto whose bookes we send them that will know more at large. Damasus builded certaine Temples, and adorned them with gifts: he gaue fields and possessions, and bathes to the Cleargie. He augmented certaine straunge facions of seruing of God. He approued S. Hieromes translation of the Bible.S. Hieromes Translation.The hearts of the Archbishops of Rome, began to be taken with too much ambition. After this, Damasus as hee could diligently calculate times, to the end that in time to come, in the Romane seate might bee placed Bishoppes of renowme, hee drew briefly in writing the liues and statutes attributed to his pre∣decessors Bishops of Rome, yet this was not without manifest lies. As for his faith and doctrine Theodoret giueth great wit∣nesse: he had a good opinion of the Trinitie, and by his Epistle to the Bishops, assembled at a Sinode at Constantinople, exhor∣ted them to maintaine the holy doctrine of the sonne of God. But in his Epistles, although he call the Bishops vnto whom he writ, his brothers; yet he sheweth himselfe too much giuen to eleuate the dignitie of the Romane seate. For he thus be∣ginneth his aforesaid Epistle to them of Constantinople. In the reuerence deare children which you owe to the Apo∣stolike seate, you doo much for your selues, &c. Theod. Lib. 5. Chap. 9. He had many combats to maintaine the doctrine of the Councell of Nice; especially against Auxentius of Millan. Hee condemned many heretikes, and amongst others, the Apollina∣ries, at a Councell of many Bishops at Rome. Hee had firme amitie with Hierome, who in his writings gaue great witnesse of him. Virgin, Doctor of the Virgine Church, in his Preface vpon the foure Euangelists, calleth him great Priest. Athanasius in his Epistle to the Bishops of Affrike, calleth Damasus his very deare companion in the Mi∣nisterie, &c. Gregorie Nazianz▪ calleth Damasus (happie) in his Epistle to Clidonius. Damasus dyed of the age of 80. yeares, in the raigne of
Theodosius:Syricius. witnesses Hierome and Suidas, after hee had admi∣nistred his Bishopricke 18. yeares, the yeare of Christ after Naucle, 385. but after Prosper, the yeare 387. Aduertisement. From the time of Siluester the first and others after him, the Bishops or Archbishops of Rome being inriched by gifts & munificences of many, began to liue at their ease, and to receiue vnvsed apparell, as Miters and other pontificall ornaments, to make themselues to be accounted of, and to prepare the seate for the great Antichrist by their traditions and canons: yet neither Siluester nor his successors till Boniface the 9. (who was about the yeare, 1390. were Lords of Rome, much lesse did they holde the domination of the West. For wee haue seene that Liberius was sent into exile by Constantius:The successors of Siluester had not the rule of Rome. that Iulius im∣plored the aide of Constantius for Athanasius against the furie of the Arrians: and that Damasus by vertue of the Letters of Theodosius, called the Easterne Bishop vnto the Sinode of Rome. The right of choosing and crowning the Emperours.And as for the right to choose the Emperours to Crowne them, and put on their Imperiall purple and such other solem∣nities requisite, it was partly done by ordinary souldiers. And the Emperours Constantine the great, Iulian, Iouinian, Valentini∣an the first and second, were created Emperours and Cesars by the Campe of souldiers: Constantine ordained his three sonnes. Valens was ordained by his brother. Theodosius by Gratian. Ar∣cadius, and Honorius by the Father. It is not read in any appro∣ued Author of this time, that any Romane Bishop thrust him∣selfe in, to choose or crowne an Emperour. Theodo. lib. 5. chap. 6. saith, that Theodosius in a dreame sawe Meletius Bishop of Antioche, who gaue vnto him the Mantle, and the Imperiall Crowne. Syricius a Romane, the sonne of one Tiburtius, succeeded Damasus. There are attributed vnto him many ordinances. Hee put such as were Bigami, that is, such as were married twise, from the misteries of the Masse, and was the first
that admitted Monkes to receiue Ecclesiasticall orders, because of their continencie: which before were not accounted, no not amongst Clarkes. Fastings and abstinencies. The varieties and multiplications of Fastings certaine dayes, at this time engendred great disputations and contenti∣ons. Augustine in his Epistle to Casulan, writeth that some men fasted on the Wednesday, because Iesus Christ was solde that day. And on the Fryday, because hee was then on the Crosse. As for fasting on Satterdayes, there was great strife. They of Millain and of the East, maintained that none ought to fast on it, because Iesus Christ rested that day in the Sepul∣chre. And contrary, the Romanes and Affricanes and others fasted it, because Christ was cast euen to the ignominie of the Sepulchre. P. Martir. Monicha S. Augustines mother,Monicha S. Augustines mother. comming from Affrike to Millan, seeing none fast there on the Saterday, maruelled greatly. Augustine her sonne beeing then not yet baptised, came to Ambrose, and prayed him in the name of his mother to expound what were best to be done therein. Doo, answered Ambrose, as I doo. Augustine by this answere thought he should not fast vpon Saterday, because Ambrose fasted not: but hee declared his meaning more plainely in these words. When I am at Rome, I fast on the Saterday because there they fast: but when I am returned to Millan againe, I there fast not. Men attribute to Melchiades Bishop of Rome, aboue mētioned, the ordinance not to fast on the Sunday nor Thurs∣day, because Christians fastes should bee farre from the fastes of Ethnikes and heretikes. Epiphan: also bringing the reason wherefore wee should fast on the Wednesday, saith:The Papist hold that it was vpon Thursday. because Christ that day ascended into heauen. And that it is written, when the Spowse shalbe taken away, that then the Apostles shall fast, &c. and this hee affirmeth to bee a tradition of the Apostles. I leaue other Fastes of Angaria, that is to say, of torment,Fastes of Angaria. when some calamitie comes and other differences and absti∣nences
and meates which were after inuented,Arcadius Honorius. as these discour∣ses in their place shall shewe. Superstition hath peruerted the exercises of pietie: despight or negligence hath caused them to be forgottē in the Church, which are two extremities that all the faithfull must shunne. Theodosius after hee had established peace in the Church, and caused many publike Sinodes to be assembled, died at Millain, of the age of 50. yeares, and raigned 17. that is to say, 6. with Gratian, and 11. after. The same yeare his body was carried to be buried in Constantinople. See Aurel. Vict. Pomp. Laet. Paul. Diac. lib. 12. Ambrose lamented his death, and made a funerall oration, wherein amongst other things hee said: I loued this Prince who when his soule was ready to depart from his body, had more care of the state of the Church, then of the dolours of his death. This care for Religion is a singular vertue, worthy of a Chri∣stian Prince. Archadius and Honorius, the children of Theodosius, and of Placille his wife a vertuous Ladie, raigned after their mo∣ther the yeare 397. Arcadius was Emperour of the East, and Honorius of the West. Their father ordained them Tu∣tors before hee died: to Arcadius, Rufin; and to Honorius, Stillico; and Gildo was also Instituted Gouernour of Af∣frike. Honorius then ruled the Empire at Rome, his brother go∣uerning that of Constantinople. Three yeares after this, Gildo Gouernor of Affrike carried himselfe as Maister and Lord, but afterward he was ouercome by Mascezel his brother, whose children he had slaine. Singing recei∣ued into the Westerne Church.The Westerne Church about this time receiued the fa∣shion to sing. Augustine in his Confessions, the 9. booke saith, it was by the meanes of Ambrose. For in the time of the
Arrian fury, this holy person being constrained by the people to remaine in the Temple, yea euen in the night time, fearing it should haue bene deliuered to the Arrians, accustomed the people to sing Psalmes and Hymnes, to put off griefes, and passe away the time. The East Church from the beginning re∣ceiued singing, as appeares by Plinie to the Emperour Traian, who was at the time that Iohn the Euangelist liued. But Augustine in the same booke confesseth he failed there∣in, in that hee gaue more attention to the Song then to the words that in it are passed, and accused that sinne,Singing recei∣ued in assem∣bly from the time of the Apostles. for that the voyce and the Song are made for the word; but not the word for the Sōg. In that place likewise he reciteth the maner of the Church of Alexandria vnder Athanasius. See also Hierome vp∣on the Epistle to the Ephesians. Whensoeuer you assemble as S. Paul saith; if each one sing Psalmes, or Doctrine, or Reuelation, or Language, or inter∣pretation let all be done to aedification. 1. Cor. 14. f. 26. The appellation of the Masse. The communion of the Eucharist at this time to be called Missa. It is twise found in S. Augustine, namely, in his Sermon of Time, 237, wherein hauing exhorted men to pardon in∣iuries done to one another, saith: You must come to the Masse of the Catechumenes. There we pray: Pardon vs our offences, as wee pardon them which wee haue offended, &c. And in an other Sermon 91. he saith; In the historie which is read at Masses, &c. Many doubt whether these Sermons bee S. Augustines. But Peter Martir a Diuine of Zurike saith,In his Com∣mentary vpon the Iudges. the stile and sentences seeme to bee S. Augustines. I am of opini∣on saith he, that in that time of S. Augustine it beganne one∣ly to bee vsurped. For if it had beene vsuall, S. Augustine would haue oftner made mention of it: seeing hee vsed to applye his Sermons after the common manner of speech. Iohn Cassian liued in this time vnder the Emperour
Honorius. The heretikes chased him from the Church of Ie∣rusalem: hee came to Marcellis and liued there a Monastike life. Contenti som∣no qui a missa vigiliarū vs{que} ad lucem con∣ceditur, ctc.The word Masse is found in his writings, Lib. 3. Chap. 7. and 8. but in an other signification then for the holy Commu∣nion; that is, for the accomplishment and the ende of the con∣gregation of the faithfull. For speaking of the sleepe of Monkes, he saith. Being contented with the time that is permitted to them to sleepe: that is, from the Masse of the Ʋigiles vntill the light of the day, &c. vnderstanding by these words, the time wherein they ended the Vigiles. Remissa pee∣catorū, for remission of sinnes.As for the deriuation of the name, euen as the La∣tine Doctors which were before this age, vsed the word (Remissa) for remission. Tertullian Lib. 4. against Martion in the leafe 24. and Ciprian in his booke of the good of patience, so it seeemeth afterward they said Missa for Missio, or Demissio, that is, sending away, when the Catechumenes went out of the Temple. For after the holy scripture was read in the assem∣bly, and that the Sermon was done, the Deacon with a loude voyce pronounced Goe: or goe out Cathechumenes. After this,Euergumenes the Cathechumenes went out with the Euergumenes; that is to say, they which were handled with euil spirits: and thirdly such as did penance. Dionisius in his Hierarchie makes mention of these orders, and so the Latine Church called the celebration of the Eucha∣rist Messe, because it was done after the dimission or sending away of the Catechumenes and such as were not capable to bee admitted therevnto. And in this signification, Ambrose saith Missas facere,Missas facere, to let goe. for sending or letting goe. This is the opinion of Peter Martir in his Commentaries vpon the Iudges. Some haue said that the word Missa was deriued of the Hebrew word Mas, because the gifts which the faithfull offe∣red, were said to be presents and sent. And the occasion hereof came of the oblations which the Iewes offered at their feast of Pentecost.
If it were so, the Papists abused the word Masse: for they will not name it of the almes and gifts which are giuen there: but of the oblation they make of the body and bloud of Christ for the quick and dead. P. Martyr. Catechumenes,Catechume∣nes which were not yet baptised. Auditors Competitors. signified such as were instructed in the faith and were not yet baptized. The word is deriued from the Greeke word which signifieth to teach, especially by liuely voyce. Tertullian calleth them sometimes Hearers or Auditors. Augustine calleth them Competitors. For before they were admitted to be baptised at Easter, they gaue vp their names 40. dayes before. During which time, the Pastors not onely got information of their faith and doctrine, but also of theyr life. P. Martir. The Papistes, Apes of antiquitie, had it in custome to send their children to schoole in Lent. Rufin before named, French by Nation, tempted with pride, sent presents and siluer to Alarike King of Gothes, and stirred him to raise vp warre against Archadius, perswading him that that young Prince affrighted would leaue him the Em∣pire. His practise was dicouered, and Stilico pursued him. The souldiers cut off his head and his right hand, and after carried them into Constantinople for a shewe. See Pomp. Laet. Deuastation of the fourth Monarchie. The yeare of the Lord 405. the Gothes entred into Italie with a great and fearfull company. But because there is often mention of them, we will briefly touch the history of their ori∣ginall. The appellation of Gothes doth not only comprehend one people, but many; that is to say Gothes, Ʋandales, Rugians, Hunnes, &c: but the Gothes properly were they which from the Ile of Gothland occupied a great part of Lifsland. Procopius an Historiographer saith they were Cymmerians and Greekes. Be∣ing come into Thrace and Hungarie, the Romane Emperours sought to driue them backe but could not. The first & greatest
battaile of the Romanes against them, was vnder the Empe∣rour Decius, wherein he was slain. But after the Ʋandales and Huns comming from Scithia, did driue away the Gothes, and pla∣ced their seates in Hungaria. The Gothes then entered into Italie by the disloyaltie of Rufin (which as it is said fell vpon his owne head by the iust iudgement of God.) Stillico a Ʋandall by Nation, hoping to lift vp Euchere his sonne to bee an Emperour, raised vp the Sueuians, Vandales, and Alenems, and other people, to the number of 200000. conducted by theyr King Redegastus or Radagastus,Radagastus. who afterward was discomfited in the straite of Appenin. After Radagastus, a new Armie of Gothes came into Italie, hauing for their Captaine Alricus, or Alaricus, who was solli∣cited by the Emperour Honorius to leaue the Countrey of Italie, and to discend into Fraunce, which then was so occupied with French Burgonians and other Nations, that Honorius dis∣paired to hold it. But as Alaricus prepared his departure, Stil∣lico thought to haue surprised him on the sudden beeing vp∣on Easter day, there being a truce betwixt them not yet ex∣pired. Alaricus the next morning came against Stillico, and to be reuenged besieged the Towne of Rome, Honorius being at Ra∣uenna. The treason of Stillico being disclosed, hee caused him to bee beheaded; so receiued hee the reward of his infidelitie. Then was there found no Captaine for the warre to leuie the siege before Rome, wherefore the Towne was taken by Alaricus after it had endured long time the siege.Rome taken by Alaricus. This was about the fifteenth yeare of the Empire of Honorius, and of the Lords Natiuitie, 412. and from the foundation of Rome, 1164. Alaricus neither burnt nor wasted Rome, but gaue commaun∣dement that they should be spared which fled vnto the Tem∣ples of the Christians. He died soone after. Adolphus succee∣ded him and came to Rome, but by the meanes of Placidia the sister of Honorius, he spared Rome, and tooke his way towards Gaul and Spaine, and so the Gothes left Italie and occupied
Spaine, (which Alaricus before had inuaded) and got the do∣mination thererof.The Kings of Spaine discē∣ded of the Gothes. In so much that the kings of Spaine that came after, discended of them. Diminution, or the Romane Empire. From henceforward the fourth Monarchie receiued such calamities, that in place to rule, and haue straunge people in subiection, it selfe was made a seruant vnto barbarous Nati∣ons. The Towne of Rome the seate of the said Monarchie, in lesse then 139. yeares, was foure times taken by the Gothes, Ʋandales, and other barbarous people. The first is that alrea∣die recited by Alaricus. The 2. by Gensericas the Vandall vn∣der Martinian, the yeare 456. The 3. by Totila King of the Gothes, which was the most grieuous oppression that euer Rome endured. For it was taken and burnt the yeare 21. of Iu∣stinian, and from the foundation of Rome 1300. and of Christ, 548. The 4. it was sacked three yeares after the other, namely, the yeare of Christ 551. as shall be seene in this Historie. The Pope Siricius added the Anthems to the Psalmes.Antiphonae Anhemes Orders. He made a Lawe that orders (that is to say, the ceremonies and ob∣seruations which they vse in the consecration of their Church-people) should be celebrated and giuen by certaine spaces of time betwixt one an other. Ambrose Bishop of Millaine was his familiar, and writ vn∣to him some Epistles which are amongst his workes. One in the number 49. and the other in the number 54. wherein hee calles him his Father. He died about the yeare 399. hauing occupied that seate 15. yeares, after Socrat. lib. 7. chap. 9. and Sozom. lib. 8. chap. 25. Anastasius the first of that name borne at Rome, succeeded  him, and gouerned about three yeares. Hee ordained that euery one should heare the Gospell standing and not sit∣ting. Hee cast out of the Ministerie such as wanted or were maimed in any of theyr members, or subiect to any dis∣ease. Hee ordained that none beyond the Seas should bee
admitted to any Ecclesiasticall estate, without hauing a Testi∣moniall sealed with fiue Bishops. This was because of the Ma∣nechies which came from Affrike, to corrupt Churches. Iohn Chry∣sostome.Chrysostome borne at Antioch, disciple of Libanius the So∣phister, and an Auditor of Andragatius a Philosopher, forsooke the estate of an Aduocate, and followed Euagrius, with two o∣ther his companiōs, Theodorus and Maximus, which after were Bishops, after they had well profited in holy scriptures in the Monasteries.Monasteries. For then Monasteries were publike Schooles, and Abbots, or Priors, which gouerned them, did publikely teach the holy scriptures. Innocent, the first of that name borne at Albe, preferred the seate at Rome before all others, and ordained that it should not be subiect to any other. He commaunded the faithfull to fast on the Saterday, to the ende that that day they might with Mary Magdalen mourne for Iesus Christ being in his graue. He ordained that the Pax should be giuen at Masse: and that a Temple which once had beene consecrated, should be so no more. Hee made certaine lawes concerning the Iewes, Pai∣nims, and Monkes, and made the Sacrament of Vnction of such as were sicke. Chrysostome was often sicke of a disease of the stomacke: therfore he abstained from eating in company. He was hardie and liberall in reprehension, and aboue all in his publike Ser∣mons, and therefore was he hated of the Cleargie. He resisted Gaiuas an Arrian, who begged of the Emperour a Temple in Constantinople for his people. See the Tripart. Hist. Chap. 6. Lib. 10. Constantinople was diuinely aided against Gaiuas, who sending souldiers in the night to burne the Emperours Pallace, a great multitude of armed men were seene come against them three nights; which made them desist and leaue off their enterprise. Chrysostome was sent in ambassage towards the said Gaiuas, (who had wasted all the countrey of Thrace) who met the said Chrysostome, and commaunded his owne children to kisse his knees, and he himselfe kissed his hand. Certaine Monkes Egipt, Antropomorphites maintained
that God had a body whereabouts came many contentions amongst the Bishops: Insomuch that the Arrians and Catho∣liques in the night slew one an other. There was an earthquake in Constantinople. The siluer Image of Eudoxia was placed nigh to the Tem∣ple of S. Saphie, and playes celebrated in her honour. Chryso∣stome crieth out against it, and in a Sermon vnder the name of Herodias, taxeth Eudoxia: whereof beeing angry, she subor∣ned people to sley Chrysostome: but the people guarded him both day and night: he was afterward exiled into Pontus. The Church of Constantinople so increased by the Chryso∣stonites, that many of them were put to diuers torments. Af∣ter his exile, there happened at Constantinople in September a great haile, and foure dayes after died Eudoxia. See the foreal∣leadged booke. Chap. 15.16. &. 20. The Pernitious errour of Pelagius. In the time of Innocent Pope of Rome, there was in the Coun∣trey of England one called Pelagius,Pelagius the heretike. who began to teach that we are not iustified by Gods mercie for Iesus Christes sake without Merite, but that through our owne workes and natu∣rall vertues, we acquire true and perfect righteousnesse before God. Against this Pelagius, many good Doctors of this time writ: but aboue all, Augustine hath shewed, that by faith onely we are Iustified, because by it wee embrace him that iustifieth vs: that is to say, Christ our Lord, with whom it vniteth and ioyneth vs. In such sort, that we are made partakers of him and all the goods he hath; and that frō thence good workes should come; that is from Iesus who is within vs, by the force and free efficacie of whom we begin, to will that which is good,Iustification of faith. and to employ our selues therein. Zozimus a Grecian by Nation: hee ordained that on the  Saterday before Easter waxe should in euery Parish bee bles∣sed. That Deacons shoule hide their windowes with a cloath. And that Clarkes should not publikely drinke. He ruled about two yeares. The Pelagian heresie was condemned of the Bishops at the Councells of Ephesus, Carthage, and Mitiuitaine.
Arcadius Henorius.Before Pelagius, England knewe not what superstitious Monkery meant, neither yet learned to preferre by vaine and friuolous allegories, the righteousnes of workes before the me∣rit of Iesus Christ. But this Pelagius begun to broach this pesti∣lent heresie vnder Maximus King of Englande, the yeare of Christ. 390. The Doctors which were before this Pelagius, vsed in their writings this word Merite, in the signification to obtaine or at∣taine. Peter Martyr. The beginning of the Kings of France. THe French-men are said to be issued of the Troians, and as Histories say, came after the destruction of Troy, with the Duke Francion,Francion. to the pooles of Meotides, which at this day is called the Golfe de la Tana, aboue and something farre frō Con∣stantinople, as men draw towards the North: neare there they builded a Towne which they inhabited vntil the time of Valen∣tinian the Emperour, sonne of Valentinian, and the brother of Gratian also Emperours. They were honoured by the said Emperour, and made free of paying tribute for 10. yeares, in consideratiō that they redu∣ced the Almanes vnder the obedience of the Romanes. But af∣terward when the tribute came again to be laid vpon them, and they vnwilling to subiect themselues, they forsooke the Coun∣try, and came with their Duke Marcomir into Franconia, which is betwixt Saxe and Almaine. Pharamond the sonne of Marcomir, was chosen for their King, and began to raigne ouer them the yeare of the worlde 4383. and of Iesus Christ 420. vnder whom first they vsed Lawes, and appointed foure Nobles which iudged of causes and differences betwixt men. Then was the Salike Lawe made which stood vpon many articles, amongst which there was one which tooke frō daughters the right to succeed in the Crowne and Realme of Fraunce. Hee raigned 11. yeares. Paul. Emil. the first booke.
Boniface the first of that name a Romane, ruled at Rome 4. yeares. His Father was a Priest called Iucundus. The fourth schisme was by a Priest called Enlalius,The fourth schisme. who was also ordeined: whereof came great dissention and schisme which endured 7. moneths, but finally Boniface was approued. The sixt Councell of Carthage after some, & the seuenth. S. Hierome died of the age of 91. yeares. The Affricane Councell was now, which is a confirmation  and recapitulation of the Councels of Carthage. The titles of the Canons are in the number 105. Boniface renewed certaine decrees attributed to his pre∣decessors. Amongst others, that none should be ordeined a Priest before the age of 30. yeares, &c. Also that no woman or Nunne might touch or wash the Priests ornaments which are holy. The Hunnes a cruell and barbarous people which came out of Scithia, did great hurt all ouer, and at their comming into Italie many fled towards the Adriatike sea, and tooke place in those litle Iles which were in great number, and liued as they could of fishing. After they beganne to make certaine buildings in these Iles, and principally in that which is called Miroalto,The begin∣ning of Ve∣nice. it being the chiefest of them. There was at this time many Churches in Italie. Sozom. reciteth them, lib. 4. cha. 24. where hee makes mention of the faithful which retired into the places where is now builded the Towne of Venice, in the Adriatike Sea. There is also heereof made mention in the Epistle of the Romane Sinode which was held vnder Constantine. Theodor. Liber 2. Chapter twentie and two. The Emperour Honorius being at Millan, and vnderstan∣ding the dissention for the electiō of the Romane Bishops, de∣posed them both, and writ to Boniface that whē two were elec∣ted he would ordain that neither should be allowed, notwith∣standing for this time he allowed the election of Boniface.
Boniface by his Legate Faustin Bishop, a fierce and proud man, and Philip and Esellus Priests, proposed to the sixt Coun∣cell of Carthage, that it might be graunted that appellations of Bishops might be sent to Rome: and that no Councell should be allowed vnlesse he send thither his Legate to doo it; and al∣ledged for his speech the decree of Nice. The Bishops caused the bookes to be searched, and the Registers of the Councell if it were so. Also they caused to come from Constantinople a Co∣pie of the said Councell: but finding it not to be so as the said Boniface had alledged by his Legate, his request was reiected. See the Epistle of the said Councell of Affricke to Boniface, and to Celestine in the first volume of the Councells. Note here by what meanes the Popes sought to obtaine their primacie. The introitus of the Masse.Celestine first of that name a Romane, or of Campaine after some. He ordeined that the Introitus of the Masse should be of some Psalme Dauid, yea and the Graduall which they call the Offertorie, and added vnto the thē Praiers with the song. Naucler. Also that the Priest should say before the Introitum the 43. Psalme. Indica me Deus. Supl. Chron. Item that they should sing three Sanctus. Abb. Vsp. This said yeare 426. the Emperour Honorius died. The third generall Councell at Ephesus against Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, of 200. Bishops: It was there conclu∣ded that Iesus Christ is one alone person in two natures, and that the Virgine Marie by good right is called the mother of God. Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria assisted there. Theodosius the younger, alone obteined the Empire, and raigned 26. yeares. Celestine gaue commaundement to all Ecclesiasticall per∣sons to know and obserue the Canons. He sent Palladius a Greeke and Patricius, into Scotland and Ireland preach the faith. He sent into England Saint Germaine Bishop of Anxerce,
against the Pelagian heresie.Valentiniā He ordeined that none should attempt any thing in an o∣thers parish. Item that no Bishop should be ordeined against the wil of the people, but that the consent of the Cleargie and of the peo∣ple was requisite. The Church in that time was greatly troubled, and espe∣cially in Affrike: the Ecclesiasticall people were cast into exile, and martyred by Gensericus of the Vandales. Palladius composed the life of S. Iohn Chrisostome. S. Augustine Bishop of Hipone, of the age of seuentie sixe yeares dyed, after he had gouerned the said Church fortie sixe yeares, the third moneth after his Towne was besieged by the Vandales, euen when he writ against Iulian a Pelagian Bishop. Possidonius writ his life. Sedulius, Possidonius, Sozomenus, Socrates, and Theodori∣retus, were Authors of the Tripartite Historie, which after∣ward was brought into one by Cassiodorus. Ʋalentinian was made Emperour with Theodosius, and they  raigned together, the one in the East & the other in the West. Clodio a Painim, King of France, raigned 18 yeares. Hee recouered from the Romaines Torney and Cambray, where he was buried. Superstition was now farre entred into the houses of great men: In so much as Eudoxia the wife of Theodosius the yonger went vnto Ierusalem, and frō thence brought the chains where∣with S. Peter was bound by Herode, which were ioyned with them of Nero, wherevpon afterward was instituted the feast of S. Peter in bonds. Item the Relikes of S. Steuen. S. Hierome in his Epistle to Eustochius counteth them o∣therwise.Abb. trip. Naucler. Sixtus the third of that name a Romaine, gouerned the  state of Rome, 8. yeares. Hee was accused by a Priest of great credit called Bassus,
to haue committed Incest, and to haue violated a religious wo∣man named Chrysogonus, and so did Bassus vnderstand of a ser∣uant of the said Sixtus called Peter. But in a full Sinode of 55. Bishops, by Valentinian Augustus, libertie was left to Sixtus to iudge himselfe. For it is not lawfull saith he to iudge nor giue sentence against the hie and great Bishop. He then tooke his oath that he was innocent of the matter, and so was absolued by the Sinode, and Bassus banished, and all his goods confiscate and giuen to the Church. The beginning that the Pope should not be iudged. Sixtus then instituted the feast of S. Peter in bondes, the first day of August, in place of an other Feast which was be∣fore made, for the victorie of Augustus Caesar which he obtai∣ned against Marcus Antonius and Cleopatra. Suspition or Idolatrie chaunged but not abolished. The Vandales which from the outward parts of Almaine vnder Gratian came into France, and after into Spaine, finally, vnder the conduction of Genserich, came into Mauritania, and after sell vpon Carthage, and there occupied Affricke more then 77. yeares. Victor Bishop of a Towne in Numidia which is in Affricke, called in Latine Cattena, made a booke against the Arrians, and presented it to Genseric King of the aforesaid Vandales an Ar∣rian. Polychronius Bishop of Ierusalem is chased away. Hee in the time of a famine sold all his goods and gaue it to the poore. For which chatitie and mercy he was after restored againe. Sixtus ordeined that none should bee promoted in the Cleargie into anothers Diocesse or Parish. He also before his death gaue all his goods to the poore. Supp. Chro.Hillarie Bishop of Arles, left all his goods and went into an hermitage, where he composed the life of Saint Honorius. Abb. Tritem.
He had done better if hee had preached constantly, and opposed himselfe against the peoples vices. Arcadius, Probus, Paschasius, and Eutichius, were in great estimation and honour with Gensericus, but seeing he could not draw them vnto Arrianisme, after many euils, finally he mar∣tyred them with others: yea hee cast certaine Bishoppes out of their places, and bookes of Religion and the Christian faith were burnt. The Councell of Ephesus the second, was assembled by  Theodosius, wherein Eutiches the heretike was restored, and Fla∣uianus a true Catholike condemned, by a false accusation: For there was Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria President, who was of the sect of the said Eutiches. This Councell was corrected by the Councell following which was assembled vnder Leo the Pope, first of that name, as fol∣loweth. The Towne of Rhemes was taken by Attila, and put to fire and sword. Nicasius Bishop of the saide place a very auncient man was slaine, and his sister Eutropia put to death.Blund. lib. 2. Leo a Tuscan first of that name,Naucler. gouerned the Romaine  Church 21. yeares. He ordained, that whosoeuer vnreuerently should handle the Images of Saints, should be seperated and depriued of the communion of the faithfull. He added to the Masse, Orate pro me fratres, &c. Also the Deo gratias is attributed vnto him. He added to the Canon, Sanctum sacrificium, immaculatam hostiam. Item, hanc igitur oblationem, &c. Attila sacked all Italie. At the sacking of Aquilia, one of the honourablest wo∣men called Digna, cast her selfe from an high Tower into the water, for feare to be rauished by the Barbarians. For the fai∣rest women were reserued from death, that they might be for∣ced of those barbarous people. Naucler.
Merouee the third King of France raigned ten yeares. He also was a Painim: and was not the sonne of Clodio, but the mai∣ster of his horse-men. Yet to him the king Clodio recommen∣ded the gouernment of his kingdome, of his wife, & of his three children, trusting vnto his loyaltie, which hee had sworne and promised vnto him in the presence of his Princes. But soone after the death of the said Clodio, Merouee chased away his said three children, and caused himselfe to be chosen King. When the three children came to age, they made warre vpon him, and tooke from him all the Countrey of Austria, Lorraine, Bra∣bant, Namure, and Hainault. Sureties.Leo ordeined that there should be but one God-father or God mother at Baptisme, and at confirmation. Some attribute vnto him the ordinance that Alleluya and Gloria in excelsis Deo should not be sung from Septuagesima vn∣till Easter. Inuention of Letanies.Letanies were first in Constantinople, and after in the West by Lupus Bishop of Troy receiued and approued. Item by Ma∣merus Bishop of Vienna, for an Earthquake that happened and further to appease it; was sung the Sanctus Deus, Sanctus For∣tis, Sanctus immortalis miserere nobis. From hence-forward thou shalt see infinit superstitions, traditi∣ons, and heapes of Councells and Relikes. He ordeined fasting the three Rogation dayes. The sea of histories.Attila Captaine of the Hunnes tooke Rome: before whom Leo came at the first and obtained of him to touch nothing at Rome. And Attila being asked wherefore so easily he agreed therevnto, answered that hee sawe the Angell of God with a  sword drawne, who threatned him, if hee graunted not his re∣quest. Paul. Diaconus. The general Councel of Calcedon of 630. Bishops against Eutiches Abbot of Constantinople, vnder Martian. In this Councell 16. Chap. this decree is set downe. If any Virgin vowe and dedicate her selfe to God, and likewise a Monke, it shall bee no more lawfull for them to marry:
but if they be found to marry,Valentiniā then to remaine excommunica∣ted, yet we ordaine that the Bishop of the place, if he thinke good, may shew the same humanitie and fauour. The Narration or Fable of the 17. sleepers, named Mal∣chus, Maximianus, Martinianus, Dionisius, Ioannes, Serapion, and Constantinus, raised again as it were 200. yeares after their death, and preaching the resurrection of the bodie against certaine heretikes affirming the contrary, is forged about this time. Long & great persecution was against the Christians in the Country of Persia: In so much that Theodosius made peace with them that they would cease the persecution. Abb. Vsp. The Tripartite Historie, lib. 9. chap. 43. and others, make mention that S. Iohn Baptist reuealed his head to two Monkes which were hid nigh an house: and after that, the said head was transported into Edissa, a Citie in Phinitia, where he was honou∣red. Monkes beare witnesse in their owne cause. But how came this head from thence vnto Amiens in Picardie where hee is adored? See Iohn Caluin in his booke of Relikes. Leo made many Epistles, euen 66. in number. Saint Germaine Bishop of Anxerre, Seuerus Bishop of Tre∣ners, Lupus Bishop of Troy▪ were againe sent into England a∣gainst the Pelagian heresie. Many Councels were held at this time, after that of Chal∣cedone. The first at Auranges, a Towne in the Prouince of Nar∣bone. The second at Valens. The third Councell of Carpentras. The fourth at Arles. The fift at Venice. The sixt at Tours. In the Councell of Tours the censure Ecclesiastical against Priests marriages was moderated,1. Volume of Councels. which was to be excommu∣nicated and depriued of the Communion, which was permit∣ted them only, vpon condition they should not come to higher degree or dignitie, and that they should abstaine from cele∣brating and administring to the people. Archephali heretikes in this time, which cast off the Coun∣cell of Chalcedone.
Martin.Eucherius Bishop of Lions, in this time sent a booke contei∣ning the praise of Hermits liues, to S. Hilarie Bishop of Arles, who went into an Hermitage as is said. Item an other booke De contemptu mundi. In this time the wisest gaue themselues to write the praises of virginitie, and of a contemplatiue and monastike life. The bookes of the Manicheans were burnt in Rome. Theodosius dyed of the pestilence at Constantinople. Abb. trip. Naucler.Earthquakes, Comets, and other tokens were seene in hea∣uen. Anian Bishop of Orleans, Lupus Bishop of Troy, Nicasius Bi∣shop of Rhemes, were martyred. Valentinian the Emperour, slaine at Rome of his people, by the fraud of Argobastus. Martian chosen Emperour, raigned 7. yeares, he made alli∣ance with the Ʋandales. It was he which was wont to say that a Prince ought not to take armes as long as it is lawfull to liue in peace. Rome was taken againe by Gensericke, towardes whom also went Leo, and entreated of him that the Towne might not be put to fire and sword. Some say hee intreated nothing at this time. The sea of Histories.Orleans was besieged by Attila about this time, after he had wasted Almaine and a great part of France: but before Orleans his people were discomfited by Merouee King of France, and there was slaine 180000. men. That which is said of Geneuiesue virgin at Paris, is reported of this time. This is now the great Diana of the Parisians. Martian the Emperour was slaine at Constanstinople, by the conspiracie of his owne men. Childeric.Childeric the fourth King of France, a Panim, raigned 26.  yeares, a man subiect to leachery, which to maintaine, hee laide great taxes vpon the people, wherevppon hee was re∣iected from the kingdome. A Gouernor of Soisson, and Meion of called Giles a Romane,Annualls of France. succeeded in his place, and raigned eight yeares: but after Childeric was restored.
After Childeric was called againe,Leo, the first. hee gouernerned wisely vertuoufly, and valiantly: hee put to flight his enemy Giles, and sacked the Townes of Treuers and Coloigne, and hee rety∣red to Treuers. After also he conquered Orleans, and all the Countrey along the Riuer of Loire vntill Angiers, and then brought all the Countrey of Angiou vnder his subiection. He tooke also the Cittie of Trect, and all the Countrey along the Riuer of Rhene, and greatly encreased the Kingdome of France. He vsed great ingratitude towardes Basin King of Lor∣raine called Thoringe, who had kindly entertained and main∣tained him, all the time hee was depriued of his kingdome. For hee receiued the wife of the saide Basin, and tooke her for his owne wife. Leo Emperour, first of that name a Grecian, left for his successor Leo, who was of Ariadne his daughter and of Zenon. He sent Basalike a warriour against Gensericke King of the Van∣dales. Constantinople and a great part of Italie, was as it were in perpetuall trouble vnder this Emperour, who raigned about 17. yeares. Hilarie borne at Sardes, Bishop of Rome, ruled 7. yeares. His time was full of troubles. These ordinances are attributed vnto him: That no Romane Bishop should chuse him a succes∣sour. And this constitution stretched to all Ecclesiasticall dig∣nitie. Naucler. and Suppl. Chronic. That a Clarke should receiue no Inuesture of a Laie person. That none should be admitted vnto orders if he were not learned, and hauing all his members. In a Sinode at Rome of fiftie Bishoppes, it was ordained that the Decrees of the Apostolike seate should be receiued and published vniuersally. There also it was ordained that the Bishop might correct that which his predecessor had euil ordeined. This Pope confirmed the domination and principalitie of the Apostolike seate.Suppl. Chro. He made three Epistles. He depriued a Bishop of his dignitie called Ireneus, be∣cause
by ambition he had left his Church to goe into an other,Leo. which was by Canons forbidden. Remy Bishop of Rhemes, and Patricius his brother, was Bi∣shop of Soissons. Simplicius Tiburtin succeeded Hilarie, and gouerned the Romane Church 15. yeares, and more after some. He declared (as his predecessor) that the Romane Church was the chiefe and principall. He builded many Temples and dedicated them. Hee instituted that in the Church of Peter and Paul there should be seuen Priestes to heare the penitents and to Baptise them. In the first volume of Councells. Leo the younger was left a childe, successor of the Empire, by his Grand-father on the mothers side, and hauing gouerned a yeare, he was content that his Father Zeno should raigne for him. In so much that with his owne hands he placed the Dia∣deme vpon his Fathers head. That which is said of king Arthur is of this time. Zenon.Zenon Isaurike Emperour, raigned 16. or 17. yeares. He was  an Arrian, a cruell man. He was buried aliue being drunke, by his wife Arriadne. The English men came farre into France. The Arrians exercised great cruelties. Honorius an Arrian king of Vandals, persecuted greatly the Christians in Affrike, & more then 4976. were exiled in diuers places, without sparing sexe or age, & afterward at diuers times and with diuers punishments were put to death. Some had their hands cut off, some their tongues. Certain times after, vnder the shadow of a Councell, hee made assemble all Bishops, Doctors, and other Catholikes, to the number of 324. after Paulus Dia∣conus, but after others 444. he sent into exile, & caused the Tē∣ples to be shut vp against Catholikes, & gaue them to the Ar∣rians. One Bishop called Laetus was burnt, to the end to feare others. The Bishop of Carthage Eugenius, with more thē 500. of the Cleargy were banished. But 2. yeres after Honorius died mi∣serably of vermine. And Gonthamundus succeeded him. He re∣uoked Eugenius from exile. At the request also of whom, all the others were called home and the Churches opened.
An horrible famine in Affrike. Naucler.Zenon. It is a thing worthy of remembrance, the great constancie of a woman called Denise,Denise. and the exhortation she made to her sonne called Maioricus. Remember said she my sonne, that we were baptised in the name of the Trinitie: wherefore let vs not loose the garments of our saluation. Also an other called Ʋictoria,Victoria. who neither by the solicitation of her husband, nor the teares of her children could be perswaded, &c. Naucler. Epiphanius Bishop of Pauie, a very graue man, brought in∣to peace and concord the people of Liguria, and brought from Burgonie many Captiues, as well by his Siluer as his holie life, whereby he entreated the redemption of 6000. Captiues. Paul. Diaconus and Naucler. after him. Seuerin an Abbot in Noric, was now of great renowne. Odoacer King of the Gothes, as he passed by Noric into Italie, went vnto him for his blessing. Odoacer occupied Italie, and was made King thereof, and the Gothes raigned there by the space of 70. yeares. The West Empire takes here an end after Augustulus had deposed himselfe, the yeare of Christ. 472. Sidonius Bishop of Auuerne a famous Poet in this time. Clouis the fift King of France, and the first Christian King, raigned 30 yeares. That is, fifteene a Painim, and fifteene a Christian: Hee reuenged himselfe of them which cast out his Father Childerike out of his kingdome. Going to Soisons hee tooke it by force, and draue away Siagre the sonne of Giles the Romaine, who occupied the kingdome against Childeric, as hath bene said: And at his returne tooke Melum, and chased away the Romanes. He amplified the kingdome of France, hauing subiected to it all the Cities and Townes which the Romanes held be∣twixt the Riuers Rhene and Seine, also all such as were betwixt Seine and Loire. The histories of France say, that in a certaine battel against the Almaines, being at a strait, he remembred the admonitions which Clotilde his wife had often giuen him, to imbrace the Christian faith and religion: In such sort, that being pressed he
lifted vp his eies to heauen and said; Lord God deliuer me from this perill wherein I am thus enuironed with mine enemies: and I will beleeue in thy name, I & all my people. It came to passe not only that he was deliuered from perill, but also that he had victorie vpon his enemies; wherefore he was baptized by Re∣my Bishop of Rhemes, his two sisters and more then 3000. of the noblest of his people besides women and children. The inuention and fable of the holy Ampoule (as they call it) wherwith the kings of France are annointed, is reported of this time. Churches began to be∣come rich.Clouis for recompence, gaue to the Church of Rhemes many great gifts, lands, signories and rents. S. Remy afterward had great authoritie, and was principall Councellour of king Clouis. Some say he builded the Church of Laon, and that hauing e∣rected it a Bishops place, gaue vnto it the land of Laon. Patricius the brother of S. Remy, Earle of Soissons, was after Bishop of Soissons, and also gaue to the said Church the Earle∣dome, which the Bishop there holds at this day. For you must vnderstand that S. Remy and his brother were children of the Duke of Laon and of Soissons, of a noble and auncient race. Visigots.The Annales of France make mention that Alaric King of Visigots, then occupied a great part of Gaul, namely all the coun∣try along the Riuer of Loire, from Orleans euen to mount Pire∣nes, which do seperate France and Spaine. Item the countries of Berry, Auuerne, Limosin, Quercy, Perignex, Angolmois, Agenois, Languedoc, Prouence, and other nigh places; against which Clo∣uis willing to make warre as he passed nie Tours, he sent to make his offerings to S. Martin, to haue his succours against the said Visegoths, and that after the victory he himselfe came to Tours, and offered great gifts to the Temple of S. Martin. If this be so for a first Christian king, he was partly instructed in the Christian faith, and felt yet his Paganisme, because in the place of his old Gods, he reclaimed & called now vpon Saints. The fault may be imputed to the Bishops & Pastors, which then were more superstitious then religious, and more foolishly deuout, then well and diuinely instructed in the word of God.
As S. Brice, Patrice, Fourcy, Medard, Gildard, Vaast, Remy, Se∣verin, Germanie, Loupe, Nicaisius, Aguien, and other Saints of like branne were canonized after their deaths. Vnder Zenon there happened such a fire in Constantinople that the greatest part of the Towne was brought into ashes, and more then sixe score thousand volumes were lost and con∣sumed. Clouis had in marriage Clotilde, the daughter of Chilperic, King of Burgonie, who was slaine by his owne brother called Gondobaldus, and his wife mother of the said Clotilde was drow∣ned. Felix the third of that name borne at Rome, gouerned the  Church of Rome 8. or 9. yeares, his Father was a Priest called Felix. The consecrations of Temples and their dedications,Dedication. year∣ly are attributed vnto him. Germain Bishop of Capua in this time. Vaast, Bishop of Arras, Vedastus in Latin. Fulgence Bishop of Rupe in Affrike. Auitus Bishop Ʋienne. Solemus Bishop of Chartres, preached Christ, and Fourcy that came new from Ireland. The Councell of Orleans the third at this time after Iohn le Maire. In the first Melanius was President.In the first vo∣lume of Coun¦cells. In the saide Councell which was vnder Clouis, it was agreed that the goods of the Cleargie should be imployed for the mainteining of Priests, for the reliefe of the poore, for the deliuerance of prisoners, and for the repairing of Chur∣ches. In the Councell of Tarrascon in Spaine, Church-men were enioyned not to buye good cheape, with intent to sell the same thing dearer, for then they should be deposed. Meane cares occupied the assemblies of Bishoppes. Anastatius the Emperour called Dicorus,Anastatius. for the chaunge of colours which appeared in his eye-browes succeeded Zeno,
and raigned 27. yeares:Anastatius he commaunded straightly to worship a quaternitie,Quaternitie. that is to say foure persons in the Diuinitie: which pernitious heresie was by him maintained. Gelatius of Affricke gouerned the Romaine Church fiue yeares: his Father was a Bishop named Ʋalericus. Naucler. The distinction of Autentike and Apocrypha bookes of the scripture are attributed vnto him. Hee declared many bookes Apocryphaes, as the booke called the Assumption of the Virgine Mary. Item the Canons of the Apostles, & such like. In the 1 volume of the Councels. The Manicheans againe are condemned and exiled, and their bookes burnt. He shewed how Anastatius the Emperor might be excom∣municated. Naucler.Hee is numbred amongst them which chiefly ordained the Canon, Te igitur clementissime, &c. Some attribute to him the ordinance of Bigamies, that is, of such as haue bin twise married, that they should not be promo∣ted to orders, vnles it were by ordinance of the Apostolike sea. That orders should be made foure times a yeare, and on the Saterday only. He made Hymnes, Collects, Responds, Graduels, Prefa∣ces of the Masse, and brought all into order. He added to the Masse Vere dignum & iustum est. The Canons then was made at diuers times, & in diuers times; It is then no maruell if it be euil sowed, and patched with rags and tatters, without any certaine Authour. He made 5. bookes against Nestorius & Eutiches. Item two a∣gainst the Arrians, and a Treatise of excommunicatiō. He restored Messenus Bishop, after the knowledge of his pe∣nance. He excommunicated the Emperour Anastatius because hee fauoured Acarius and other heretikes. He excōmunicated the king of Vandals, & all his people which thē in Affrike afflicted the true faithfull in fauour of the Arrias. He commanded Priests that they should not communicate but in both kindes, and not vnder one alone. The Cleargie greatly loued, waxed rich in this time and in∣creased.
Gelatius in full Councell at Rome,Gelasius.Bread and wine of the Supper. declared that in the Eucharist, neither the substance of the bread and wine, nor their natures are chaunged, but that in them as in an Image, the flesh and bloud of the Lord are represented: and that in the Sacra∣ment both are exhibited to the faithfull. Hee also declared them to be excommunicated which gaue not nor tooke the Sacrament of the Eucharist whole. In the first volume of the Councels. Gennaduis at this time was Bishop of Marceil. Anastatius a Romane, second of that name Pope, gouerned the Church of Rome two yeares. This is the second Pope noted of heresie, whose beginning was reasonably good, and excommunicated the Emperor Ana∣statitius, an Eutechian heretike: but afterward he himselfe did all he could to reuoke Acetius from exile, and stucke vnto him. He prooued also very fauourable vnto the Nestorians, and commu∣nicated with Photin, a Deacon of Thessalonica; wherfore many Clarks, Priests, and Bishops, refused to communicate with him. See the Chap. Anastatius. distinct. 9. In the moneth of September he created 12. Priests and 16. Bishops. Hee died very miserably (as it is saide) beeing vpon the priuie, where he voyded all his bowels, as did Arrius. Naucler. Acatius Bishop of Constantinople an heretike, was at this time murthered. Sigeb. Simmachus borne in the Ile of Sardiue, ruled in Rome 16. yeares. The first schisme in the Romane Church. The election of Popes consecrated with bloud. When Simmachus was chosen, an other likewise called Lawrence was ordained: Simmachus in the Temple of S. Iohn de Latran, and Lawrence in the Church of S. Mary the greater: for which election, there was great diuision in the Church: In so much, as the people and the Romane Senate were diuided. Wherefore a Councell was held at Rauenna, the King Theo∣doric
being present,Simmachus wherin the election of Symmachus was con∣firmed, & Laurence was recompenced with the Bishopricke of Nycerre by Symmachus: but by some of the Cleargie of Rome this same sedition began againe about foure yeares after. In so much that Theodoric being grieued thereat, sent to Rome one Peter Altin Bishop of Rauenna to be Pope the other two reiec∣ted. But Symmachus assembled the Councell, and there in the presence of all, 102. Bishops, made his Oration, and therin so purged himselfe of all vices and crimes laid against him, that he was againe elected and approoued of all, and Laurence and Pe∣ter Altin were reiected, yet the noise at Rome was greater, and the sedition more enflamed then before. For at euery faction there was bloud-shead:Bloudshead. As well Priests as Lay-men slew one an other in the streetes. Finally, Faustin the Consul appeased the sedition, laying hand to Armes against such as were chiefe Captaines of so many euils. See the fruites of the riches of the Romane Church. Symmachus ordained that on Sundayes and solemne daies of Martirs, they should sing Gloria in excelsis Deo, adding to the Cantic. the rest, which are more then the words of the Angell. Item, that whilest the Pope liueth, none should holde talke of chusing a new Pope, vpon paine of excommunica∣tion. Hospitalls.He caused certaine houses to be builded nigh the Church of S. Peter, for the ease of the poore, and prouided them of all things necessary for liuing. Vnder Trasimundus King of Ʋandals, many Bishops of Affrike were put to exile and sent into the Ile of Sardine: to the number of 202. Amongst the which was Fulgentius: which this Symmachus helped with siluer, and redeemed many Captiues. Olimpius Bishop of Carthage an Arrian, beeing at the Bathes and blaspheming the Trinitie, was suddenly burnt. Naucler.
Boetius a Poet of this time,Hormisda. whose wife was named El∣phe; was sent into exile by Theodorice King of the Ostro∣gothes, and after sent to prison, where he made his bookes, De Consolatione Philosophiae. In this time Abbies and Temples began to be founded in Fraunce, and to be dedicated to the honour of Saints, and called by their names.Clouis founder of Temples. The King Clouis vowed to build a Church if he obtained victorie against Allaricus King of Ʋise∣gothes. Hee caused to bee builded the Church of S. Geneurefue at Paris, then called Saint Peter and Pauls, where hee was bu∣ried. He founded the great Temple of Strasbourge. Gerard Bishop of Laon was married, and of his wife had a sonne, who succeeded him in the Bishoppricke. Symmachus cast out of Rome the Manecheans, and caused publikely their bookes to be burnt. And made a booke Intitu∣led, The excesse of Clarkes. He created 92. Priests, and 107. Bishops. Many Sinodes were held at Rome, and one Councell at Ʋalence in Spaine, whereby they sought to force Ecclesiasticall persons to leaue their wiues. Childebert, the sixt King of France a cruell man, raigned  45. yeares. He founded the Abbay of S. Germain des prees, nigh Pa∣ris, where he was buried; and the Abbay Du Mont at S. Mi∣chaels; the Church of S. Germain del; Auxerrois at Pa∣ris. But the booke called Le mer des histoires, sayth other∣wise. Hormisda Pope, borne at Fresselon, a Citie of Campania, gouerned the Romane Church 9. yeares. Hee ordained that Priests should addresse no Aultars without the licence of their Bishop. That marriages should be made publikely and solemnly. Suppl. Chron. That no Lay-man should be chosen to be Bishop. A Councell was at Rome against the Eutechians, wherein
it was ordained that he that had done his penance,Iustin the olde. and made an honourable amends, should not be admitted into any Ec∣clesiasticall estate. Supp. Chro. Many Monkes corrupted with the Nestorian heresie, not leauing it by the exhortations of Hormisda, but rather sowing diffametory speeches against him, were banished from Rome, a∣gainst the hipocrisie also of which, he writ. He sollicited by Letters and messengers, Iohn Bishop of Constantinople, companion of Acarius, and euen the Emperour himselfe to leaue the Eutechian heresie: but not onely Anasta∣tius despised his admonitions, but iniuried his foure Embassa∣dors, saying that it belonged to an Emperour to command, and not to a Pope. Paulus Diaconus addeth, that the Emperour Anastatius be∣sides all this, caused them to mount on the Sea to goe into I∣taly in a light and worne ship, forbidding them to take no land in Greece,The death of Anastatius. but quickly passe away without taking any Porte. Anastatius a litle after died with lightning: he was of the age of 88. yeares, the 25. yeare of his Empire. Hormisda.Hormisda was renowned for his great almes done to the poore, and for condemning the Manichean heresie which sproong a∣gaine, and for burning their bookes. Boetius was put to death by the commaundement of Theo∣dorike the Arrian. Iustine of a swine-heard became an Emperour.Iustine the auncient Emperour raigned nine yeares. In his youth he kept swine, then he kept oxen; after he was a Car∣penters man. About the age of 16. yeares he beganne to fol∣low the warre, and by craft came to the Empire. For hauing receiued a great summe of siluer to buy the suffrages of Prin∣ces, Captaines and other, for an other, he subtilly bought them for himself, and so was chosen, but he caused all them to die for whom he had receiued the said siluer. A Councell at Gerone in Spaine at this time. A Councell at Satragosse. In the 7. Chapter of the said Councell, it is said: Whosoeuer receiueth the Eucharist and eateth it not, let him be excommunicated for euer. This is in the second volume of Councells.
In the 16. Chapter. If any Clarke vpon presumption of vanitie, or by dissolution make himselfe a Monke, let him bee excommunicated. Brigide a virgin in Scotland, dyed the yeare 524. of whom, many fabulous things are inuented. Iustin after his election sent Embassadors vnto Hormisda the Pope, to confirme the Apostolike authoritie, and to bring peace to all Churches. He cast out of Constantinople all the Eu∣techian Heretikes and Arrians, and reuoked from exile all such as Anastatius the Emperour before had banished; and Temples were taken from the Arrians, and giuen to the Ca∣tholiques. Theodorice much grieued that Iustin should againe driue a∣way the Arrians, in despight determined to torment the Town of Rome. Iohn, Pope, the first of that name a Tuscaine,Iohn, Pope, first of that name. gouerned the Church three yeares at Rome. Hee with the Bishop of Rauenna,In the first vo∣lume of the Councells. and certaine Senators and Councellors of Rome, were sent to Constantinople by Theodorice King of Italy, to the end that the Emperour should restore to the Arrian Bishops and Priests their Churches, o∣therwise he would put Rome and Italie to fire and sword. As this company approached neare the towne, the Emperour Iu∣stin with all his Cleargie and all the people of the Towne met them, and the Emperour casting himselfe at the Popes feete, sa∣luted him. Iohn then being receiued in such honour, expounded the cause of his comming, and seeing hee could not bring Iustin to Theodorics will, began to weep, and besought him to helpe the ruine of Italie, and of the Catholiques. Then rose there vp a great lamentation on the Ambassadors side, and of the Au∣ditors, euery one seeing Religion to be in so great hazard if the Arrians were restored: and on the other side, the great disso∣lation of Rome and Italie. Finally the request of the Embassadors obtained,The faith put behinde. the opi∣nion of which was, that for a time the cause of the faith might tarry behinde to procure the saluation of the Towne, and of
Italie.Iustinian. The Emperour consented to the restitution of the Ar∣rians, suffering them to liue after their owne lawes and sta∣tutes: but for all this, the Pope Iohn and his companions got nothing heereby. For the honourable entertainment which the Emperour gaue them was suspected of Theodo∣rice:He that en∣dures not what he shuld, must endure that he would not. wherefore hee put the Pope in prison at Rauenna, where hee finally died in great miserie, pouertie, and infection, and the other Embassadors were likewise with him. This was a notable iudgement of God, vppon such as set behinde, the cause of Faith, for a temporall commo∣ditie. Peace restored to the Catholiques in Affrike by Hilderic King of Vandales; who reuoked from exile, all such as his father had banished: notwithstanding his father on his death-bed had charged him that he should neuer giue helpe nor support vnto Catholiques. Affrike was afflicted vntill this time, namely, about 74. yeares. Some histories say, that the Towne of Antioche was by an earthquake wholly destroyed. Iustinian, the Emperor Iustins Nephew by his sister, raig∣ned 38. yeares. He set his studie to repaire the estate of the Commmon∣wealth by Bellisarius. Felix the fourth Pope of that name, ruled foure yeares. Supp. Chron. He was great Grand-father of S. Gregories father. Eztreame Vnction.There is attributed vnto him the ordinance of extreame Vnction, grounding his ordinance vpon the words of S. Iames, the 5. Chapter. He caused to be builded at Rome, the Temple of S. Cosme, and of S. Damian, and repaired the church of S. Saturnin, which was burnt. Dedication.The Feast of the Dedication euery yeare ought to bee ob∣serued and celebrated. In this time Cassiodorus compiled in one the Historie
which is called Tripartite. Boniface ruled at Rome two yeares and more. There was  great contention and discention in his election. For some had chosen Discorus, but hee died about a moneth after, and so ceased the diuision: wherefore hauing prooued the feare thereof, hee ordained that three dayes after the Popes death if it were possible there should bee an other elected to shun sedition. This was hee which did seperate the people from the Cleargie as they were hearing the diuine Seruice as they cal∣led it. Iohn, the second of that name, called Mercurius, borne at Rome, gouerned the Church three yeares. The Vandales tooke ende in Affrike, 96. yeares after it was occupied by Gensericus the Tyrant, an Arrian. And Affrike was made tributary to the Romane Emperour by Bellisa∣rius. Iustinian sent the confession of his faith, with his owne hand and seale, to Iohn the second. In the second volume of Councels. Item he sent vnto him a Cup of Gold, and two of Siluer, and certaine Challices. Gregorie Bishoppe of Langres, was married. Fascicul, Temp. The Councell of Toledo the second. Agapetus a Romane, ruled one yeare. His father was a  Priest, called Gordian. Iustinian was seduced by Athemius the Eutychian, Bishop of Constantinople. Agapetus was sent to Constantinople by Theodatus King of the Ostrogothes in Italie, to appease the Emperour,The treason of Theodatus. and to haue pardon for the fault hee had committed in putting to death Queene Amalasontha, the wife of Theodorice, by whom he was admitted into the Kingdome. Agapetus comming to Constantinople, contention arose betweene him and the Emperour. And after many threat∣nings against Agapetus, Iustinian finally left his errour, was
quieted, and cast Anthemius out of his Bishopricke, and there appointed one Mennas in his place at the exhortation of A∣gapetus. Vnto Agapetus is attributed the ordinance of Processions on Sundayes about the Temples. The Temple of S. Sophie was builded at Constantinople by Iustinian. Germaine Bishop of Paris, excommunicated the King of Fraunce Herebert, because he left his wife Iugebergne. Abb. Ʋrsp. Eleutherius Bishop of Tornay. Medard Bishop of Noion. Gildard Bishop of Rouan in this time. Iordain a Monke, after came to be a Bishop of the Gothes, a Chronicler of the Ieastes of the Romanes, and of the Gothes. Abb. Trit. Syluerius Pope, or Liberius, borne in Campania in Italie, the sonne of Hormisda Bishop (who as is said was Pope of Rome) gouerned the Romane Church a yeare, fiue moneth, and 12. dayes. Naucler. He was by force promoted to his dignitie by Theodatus King of Italie, who corrupted by siluer, constrained the Cleargie to chuse Syluerius, without the consent of the Em∣perour. Theodora the wife of the Emperour Iustinian, at the insti∣gation of Vigilius Deacon, required Syluerius to call again from exile Anthemius, and to restore him to the dignitie from which he had bene cast and depriued for his heresie, and so to put out Mennas. Syluerius would not do this. Bellisarius had commission to depriue him of the Pope∣dome, and to appoint vnto it Vigilius, who subborned false witnesses, which affirmed that Syluerius had intelligence with the Gothes, and that he would haue deliuered them the Towne of Rome. Wherefore Syluerius was constrained to giue place and goe into exile. In the second volume of Councells. At this time Italie was greatly afflicted with an extreame famine. Maurus a Romane, and Faustus an Italian, Disciples of
Saint Benet, were sent into France to teach the Monastike life,Iustinian. Vigilius. and at the request of the French men,Monkes first in France. who sent messengers to S. Benet, to the Mount Cassim. Amator a Bishop, sent some siluer to Siluerius to maintaine him in exile. Syluerius gaue sentence of excommunication against Ʋi∣gilius. The Feast of Purification was at that time instituted in Constantinople, to appease a great pestilence. Abb. Ʋrsp. This is Candlemas, which then was called Hypapanthy: that is to say, an encounter or meeting: For then Si∣meon founde Christ, whom hee hadde so long atten∣ded. Liberius made fiue bookes of the Incarnation of out Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, and a booke against the Bi∣shops of Affrike. Iustinian compiled the Romane lawes: first the Code,The ciuil Law of Iustinian. con∣taining 12. bookes. Secondly, the Digestes. Thirdly, the Institutes. Fourthly, an Epitome of Lawes. The warre in Italie against the Ostrogothes by Bellisarius. Leonard Attelin. Iustinian in his new Constitutions, ordained that all Bi∣shops and Priests should celebrate the prayers of Baptisme, and of the Lords Supper with an high voyce, and with words vnderstood of all Christians, to the end that the spirits of the Auditors might be lifted vp with greater deuotion to sing praises vnto the Lord. Ʋigillius borne at Rome, gouerned the Romane Church  14. yeares, after Naucier. or 8. yeares 6. moneths, and 26. dayes, after others: hee entred wickedly into the papacie. It was hee also that ordained that the Masse should be said to∣wards the East. Rome was taken and burnt by Totila at this time.
The first vniuersall Councell was now held at Constanti∣nople, of 165. Bishops, by the commaundement of Iustinian the Emperour, and at the request of Vigilius, against Anthemius, Seuerus, Peter of Antioche, Zona, and other heretikes, who said that the Virgin Marie brought forth Iesus Christ onely Man, and not God and man. There againe it was agreed, that it is well said, Marie the mother of God. The yeare of Christ, 551. Rome was taken the second time of the Gothes, by Totila the scourge of God: before whom came Vigilius, or after Nauclerus, Pelagius. In this time besides the warre and famine which was in I∣talie, there was also a sore plague, in so much, that houses were inhabited by sauage beasts. Benet the younger was cast into a burning furnace by the commaundement of Totila. Herculien Bishop of Peruse, had his head sawne off, by the same. 2. Volume of Councels.In this time were held the Councels of Orleance, the second and third: or fourth and fift after some. In the 10. Chapter of the second Councell, it was ordained that a Christian should not take a Iewe to wife, nor that a Christian wo∣man should marry a Iewe, and such communication was vn∣lawfull, and if they were ioyned, they ought to bee seperated. In the third Councell wherein Honoratus Arch-bishoppe was President, Chapter 2. it was ordained that no Priest, Dea∣con, or Subdeacon, should haue the company of his wife; other∣wise, that he should be deposed from his office and remitted into the communion of Lay-people. In the 16. Chapter it was ordained that the Deacon be∣fore 25. and the Priest before 30 yeares should not be ordai∣ned. Priscillian heresie.Many in this time were infected with the Priscillian here∣sie, abstaining from eating flesh. A Councell held now at Auuerne. Vigillius being come to the Popedome by the deceit and subtilties of the Empresse Theodora, shee commaunded him to come vnto Constantinople and to restore Athemius, as hee had promised: but hee refused to doo it: saying, that
iustly he was cast out by Agapetus and Syluerius, and that there∣fore he was not bound to keepe his promise which hee made against all right and reason. Theodora very angry hereat, sent an Embassage to Rome to drawe Ʋigillius into Lawe for the iniurie done by him, in ca∣sting Syluerius into exile. Item, for the plot by him laid for the death of a young man of the chiefe Nobilitie, called Aste∣rius, and of one which was his Secretarie. Vpon these matters the Embassador arriuing at Rome, was aided of the Romanes, and they tooke Vigilius and lead him to Constantinople, and as hee embarked, the people cast stones at him, with these Imprecations. A famine bee with thee: a mortalitie be with thee: thou hast done a thousand mischiefes to the Romanes: euill enough maiest thou finde where thou goest. Doo (said hee) what you will vnto mee, for I haue well deserued it. And as he approached nigh vn∣to Constantinople, a great multitude of the Cleargie mette him and conducted him into the Towne. Theodora in the meane while ceased not to sollicite Ʋigillius of his promise, and to restore Anthemius. To whom Ʋigilius saide, that hee would rather endure all things whatsoeuer, then doo it. He was grieuously afflicted, iniuried, and outraged, and drawne out of the Temple of S. Sophie, or Euphemie,Vigilius byeth the Popedome deare. whereinto hee was fledde for safetie and refuge. One put a rope or corde about his necke, and ledde him all ouer the Towne from morning till night. This done, hee was put in prison, fed with bread and water, and finally sent into exile with the Cleargie which accompanied him at his entrie. After the death of Theo∣dora hee was called againe with all such as went with him, at the request of the Captaine Narses: but in the way he fell sick and died in Sicile, at the Citie of Siracusa. Denis Abbot, a Romane, made the great Pascall Cicle in this time. Item, a booke of the reason of the Feast of Easter. Abb. Trit. Arator a Subdeacon at Rome, wrote the Acts of the Apo∣stles in Hexamiter Verses. Radegonde Queene of Fraunce, the wife of Clotharius,
who was King of France,Pelagius. after the death of his brother Hil∣debert. Pelagius a Romane, gouerned the seate 12. yeares: hee was accused to haue bene the principall cause of all Ʋigilius his euills: But in the presence of the Cleargie and people, and in the presence of Narses, he mounted the Chaire, and publikely swore that he neuer did any euill vnto Vigilius, and so escaped and was absolued Punishment of heretikes.It is hee who ordained that heretikes and schismatikes should be punished with sword, power, and temporall Iustice. And that none should bee admitted to Ecclesiasticall orders by ambition or gifts. Canonicall houres.That Cleargie-men should each day, say or sing the seuen Canonike houres. Vniuersall.That no Patriarke should vse this word Vniuersall, but one∣ly the Bishop of Rome. That none might ordaine an Abbot, vnlesse he were first chosen Canonically. Memorie of the dead.Hee added to the Masse, the Commemoration of the dead. In this time was the fourth Councell of Orleance held, where it was ordained,Lent. that Lent should be vniuersally kept through all Churches. In the second volume. The second Councell of Tours in this time. Each Citie should nourish his poore.In the said Councell, Chap. 5. it was ordained that euery Citie should nourish his poore and straungers, euery one ac∣cording to his power, that no poore might goe about from Towne to Towne. In the third Chapter. That the Bishop should holde his wife as his sister, and that he should gouerne as well his house and family as his Church, in such sort as there might bee no euill opinion of him. In the 20. Chapter, because Priests were suspected to communicate with their wiues, it was there ordained that wheresoeuer they went, they should haue for adiacents some of the Cleargie who might lie in theyr Chambers to wit∣nesse their chastitie. In the twentie and seuen Chapter.
That Iudges and rich men which oppresse the poore,Iohn the 3Oppressions of the poore. after they haue beene aduertised thereof by their Pastors not to do it, that they should be excommunicated if they amended not. The first Councell of Paris was held in this time. Clotaire, the seuenth King of Fraunce, raigned fiue yeares; and beeing pressed with necessitie, hee tooke the third part of the reuenew of the Church, against which, the Arch-bishoppe of Tours and others opposed them∣selues. Vppon a Friday called S. hee slewe one Gualter Di∣uitot a Knight, in the Temple: whose heire for satisfaction, was exempted from all seruice and homage, as free as the King. Annales of France. Iohn, Pope, the third of that name a Romane, raigned 12. yeares. This Pope ended the building of the Church of S. Phil∣lip and S. Iames, which Vigilius had begunne. Supp. Chron. Iustinian the Emperour, after his falling into a phrensie, fi∣nally died, and his Nephew succeeded him. Abb. Tri. Iustine the younger Emperour, raigned 12. yeares.Iustine the younger. Hee  was infected with the Pelagian heresie, auaritious, and a con∣temner of God & men, who vpon great lust to haue more, be∣came out of his wits, and so died. Sophie his wife gouerned long the Empire; but by her imprudencie, Italie came into the hands of the Lombardes. Vpon false reports shee began to hate the the Captaine Narses, and said she would send that gelded mar∣chant to spinne with her maides. But Narses answered that he would spinne such a webbe, as she should not vndoo all her life. Abb. Vrsp. A great plague in Italie. Here began the raigne of the Lombardes in Italie,The king∣dome of the Lombards. whereof Albionus was the first King. Sophorachus Bishop of Paris, was sent into a Monasterie by the authoritie of a Councell at Paris. Cherebert, or Aribeet, the eight King of France, raigned 9. yeares, he was much giuen to women. Armenia againe receiued the faith.
Albinus King of the Lombards,Iustin the younger. Benet 1. was slaine by his wife Rosi∣monde the daughter of Gondimanus King of Gepilles, for that he made her drinke in a dish or masor made of her fathers scalpe. The beginning of Exarches. Longin a Grecian, the first Exarche in Italia, after all Italie as it were was occupied, raigned in Rauenna a 11. yeares, ap∣pointed by the Emperour Iustin.Exarches in Italie. This office of Exarchate en∣dured in Italie 124. yeares, and was a soueraigne Magistrate, as a Liefe-tenant Generall for the Emperour. Chilperic the ninth King of Fraunce, raigned foure yeares. Hee was slaine by his owne wife called Fredegonde, as he returned from hunting, because hee had perceiued her whoredome. Hee before had strangled his wife Galfonde, the daugh∣ter of the King of Spaine, at the request of the said Frede∣gonde. See the Annales of France. Benet Pope, the first of that name a Romane, ruled at Rome foure yeares. He helped the necessitie of many in the great famine a∣foresaid, especially at Rome, yea euen to bring victualls from E∣gipt for the poore. Gregorie was sent by him to preach to the English men. Abb. Vrsperg. The Lombards tooke and occupied all Italie, at the instiga∣tion of Narses, whom the Empresse Sophie had angred, as is said, and they entred Millain. Aman Bishop of Ʋtrect, or of Liege, and Maglorius Bi∣shop of Dole, were in this time. Abb. Vrsp. Fortunatus an Italian, after Bishop of Poiters, made 77. Hymnes, and the miracles of S. Martin. Also hee made the life of S. Hilarie Bishop of Poiters, and the life of S. Mauril Bishop.
When Bishops are thus giuen to superstition,Tiberius 2. what will the people bee? S. Ʋaast of Arras died in this time. Tiberius, the second Emperour of that name, surnamed  Constantine, raigned 7. yeares. Hee was gentle and liberall to∣wards the poore, euen to lay out largely the treasures of the Empire for their vse. Engippius an Abbot, writ the life of S. Seuerin a Monke, and a rule for his Monkes. Abb. Trit. Sigebert King of Lorraine, the brother of Chilperike King of France, was traiterously slaine at Tornay, at the sollicitation of Fredegonde. The sea of Histories. Pelagius Pope, second of that name a Romane,Pelagius 2. ruled at  Rome 10. yeares. He was elected and ordained about the commaunde∣ment of the Emperour, at the time when the Lombards held the siege before Rome. But when the siege was leuied, Grego∣rie (a Deacon who after succeeded Pelagius) was sent to Con∣stantinople towards the Emperour Maurice to excuse the Popes election: and the Emperour seeing the willingnesse he had to come vnto him, contented himselfe. This Pelagius ordained, that in all the Masses of the yeare there should be but nine Prefaces, after the auncient order of the Romanes: that is to say, Easter, Christmas, of the Kings,An heape of superstitions. Pentecost, of the Trinitie, of the Ascention, of the Apostles, of S. Crosse, and of Lent Fast. Yet this is nothing in respect of the abhominations which by succession of time came into the Masse. In this time there was great Raines, in so much that men thought there would haue bene a second deluge. Great strifes and contentions arose for the Romane seate, against Iohn Bishop of Constantinople. Pelagius transported the Patriarkship of Aquilea vnto
Grad. and constituted it the Metrapolitane of all the Prouince of Venice,Mauricius. which the Emperour Tiberius confirmed. Mauricius Emperor, raigned 21. yeares. He was sonne in lawe to Tiberius Cappidocian a magnanimous man; a good Ca∣tholique, and profitable to the Common-wealth. He made warre vpon the Armenians and Persians, and o∣uercame them. The Huns also were brought vnder him. Supp. Chro. Clotaire, the second of that name, the 6. King of France, raigned 44 yeares. At this time Antioche was founded and subuerted for the most part. The Councell of Siuille: and at Toledo the 3. time. In this Councell it was ordained in the 2. Chapter, that in Churches the Apostles Creed should be recited euery Sunday with an high voyce, that the people might be better disposed to the Cōmunion after they had made a confession of their faith. Visegothes conuerted.The Ʋisegothes conuerted to the Catholique faith, left the Arrian heresie, by the means of their king Recaredus, or Richan∣dus, and Leander Bishop of Siuile. The confession of their faith was sent to the said Councell of Toledo. The Councell of Mascon, first and second, wherein the oblations and offerings of bread and wine are commaunded for remission of sinnes. This ordinance is wholly against the word of God, and the merite of Iesus Christ, by whom alone comes remission of sinnes. And this is the beginning of the establishment of me∣rites. Great abundance of waters were in Italie, and principally at Rome, wherewith many were drowned, and of the corruption of the dead bodies, came a great pestilence. Pelagius died of the plague at Rome. Pretextatus Bishop of Rouan, was called from exile. Fredegonde was slaine in the Church on Easter day, at the sollicitation of whom, this Bishop was exiled.
Gregorie Pope, first of that name a Romane,Gregorie the first Maurice. ruled at Rome 14. yeares, or after some 13. yeares, tenne moneths and sixe dayes. This man was called one of the foure Doctors of the Church, with S. Augustine, S. Hierome, and S. Ambrose. His Father was a Senator of Rome, and of the estate of Seneshall or Captaine. The said Gregorie was a Monke, after a Deacon, and finally the Romane Bishop. In this time the Emperors cōfirmed the election of Popes and Churches. There arose in this time a great contention for the prema∣cie of the Church.Combat for the premacie. For Iohn Bishop of Constantinople, was in a full Sinode of the Grecians published and declared the vniuer∣sall Patriarke: and the Emperour Maurice commaunded the said Gregorie to obey that Patriarke of Constantinople. But Gre∣gorie could not endure that any Bishoppe should be vniuersall ouer all others:Seruant of Seruants. whervpon it came that he called himselfe Ser∣uant of the Seruants of God. See Gregorie in the 32. Epistle to Maurice, and 38. to Iohn Patriarke. See Iohn Caluin in the In∣stitution of Christian Religion. Note here Reader, that after the persecutions before Sil∣uester, and the heresies before Gregorie, now the Church lifteth it self vp by ambition of preheminence, which engendred such a combat betwixt the East Church and the West, that since that time that schisme is not yet ended. The Emperour Maurice was sharply reprehended by Gre∣gorie, for that he constrained Ecclesiastical persons to go to the warres, the which Gregorie resisted greatly. Gregorie sent into England (after Naucler.) or Ireland, cer∣taine great persons, to preach the Faith, and amongst others, one called Augustine: and Melitus and other Monkes, Institu∣ted in the rule of S. Benet, to plant that order there: and their labour prooued so well, that from thence came great troupes of Monkes into France and Almaine.Monkes. Of the number of these Irish Monkes was Colomban, and his Disciple Gallus, who after preached in diuers places of Almaine: and finally, hee retyred
into a sollitarie place which at this day is called S. Gaul in Suisse. S. Gaul. The Monkes of S. Benet priuiledged.Great libertie and immunitie was graunted vnto Blacke Monkes by the Pope Gregorie, at the Councell of Lateran, by the consent of the assembly. Images.In this time raigned Seuerus Bishop of Marseil, who cau∣sed the Images of Saints and of Christ to be broken, seeing the people worshipped them. Gregorie reprehended him for brea∣king them, but praised him that hee forbad the worshipping of them. See the Register or the booke of his Epistle the 10. part, Epistle 4. And Pollidorus Virgil. lib. 6. chap. 13. The building of the Masse. The ceremo∣nies of the Church.The greatest part of the ceremonies thereof came from this Gregorie. For he brought the office of the Church (as they call it) into a forme. So that at this day it is called the Gregorian Office.S. Gregories Masse. He brought all the Masse into certaine lawes, and al∣most such as it is at this day. And therefore many say he was the Authour thereof. And although he constrained none to fol∣low the Romane forme, as hee testifieth to Augustine Bishop of Canterbury, yet all Churches followed the manner to cele∣brate their Masses after the Romane Church: the English men by the said Augustine, the Spaniards, France, and after Al∣maine, by Boniface Bishop of Magunce, who was of great re∣nowne. He made the Antiphones and Introite of the Masse, of some verse of the Psalmes. Item the Kyrieleison should be sung nine times, the Alleluia, in the end of the Offertorie of the Commu∣nion. At the beginnig of the Canonicall houres (Deus in adiu∣torium; and in the end of euery Psalme, Gloria patri & filio, &c. Item that the Pater Noster should be sung with an hie voyce ouer the consecrate hoste. He added to the Canon of the Masse, Dies{que} nostros in tua pace disponas, &c. And made the Supper with his people in the language of his Country, which was Latin, common and intel∣ligible to all, as he witnesseth in the preface vpon Ezechiel. In the Register of his Epistles, in the 8. part and 7. Epistle
he saith, the Canon (that is to say the prayer which the Priest saith in secret ouer the Eucharist) was made by one called Sco∣lasticus. This word Masse was inuented in his time,The word Messe. although as aboue, the Supper of our Lord be called Messe of the wri∣ters, who called it with a common name of their time, as is said. But you must heere note, that so oft and wheresoeuer the Church was assembled, the Bishops preached to the people, and principally at Masse: And this custome endured yet in Gregories time, but after it was omitted by ignorant Bishops: a multitude of ceremonies were brought in, in the place of prea∣ching. Henry Bullinger. He instituted it Rome the great Letanies on S. Markes day against the pestilence which was then,The stations at Rome. with the Procession of order. The first conteined all the Cleargie. The 2. the Abbots and Monkes. The 3. the Nunnes. The 4. the Children. The 5. Laie-men. The 6. Widowes. The 7. married women. And caused there to be carried the Image of the virgin Marie. The people died neezing, whereof comes yet at this day, that when one neezeth, they say God blesse you. He instituted a great part of the stations at Rome, & chiefly such as are made to S. Peter. He ordeined for the great multitude of people which re∣sorted to Rome to the said stations and patrons, certaine Priests to keepe the Sepulchres of the Apostles, and called Chamber∣laines which afterward were deputed to keep the Popes Cham∣ber. And Leo the tenth made a Colledge of them. Briefly this Pope Gregorie vpon deuotion (which was not  according to knowledge) brought into the church a great masse of superstition; which by little and little suffocated and choked the true Religion which remained. In his time in a certaine Si∣node of twentie foure Bishops assembled at Rome,Councels. the foure generall Councells were approued to be obserued as the Gos∣pell, which is a sacriledge to compare humane ordinances with the eternall word of the liuing God. It was there also ordained that no Bigamus should be or∣dained Priest: and that Priestes accused of the people should haue this authoritie, & that by oath they might purge thēselues,
and approue their innocencie. By this meanes they would be all innocent. Monkes were forbidden to carry any to baptise, and wo∣men that they should not enter into anye Monasterie of Monkes. In Italie after a great drought there came an innumerable multitude of Grashoppers which consumed all the graine and fruite, whereof came a great famine in Italie, which en∣dured two yeares. Chro. Euseb. Legends.The Legends of Saintes were forged at this time, of such liues as these Fathers writ. Many Relikes were found out by the subtilties of Sathan: As Christes Coate vppon which the souldiers cast Lottes, is said to be found in a Coffer of Marble, in the Towne of Zapha, and frō thence carried into the towne of Ierusalem. Abb. Ʋrsperge, and Naucler. Such foule absurdities merit no recitall, but that the grea∣test of the world haue bene deceiued with these inuentions of Relikes: Argentuel nigh Paris, made a Banner of this Coat. Agilulsphus king of the Lombards, was 2. yeares before Rome, and the Arrabian Sarrasins, entered into Sicilie, and by fire wasted it. Mauricius otherwise a good Prince, who had many victo∣ries, especially against the Persians, in the end became odi∣ous to his souldiers, because of his infinit couetousnesse, which is a very detestable vice in a Prince. He by his auarice dissem∣bled rapines and murthers, and payed not his souldiers: but not them especially which serued vpon the Frontiers of Sarmatia. to resist the fiercenesse of the Scithians. They remained in barraine places enduring great necessities. For this cause the souldiers conspired against him, and Phocas was designed Em∣perour.Maurice punished for his couetous∣nesse. Who caused his M. Maurice his head to be cut off in Chalcedone, the heads also of his wife & three Children, Theo∣dorus, Tiberius, and Constantine: the rehearsall thereof is worthy memorie: that Maurice seeing his children murthered by Phocas, and that hee himselfe straightway must be put to
death, he often cryed in this voice which is in 145. Psalme,Phocas. and verse 12. Lord thou art iust, and thy iudgements are also. And so dyed of the age of 63. yeares, and the 20. yeare of his Empire. We may learne by the example of the Emperour who was not of the worst: in great & cruell temptations in such sort to bridle our thoughts, that the iustice of God may alwayes haue his praise, and be vnto vs a buckler against all temp∣tations. Colomban of Scotland, a very renowmed Bishop, dyed the  yeare 598. Abb. Trit. The Lombards were conuerted to the Faith by S. Grego∣rie, who writ his Dialogues and presented them to Theodelinde the wife of Agilulphus their King. Supplem. Chron. Eutropius a Bishop at this time. Abb. Trit. Phocas 42. in number, and the 19. of the Grecian Empe∣rours  of Constantinople, which ruled in the East from a Gouer∣nour of Scythia, after he had wickedly slaine his maister, was chosen by the vnlucky Armie whereof he had charge: a verie slaue of couetousnesse, who handled secret matters with Cour∣tiers after the manner of the Persians, and solde the Offices of Magistrates & Iudgements, and dearly loued such as tormen∣ted the people by rapine and extortion. This is hee who first ordeined that Rome should first be the chiefe of all Churches: yea though it were Constantinople. Gregorie the first, besides so many ceremonies and supersti∣tions, made certaine ordinances, and gaue permissions and ly∣cences: Amongst others, he suffered diuorces for the long dis∣ease of a woman, which cannot yeeld her dutie to her husband, if he cannot conteine: vpon condition notwithstanding that he helpe and succour his said wife in her disease. This is in the se∣cond Epistle to Augustine the English man. And in the second volume of Councells. But why then did he not rather vse moderation towardes men and women which were cast into Monasteries, when they can∣not conteine? wherefore constraine they them not to marry? See the same Epistle.
Sauinian. Boniface 3.Hee made many bookes: amongst many others the Dia∣logues of the miracles of Saints in foure bookes, which are full of Fables, whereby he pretendeth to prooue that the soules of the dead returne againe, and that we must pray for them. These Fables inuented to pray for the dead, gaue great autho∣ritie to Masses, which after came in great credit. Sauinian, Pope, a Tuscane, after Gregorie gouerned the Church of Rome two yeares. He is accounted the third Pope noted of abhominable in∣famie, an insatiable man, and a sworne enemie of his predeces∣sor Gregorie, euen to cause his bookes to be burnt. He being once admonished to follow the liberallitie of the said Gregorie towards the poore, he answered that he dissipated and wasted the goods of the Church to get a good report, and the fauour of the people. Hee passed not his Popedome without inuenting and or∣daining something, namely that there should bee burning Lampes kept continually in the Temple,Lampes. Houres of the day distingui∣shed. and the houres of the day should be distinguished and rung in Churches. The sea of Histories. Boniface Pope, the third of that name a Romane, after Nau∣cler. ruled in the Church of Rome one yeare fiue moneths. Election of the Pope.In a Sinode at Rome of 72. Bishops, 30. Priests, and some Deacons, it was ordained vnder paine of excommunication, that none should be elected Pope or Bishop but three daies af∣ter the death of his predecessour, and by the consent of the Prince, or of the Lord of the place. It was also ordained, that all such as by gifts & fauour came to any Episcopall dignitie, should be excommunicated. Then it followeth that all their Bishops at this day are excom∣municated. This Pope ordained that the Aultar should be couered with cleane cloathes. That the corporall of the Aultar should be kept cleane.
This Phocas (as is said) the murtherer of his M. the Empe∣rour, ordeined Boniface Bishop of Rome,Phocas. Boniface 4.The Romane Bishop made vniuersall. the soueraigne Bishop of all Chistianitie, and the Romane Church chiefe of all the Churches of the world. Abb. Vrsp. The primacie then of the Romane Church was established by an homicide and a traytor, who died miserably. Cosroes King of the Persian, vnderstanding his Father in lawe Maurice was put to death by the ambushes of Phocas, de∣tested so that treason that he rebelled against the Empire: In such sort that he wasted Siria and tooke Ierusalem, where there were nintie thousand men slaine. And the Chronicles adde that the wood of the holy Crosse was then taken and carried into Persia, and the Bishop Zacharie was also prisoner. The East Empire beganne to decline. The Hans likewise reuolted against the Empire,Declination of the Empire and with their great multitude they ouerranne the Romane Prouinces. The Persians occupied Mesopotamia and Assiria, and from Ierusalem ranne euen to Cappadocia and Gallatia, and succoured all the Country euen to Chalcedone. On the other side the Sarrazins wasted Egipt. Boniface Pope, 4. of that name, borne of the Countrey of Marses, in the Citie of Talleric, a Phisitians sonne, gouerned the Romane Church the space of seuen yeares. At the request of this Pope, the Emperour Phocas com∣maunded that the old Temple of Pantheon wherin were all the Goddes and Goddesses of the Painims, should be consecrated and dedicated to the honor of the virgin Mary, and of al Saints. And then was insttiuted the Feast of All-Saints in the Moneth of May,The Feast of All-Saints. which after was brought to the first of Nouember. See how those Fathers rather chaunged then chased away su∣perstitions. Leontius Bishop of Naples, in the Ile of Cyprus, made a booke of the life of S. Iohn the Almes giuer, Bishop of Alexandria. Abb. Tris.
Heraclius.After the death of Boniface the fourth, the seate was va∣cant 7. moneths, and 25. dayes, for the great discentions which were at Rome. The yeare of Christ 612. Phocas was miserably slaine by the souldiers of his guard. Abb. Ʋrsperg. Others say that Hera∣clius and Priscus slew him, cutting off his hands & feete. Others adde that his priuie member was cut off. Finally after his head was cut off, his body was burnt. See the ende of this wicked Tyrant, who caused so many good people to die. All his brethren and parents had like ende, and his race was vtterly extinct. The Romane seate is worthie to haue had such a monster to authorise his primatie aboue all Churches. Heraclius the sonne of Heraclien, succeeded Phocas. When his Father a Captaine in Affrica marched from Affricke into E∣gipt and Asia, with a great Army, the Persians being out of feare of him assailed Affricke, and brought it into their subiection. Corfrees King of the Persians, would neuer receiue any conditions of peace, vnlesse they renounced Christian Reli∣gion. The Bishop Didier of Vienna, was stoned at the commaund of Theodorus King of Soissons. Deus dedit.Deus of dedit, or Dorothea a Romane, Pope, ruled three or  foure yeares. His Father was a Subdeacon, after some. He ordeined that no Christian should take in mariage his Gossip. Item, that the sonne of a Gossip or Suertie should not take in marriage the daughter that his Father had held at the Font: And ordeined this so straitly, that if the Father or Mo∣ther carried their childe to Baptisme, that they should be sepe∣rated: notwithstanding that the wise might receiue her dowry, and that after a yeare she might marry again in any other place. There happened a great Earthquake at this time in the moneth of August, and after a great mortalitie. The Councell of Auxerre in this time, wherein it was decreed that it was a thing vnlawfull, that the Estrenes should be giuen the first day
of the yeare, calling them diuellish ceremonies,Boniface 5. Heraclius. because of the obseruation of the day. In the 12. Chapter there was forbidden to giue vnto dead bodies the Eucharist or the Paxe to kisse. In the 21. Chapter, it is not lawfull for a Priest to lye with his wife, nor for Subdeacon, nor Deacon. In the 24. and 25. Chapter, it is not lawfull for Abbots nor Monkes to goe to marriages, nor to haue commothers, nor to present children to Baptisme. In the 31. Chap. it was forbidden to take his cousin Ger∣maine, or the issue of cousin Germaine in marriage. In this time were Loup Arch-bishop of Sens, Amand, and Bauon in Flaunders. And Priscian, after Abb. Trit, and Eloy Bi∣shop of Noyon, after the Sea of Histories. Cosroes King of the Persians, was vanquished by Heraclius: And Anastatius a Persian Monke, was martyred for the faith, with 70. others. He was hanged three houres by one hand, and after be headed. Abb. Vrsp. Boniface Pope, 5. of that name, borne at Naples, gouerned  the Church fiue yeares. This was hee who first ordeined that offenders which sa∣ued themselues in Churches,Priuiledges of Churches. should haue Immunities and pri∣uiledges, and that from thence they should not be deliuered by force; but that such as committed Sacriledge in all places should be excommunicated. The waine and decaie of the Romane Empire. The Romane Empire began to fall. For whilest Christi∣ans were at warres one with an other, the Sarrasins occupied E∣gipt and Affrike, and do yet holde them. And in the space of an 120. yeares all Asia was lost from the Christians.Asia lost. Also the best part of Europe was occupied because of the couetousnesse, dis∣cention, and carelesnesse of the Emperours and Popes, which mused and studied vpon lesse matters, namely to forge naugh∣tie inuentions, and ordinances vpon ordinances. Cyrus Bishop of Alexandria, seeing the Sarrasins came into Egipt, and that there was no succours on the part of the Empe∣rour Heraclius a carelesse man, yeelded himselfe tributarie to
the said Sarrasins at a certaine annuall summe,Honorius. Heraclius. vpon which con∣dition they returned back. He was after accused before the Em∣perour, as he who transported the riches of Egipt to straungers. Wherefore he was deposed, and Manuell of Armenia ordeined in his place: who would not pay the said tribute; whervpon the Sarrasins came againe into Egipt and occupied it. Which the Emperour vnderstanding repented himselfe, and sent Cyrus in Embassage towards the Sarrasins, to cause them to goe out of Egipt, and they should haue their said annuall tribute. But one of them answered in these words: Canst thou Cyrus (saide he) plucke downe this piller? He answered no. As impossible (said he) it is that we should leaue Egipt. By like pride many Countries haue bene lost. Many common∣wealths by tributes haue bene maintained in peace. Faith pro∣mised euen to enemies must be kept. The encrease of the kingdome of France. From the yeare of saluation 514. hitherto, the kingdome of France was diuided into certaine kingdomes, because the kings of France had many heires. One kingdome was called Au∣strasia,Austrasia. & comprehended Lorraine and Brabant: and that which is betweene Rhene and Mense, from Culloine to the Countrie of Alsasia. The other called Neutria,Neutria. which comprehends the Re∣gions which are betwixt Mense and Loire: and Paris was the chiefe Towne thereof. The third was called the kingdome of the Soisons.Soisons. In this diuision of Gaul, the kingdome of Arles tooke also his beginning, which had vnder it Sauoy, the Coun∣trey of the Switzes, Zepingen, Haspurge, and Dauphine, but at this time those particular kingdomes returned into a Monar∣chie. Car. Gaul beganne to be called France.Dagobert the 11. King of France, possessed first Austrasia, after he ioyned vnto it the kingdome of Burgoine, and finally was made Lord almost of all France: and the name of France was then vniuersall for all those kingdomes. When Dagobert dwelt in Austrasia, his Pallace was in Alsatze. And he builded a Castle at Rufach called Eisenburge: he also builded many Mo∣nasteries
of S. Benet, wherevnto he gaue great reuenewes, and chiefly to that of Wittenburge, within 8. leagues of Strasbourge on the side of Rhene: An other at Surbourge, two leagues from Wittenburge. Item an other at Haselach, hard by Strasburge in the West mountain. He also brought the church of Strasburge to a Bishoppricke, and enriched it with great reuenewes. Heereby note that France was then augmented when the Ro∣mane Empire in the East diminished: So the Lord giueth vi∣cissitude, courses and chaunges to the things of this world. The Histories of France say that the bodies of S. Denis, S. Rhut, and S. Pleutherius, were found at this time by the meanes of an Hart, hunted by Dagobert. It is no great maruell if the Kings of France be giuen to super∣stitions, seeing sauadge Beasts teach them, where holie bodies are. Honorius Pope, born in Campania, ruled in Rome 13. yeares. He caused the Tēple of S. Peter to be adorned withal precious things, & enriched it with goodly Tables, couering them rich∣ly. He ordeined processions on the Saterday with Letanies. Pyrrhus Patriarche of Constantinople, a Monothelite here∣tike, was sent into exile into the Country of Affrike. The Em∣perour Heraclius was seduced by him:Heraclius seduced. and so gaue himselfe to beleeue diuinations and enchauntments: and tooke his Niece to wife, his brothers daughter, making a lawe that it should be so lawfull for all persons. Yet euen in this time was the Church greatly diuided by the Artian Sect:The Artians yet. In such sort that almost each Towne had two Bishops, the one an Arrian, the other a Catholike: and during those dissipations came Mahomet in the Easterne parts. Mahomet an Arrabian, of a Marchant became a false Pro∣phet, and finally a Captaine of Theeues and Robbers: with a Monke called Sergius, who was an Arrian & Nestorian, & with one Iohn of Antioch an hereticke, and a Necromantian Iewe, he
compiled the Alcoran, vnto which the Sarrasins and Turkes shewe obedience. The Sect of the Mahometists. In the said Alcoran is conteined that they of his Sect shall bee circumcised, that they shall abstaine from Swines flesh, that they shall drinke no wine, and that certaine whole months they shall fast. They take as many wiues as they can maintaine, and if they keepe company with others they die for it. Friday is their Sunday. No woman goeth in publike, vnlesse she haue her face couered. They hold Christ for a true & great Prophet, and make Moses and Mahomet Christs companions. Vadianus. Their Para∣dice.The Alcoran promiseth to his followers a Paradice, where there are sweet waters and of all sorts of fruites, and goodly and fine women, also flouds of wine and honey; yea briefly all that sensualitie can wish; and there they shall enioy all good things eternally. Azoara. 2. and Naucler. They confesse the Resurrection of the dead. By Testament they leaue and do great Almes. The Alcoran forbiddeth to take siluer or victuals for aduo∣cating or pleading in Iudgement. They like to take no wiues of an other Religion then their owne: neither to giue their daugh∣ters to men of diuers Religions, vnles they conuert vnto theirs. Azoara. 3. And although by their Alcoran they be commanded to roote out all such as contradict their lawe, yet they constrain no man to renie his Religion. Women must nourish and giue sucke to their owne children, and that by the space of 2. yeares. They are also commaunded to defend their religion by Armes and strong hand. Azoara. 5. chap. 5. And by force of Armes to force the Christians and Iewes to agree. Azoara 18. Euery one may take & sley him whom he knoweth to be incredulous and an heretike in their lawe. Azoara. 10. Reproach to Christians.They reproach Christians because they worship others then one onely God, as the virgin Mary. & Images of Saints. Azoa∣ra. 13. In the 18. cha. he bringeth in God speaking to his prophet Mahomet, & promising him ye 20. of their mē shal resist against 200. & ye 100. of theirs,Infamous ce∣remonies. shall ouerthrow a 1000. of others. They are also cōmanded to wash thēselues, yea the priuie places after
they haue done their naturall necessities, and after they haue lyen with their wiues: and this must they euer do before they pray vnto God.Pilgrimages. Vpon commaundement they goe on pil∣grimage into certaine places. Azoa. 2. They haue Saintes vnto whome they commend themselues and their beasts. See their Alcoran which reciteth great miracles.Their Priests and Religious men. They haue Priests and Religious men. Some Recluses and contemplatiues which do nothing but pray & meditate, and these are most esteemed. According to their foure Sects, they haue also foure opi∣nions touching the saluation of soules.Diuers opini∣nions of sal∣uation. 1. Their Priests are of opinion that none are saued but in the lawe of Mahomet. 2. Some of their Religious are of opinion that the lawe profi∣teth nothing: but that euery man shall be saued by the grace of God, which alone is sufficient to saluation, without the lawe and merites. 3. The Spiritualls and Speculatiues are of opini∣on, that euery one shall be saued by his owne workes and me∣rites, with grace and the lawe. 4. There are others amongst them, which say that euery one shall be saued in his owne lawe. Where Iesus Christ is not knowne, all Religion is vaine & vn∣certaine. Touching Iesus Christ they hold him to be the sonne of a virgin.What they hold of Christ. In the 5. Chap. There they make mention of the virgin Marie, and of her parents. Of S. Iohn Baptist, and of his Father Zacharie. In the 3. chap. at the beginning God is brought in speaking and calling Iesus Christ, his soule conferring his force and vertue vpon him. In the 11. chap. he calleth him Sent of God, the Spirit of God, and the word diuinely sent to Mary, &c. They fast euery yeare one whole moneth,Fasting. and one weeke very straitly without eating or drinking in the day time: but af∣ter the Sun set, they eate & drinke euen till the day following. On the Friday they assemble all together,Friday. and obserue it as carefully as the Iewes do the Saterday, or others the Sunday: and in each Towne there is a principal Temple which they cal∣led (Meschat) into which they come that day after noone, as well Kings & Princes as the common people, and attentiuely pray vnto God. They which come not to this Church, or pray not when they come, are condemned in a certaine
summe of siluer when they are accused by the Guardes which they commit for that businesse. See the Alcoran. As they pray, they torment themselues pitiously in the con∣tinuall agitation of their bodies, and cries without ceasing. The Pope and Mahomet. Two Hornes.Antichrist his two hornes are there set vp one after an other, namely that of the Pope & of Mahomet: It were easie to conferre one of them with an other, both in doctrine and do∣mination. Heraclius had victorie against the Persians, and brought againe Zacharias Patriarke of Ierusalem and the holie Crosse, first to Ierusalem, and then to Constantinople: wherevpon the feast of the exaltatiō of the crosse was ordeined & celebrated. Councells were about this time at Siuil and Toledo. 4.5. and 6. At the Councell of Toledo. 4. it was ordeined that all the Churches of Spaine should followe the forme of the Romane Church touching praier, the Sacraments, and Masse. One manner of singing Masse all ouer after the manner of Rome. See Bullenger of the spring of errours. Lib. 2. chap. 8. In the 16. chap. of the said Councell, it is ordeined that the Apocalips should be accounted Canonicall. In the said Councell Priests were reprehended, because after the Lordes praier, they communicated and blessed the people:That Priests might not communicate apart. wherefore in the 17. Chap. they are forbidden to com∣municate alone, but with all the assembly, after the ordinance of Iesus Christ. It was also ordeined that after the Lords praier the blessing should follow. And then only they should receiue the Sacrament of the bodie and blood of Christ in this order: that is, the Priests and the Deacons should make the Commu∣nion before the Aultar, the Clarkes in the hearts, and the peo∣ple out of the heart. The Masse yet was not as is at this day, wherein Priests com∣municate alone.
In the Councell of Bracare 1. and 2. held in Spaine, it was ordeined that if any did not confesse the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, three persons to be one same substance, vertue and power, as the Apostolike & Catholike Church tea∣cheth, should be excommunicated and accursed. In the 19. chap. If any beleeue soules and bodies to be sub∣iect to the Starres as the Painims say, and the Priscillianists maintaine, let them be excommunicated and accursed. In the 36. chap. that they should bury no dead bodies in Churches, but without.Burialls. The Councell of Bracare, 2. in the 14. chap. All they are anathematized which abstaine from eating flesh vpon supersti∣tion. The same was ordeined in the Councell of Toledo. 13. Note by this which is said, that the Spaniards more then any other, resisted the forbidding of meates and of single life. Dagobert King of France, raigned 14. yeares, and during  his raigne he gaue great reuenewes to Churches, and caused to be builded the Abbey of S. Denis in France, and placed there the three aforesaid bodies, of S. Denis, Eleutherius, and Rusticus, in Tombes couered with fine gold, and enriched with precious stones. And it wold hardly be beleeued the great riches of gold, siluer, and precious stones, the Townes and other goods which he gaue to the said Church and Abbey of S. Denis, which they yet possesse at this day. He founded also the Abbey of S. Amande, nigh Tournay, and endowed it with great reuenewes. All his study was to ga∣ther, and wheresoeuer hee went to take Relickes to enrich the Abbey of S. Denis. In so much that for that cause hee was cal∣led the Theefe of Relikes:Theefe of Relikes. And as Clouis the first of that name had his trust in S. Martine of Tours, so this had in the bodie of S. Hilarie of Poitiers; In so much that hauing taken and rased the said Towne & destroyed the Temples, yea that of S. Hilarie, he caused to carry the Coffin with other Relickes to S. Denis in France. The cause of this sacking & spoile was, because the Poi∣tiers had giuen succours, of people and siluer to the Gascoignes which rebelled against him.
Moreouer Dagobert was a man so giuen to women, that he Instituted a Colledge,A Colledge of faire wo∣men. whither hee caused to resort the fairest women, and apparelled them like Queenes: for which thing being reprehended of S. Amand, he sent him to exile. But Ga∣guin saith he was after reuoked. Seuerin Pope, ruled at Rome two yeares. His study was to repaire Churches, to endowe them with many ornaments, and encrease the reuenewes therof. Supp. Chron. & Fasc. Temp. His election was ratified by Isacheus exarche. For thē the election of Popes was nothing, vnlesse it were authorised by the Emperour or his Lieftenant. Naucler. The treasures of the Church of S. Iohn de Lateran, were pil∣led by Maurice Gouernor of Rome, & Isacheus exarche of Ita∣lie: one part of the bootie was sent to Constantinople to Hera∣clius. This was the yeare that the said Heraclius endured that great wound of the Sarrasins. Naucler. In the time of this Pope dyed Mahumet, the yeare 637. and after began to be worshipped of his followers. Mahumet signifieth Fury or Indignation. Aman Bishop of Traict baptized Sigebert, the sonne of Dagobert King of France. Chron. Iohn Pope 4.Iohn Pope, 4. of that name, borne in Dalmatia, ruled at Rome about two yeares. He ordeined that whosoeuer should  take away any Church goods should be bound to restore four∣fold. Naucler. First Lent in England.The yeare 640. Lent began to be kept in England. Chro. Sigeb. Rotharis King of Lombards was an Arrian, and all his peo∣ple after his example. In so much that there was almost no Ci∣tie nor Towne which had not two Bishops, the one a Catho∣licke, and the other an Arrian. Suppl. Chron. Theodorus.Theodorus a Grecian, the sonne of Theodorus Bishop of Ierusalem, gouerned the Romane Church 6. yeares, 5. months, and 18. dayes. Supp. Chron. Dagobert gaue to the Abbey of S. Denis a Faire and Mar∣ket,Le Lendy. called Le Lendy, betwixt Paris and S. Denis.
The Emperour Heraclius being aged,Theodorus. Constantin. gaue trust to Diuina∣tions, and Enchauntments of diuels. This is the first Empe∣rour that ruled in the East since the Empire was transferred thither, who hath hadde that infamie to haue lost the Em∣pire of Asia, and to haue bene of the heresie of the Monothe∣lites and Eutechians. After he had thus polluted himselfe by these arts, heresies, and incest of his niece,The straunge death of Heraclius. he died of a newe and straunge disease; namely, that the purses of his testicles turned vpside downe, with the priuie member alwaies stiffe. Insomuch that whensoeuer he vttered his vrine, it sprinkled his face, if a table had not beene placed about his nauell to driue it backe. Egnatius and others recite the same. Constantine his sonne of his first wife Eudoxia, succeeded in  the Empire, but his mother in lawe Martine, caused him to be poisoned before he had raigned a yeare, and so she raigned with her sonne Heracleonas about two yeares. Nauclerus rehearseth that the said Martine committed that fact, by the Councell of Pirrhus Bishop of Constantinople an heretike, who returned from his exile of Affrike, after the death of the said Heraclius. The Senate of Constantinople made the tongue of the said Empresse to be cut out, and the nose of the said Heraclionas, and cast them both into exile. They also caused Pyrrhus to bee most shamefully put to death, whom Paul succeeded, as wicked an heretike as his former prede∣cessor. The Pope Theodorus in the Church of S. Peter, the Clear∣gie and the Church being present, excommunicated and de∣clared the aboue named Paul Patriarke of Constantinople, an heretike, and his adherents: and hauing mingled wine with Inke in a Challice, he writ with his owne hand the excommu∣nication, to signifie that it was inuiolable, as if Iesus Christ had writ it with his owne bloud. Consider here how much the Church then, although it was wholly giuen to superstitions, did abhorre such as confounded the two natures in Christ.
Constance.The Searge at Easter.This Theodorus instituted the blessing of the Sierge on Easter Saterday. Constance Emperour, sonne of the said Constantine and of Gregorie his wife, (called otherwise by some, Constantine the 3.) raigned 28. yeares. He was a tyrant and an heretike and per∣secuted the Catholiques. He fauoured the heresie of Paul, Bi∣shop of Constantinople, & tirannized ouer the faithful, by impri∣sonment, exile, and other torments. Naucl. Chron. Abb. Vrsp, and Fascic. temp. At this time were Vincent Bishop of Beanuais, and Foursy the King of Ireland his sonne, who came into France with two of his brethren. Aubert Bishop of Cambray, Gertrude & others, all which after their deathes were called Saints. Reliques sold to giue to the poore.Clouis the 12. King of France, raigned 17. yeares. This King in a time of famine tooke all the gold and siluer wherwith his father Dagobert had adorned the Chappels of Martyrs, yea, and one of the Armes of S. Denis, to giue to the poore to relieue them. For that cause the Monkes deuised, that he became a foole, and out of his wittes in the ende of his dayes. Chron. de Re∣gib. Fr. Martin Pope, first of that name, an Italian, ruled at Rome sixe yeares and more. At the beginning of his Popedome he sent Messengers to Constantinople to Paul the Patriarke, to re∣duce him from his heresie: but so much wanted therein his a∣mendment, that euen abusing the authority of the Emperor (an heretike like himselfe) hee caused the saide messengers to bee throwne out:A Councell against the Monothelite heretikes. whereat the Pope Martin being mooued, as∣sembled a Councell at Rome, of 150. Bishops, and condem∣ned Paul the heretike, agreeing with the condemnation of Pyr∣rhus, Cyrus, Sergius, and others. Then the Emperour Constance sent Olimpus Exarke into Italie, and commaunded him to make haste, either to sley Pope Martin, or to take him and bring him. Againe, Constance sent to Rome Theodorus Calliopa, who by subtiltie tooke the Pope, and hauing bound him in chaines brought him to Constantinople, and from thence was hee banished and sent into a Citie of Pontus, where he fi∣nished
his daies after many and great miseries,Eugenius.The death of Pope Martin. Collation of benifices. Profession and habits for Nunnes inuented. and the seat was vacant three moneths. Supp. Chron. In this time were held the Councell of Toledo, 8.9. and 10. In the 10. there was an ordinance against Bishops which gaue Monasteries and benefices Ecclesiastical to their parents, which was now made of no valewe. In the 4. Chap. it was or∣dained that Nunnes should make a profession and vow of cha∣stitie, and that they should be apparelled in an other sort from others, to be knowne. Ierusalem was taken by the Mahometists;Ierusalē taken Some (as Nau∣clerus) say that it was in the time of Agathon Pope, and of the Emperour Constantine the sonne of this Constance. Rhodes taken by the Sarrasins; The Iles Ciclades were wa∣sted by them, and Sicile forraged. Naucl. At Rome there appeared great signes: fire fel from heauen, and great thunder, lightnings, and invndations of waters: whereof great pestilence followed. Fasci. Temp. and Nau∣clerus. Eugenius Pope, the first of that name, a Romane, ruled at  Rome about three yeares. He ordained that Bishops should haue prisons to punish crimes and faults of Clarkes. That Priests houses should be scituate, and builded nigh Churches.Prisons Ec∣clesiasticall. Supp. Chron. That none bee kept in Monasteries against their wills. One named Peter succeeded Paul the heretike at Constan∣tinople, and was of the same heresie. His Letters were recited at Rome: and the Pope was hindered by the people from celebra∣ting, vntil he had cast them away: because they denied two na∣tures in Christ. Naucler. Claudus Arch-bishop of Besancon,S. Claud. afterward Abbot of the Abbey of S. Eugenius, was renowmed about this time through Burgoine. Fasci. temp. And after his death, they made that abhominable Idoll which is at S. Claud. in the Countie of Burgoine. The children of Arikert King of the Lombards, whilest they stroue one with an other, the one was slain, and the other a fugitiue: first into Bauiere, after into France. Naucl.
Constantin. Vitalian.At the Councell of Calibone, in the Prouince of Narbone, held in this time. Theodoric Bishop of Arles, was accused to haue done somewhat against the Ecclesiasticall statutes and Canons, and because he appeared not, hee was suspended out of his Bishoppricke vntill the next Councell. Vitalian Pope, an Italian, ruled at Rome 14. yeares, and more. It was he who first ordained singing in the Romane Church, and agreed it with Organes by the consent of Rodoaldus, King of the Lombards,The King of Hungarie slaine in adulterie. who beeing taken in adulterie with a wife of Lombardie, was slaine by her husband. It is not found that hitherto the Romane Church had full domination in the Towne of Rome, other goodly things it pretendeth since the death of Constantine the great, vnlesse it were vnder certaine too soft Emperours,Rome hither∣to was not in the rule of Popes. and yet then not much. But to this Ʋitalian, the Emperour by singular grace confirmed the priuiledges of the Church, which notwithstan∣ding he after brake, and made them of no force, Fasci. temp. and Naucler. Constant the Emperor, caused to be assembled a Sinode, and abiured his heresie, and after came to Rome with a great com∣pany with Cierges in their hands, and so entred into the Tem∣ple, but he shewed well it was not vpon deuotion, but to see where the Treasures were, to take and carrie them away. Hee was there to visit it fiue dayes. Afterward hee tooke away all that was delicate in his eyes. He tooke away more ornaments and riches, he alone in 7. dayes, then the Barbarians had done in 258. yeares. Naucl. and Supp. Chron. He was greatly hated at Constantinople for his cruelties, and for causing to die in exile Pope Martin in such miserie, and for cutting the tongue and hand from Maximin: Where∣fore he sought againe to bring the Emperiall seate to Rome, and kept his Court sixe yeares in Sicilie, Abb. Ʋrsperg. where hee did many great euills, as is recited by Paulus Diaconus. He was slaine in Sicilie being in the Bathes, this yeare, 669. and of his Empire, 27.
Mizizius otherwise called Mitius, or Missessius,Constantin the fourth. Adeonatus. was constituted Emperour, and raigned about sixe moneths. Constantine the fourth sonne of Constant,Pogonatus. commonly called Le Barbu, the bearded, came against him and caused him to die, and all such as had bene of the conspiracie against his father. After these things were done, he raigned from the beginning with his brethren, Tiberius and Heraclius. Abb. Ʋrsp. But af∣ter, according to Naucler. alleadging Blundus and Pius his ab∣breuiator, he caused their noses to be cut off, least they should after come to the Empire: so that his sonne Iustinian might raigne. The Councell of Toledo, 11. in this time. Dado Bishop of Ruoan, writ three bookes of the life of S. Eloy Bishop of Noyon. Abb. Trit. Clotaire, the third of that name, and the 13 king of France, raigned foure yeares. Note Reader, touching the Kings of France which follow, that from this Clotaire vntill Pipin and Charlemaine, they did nothing worthy of any great memorie, but became vnprofitable and full of cowardise, so that they had not like authoritie, as either their predecessors or successors. They had as it were nothing but the bare names and ti∣tles of Kings. For the Maiors or Prouostes of the Pallace, which then were as it were the Constables, or great Maisters, had the administration of all matters of the Kingdome, as well those of warre, as of peace; and all was done by their commaun∣dement and ordinance. Childeric second of that name, the 14. King of France, raigned two yeares. Hee was by treason slaine for his crueltie;  and his wife bigge with childe, was also slaine. The Annalls of France. Adeonatus or Deodatus Pope, borne at Rome, ruled there foure yeares and more. His father was a Monke called Io∣uian or Iouinian. Hee amplified the Monasterie of Saint Erasmus, in the Mount Coelius, wherein he was a Monke. Hee instituted against Thunders and Tempests (which then hap∣pened)
many Supplications and Letanies.Constantin the fourth Agathon. Supp. Chron. Donus Pope, a Romane, ruled at Rome three yeares. After  some a yeare and fiue monethes. Hee caused S. Peters Court to be paued with Marble, and so dedicated the Church of the Apostles, and of S. Euphemia, and greatly augmented the ho∣nour and dignities of the Cleargie. The sixt Councell of Constantinople, was called vnder this Pope, began vnder Agathon, and ended vnder Leon the second. Here the Church of Rauenna agreed not with the Romane Church, beeing not subiect vnto her, but called chiefe of it selfe, did willingly subiect her selfe for the integritie of this Pope, and that with the consent of Reparatus, then Bishop of Rauenna.Rauenna sub∣iect to the Ro∣mane sea by force. In the second volume of Councels. But their succes∣sors afterward would haue recouered this libertie and auncient freedome againe. Wherfore there was a great and long cōten∣tion betwixt the said Churches of Rome and Rauenna. Finally the Chuch of Rauenna was made subiect by violence. For Iusti∣nian the second, inducted and inuited by the Pope, besieged the Towne, and their goods were pilled, many banished, and their Bishop which then was, called Felix, had his eyes put out with an hotte Iron, and was after sent into exile in∣to the Ile of Pontus. Some say this happened in Agathons time. Theodorike the fifteenth King of Fraunce, raigned four∣teene yeares: hee was drawne out of the Monasterie of Saint Denis, where hee had beene a Monke. Hee founded the Abbey of S. Ʋaast at Arras, and was buried there, as shall be said. Agathon Pope, a Sicilian, a Monke before, ruled at Rome two yeares and an halfe, or foure yeares after Naucler. It was he that ordained that the decree of the Romane sea should be serued as proceeding from the mouth of S. Peter, Dist. 19. Chap. Sic omnes. The begin∣ning if leaden seales.In this time the Romane Church encreased much, and the Letters of that sea were sealed yet with waxe, but after with leade.
The sixt generall Councell held at Constantinople,Constantin the fourth Adeonatus. was of 289. Bishops against the Monothelites, which denied two wills and natures in Christ. Gregorie or George, Bishop of Constantinople, left his here∣sie▪ but Machirus Bishop of Antioche, left it not. Wherefore hee was cast out of his Bishoppricke. The Pope Agathon sent to the Councell, Iohn Bishop Portuensis, and Iohn Dea∣con. And the dissention that then was betwixt the East church and the West, was appeased. In this Councell,The approba∣tion of the Masse in Latin Marriage per∣mitted to some, and for∣bidden to others. Iohn Bishop Portuensis, celebrated the first Masse in Latine, and the vse and order thereof was allowed of the said Councell. There al∣so the Priests of Greece were permitted to liue in marriage, and to haue lawfull wiues; but not the Priests of the West Chur∣ches. The Author of the booke called Fasciculus temp. yeel∣deth a reason therof; saying that willingly he had already vow∣ed chastitie vnder Gregorie. But what should they doo if they had not the gift of continencie? And moreouer, could they vowe for others that came after them? Lastly, they vowed vppon constraint and authoritie of Councells, as appeares a∣boue. It was there also ordained,Who ought to carry chil∣dren to Bap∣tisme. that none should beare a child to be baptised, vnlesse he knew the Lords prayer, and the be∣liefe of the faithfull. In the second volume of Councells. Item, not to vowe not to marrie, and that Priests which seperate themselues from their wiues because of their sacred orders, should bee excluded from the Communion. Peter Ʋiret in the Dia∣logue to them of Orbe. A Briefe of the sixe generall Councells. Hitherto there hath beene held sixe generall Concells. The first at Nicene was of 318. Bishoppes, against Arrius, vnder Siluester and Constantine the great. The second at Constantinople, of 150. Bishops, vnder Gratian and Theodosius
Emperours,Constantin the fourth. Agathon. and Damasus, against Macedonius Bishop of Con∣stantinople, and Eudoxius, who denied the spirit of God. The third was in Ephesus,One person in Christ. of 200. Bishops, vnder Celestine, Sixtus, and Theodosius the great, against Nestorius Bishop of Constanti∣nople, who called the virgin Mary the mother of Christ, man, but not God. The fourth in Calcedon, of 360. Bishops vnder Leo the Pope, and Martine the Emperour, against Eutiches Ab∣bot of Constantinople, who denied two natures in Christ. The fift was vnder Iustinian the Emperour,Two natures in christ, di∣uine, and humane. The virgin Marie the mother of God. and Vigilius Pope, against Theodorus and other heretikes; who said that the virgin Marie did onely bring forth a man, and not God and man. There it was ordained that iustly and truly the virgin Marie is cal∣led the mother of God. The sixt Councell was at Constanti∣nople against Gregorie or George, and Machairus, and Cirus, Ser∣gius,Two wills in Christ. Honorius, Pirrhus, Paulus, Petus, Bishops which denied two willes, as it is said, Abb. Trit. Theodorus Arch-bishop of Rauenna, was a great Almes∣giuer, and very desirous to keepe the Cleargie in good order: for the which hee was hated. In so much, that on a Christ∣mas day as he was going to celebrate Masse, he was left of all, whereat beeing much grieued, hee went towards Agathon and willingly subiected his Church to the Romanes. Nau∣clerus. Leger Bishop of Anthun was in this time. Persecution in France.Ebroine Prince of the Pallace of France vnder Theoderic, caused Legier his eyes to be plucked out, the soles of his feete taken away, and his tongue and lips cut off, and at last cut off his head, and his brother Guerin was stoned to death. This Ebroine cast Lambert out of the Bishoppricke of Ʋtrich. Ame Bishop of Sens was banished by Ebroine. Chron. 519. In this time there was a great pestilence at Rome, whereof Agathon di∣ed, and the Sea was vacant a yeare, seuen moneths, and fiue dayes. Leo the 2.Leo Pope, the second of that name a Sicilian, raigned two yeares, or thereabouts. Abb. Vrsp. After his death the Sea was vacant 11. monethes. Supp. Chron.
This Pope was cunning in Greeke and Latine,Cōstant. 4. and made many Epistles and Homilies. He ordained that after the Agnus Dei of the Masse, they should giue the Paxe to kisse vnto the Assistants. Supp. Chron. Fasci. Temp. Hee permitted to baptise at all times in case of ne∣cessitie. He ordained by the authoritie of the Emperour, that the election of the Bishop of Rauenna should not be good, if the Romane Pope did not approoue it: but that the Arch-bishop should pay nothing for his Inuesture;The vse of the Mantle. for many mischiefes came of this largition. Supp. Chron. and Fasci. Temp. The Councell of Toledo 12. and 13. in this time,Such as for∣bad eating of flesh are ex∣cōmunicated. wherein such were anathematized as forbad eating of flesh. P. Ʋirel. This is meant as it was ordained in the 14. Chapter of the Councell of Bracar. 2. See aboue. Benet Pope, second of that name, a Romane,Benet. 2. ruled at Rome 10 moneths. He was humble and soft. Naucler. He restored at his great charges, the Churches of S. Peter and S. Laurence: of S. Ʋalentin, and S. Marie: aux Martyrs. Supp. Chron. and gaue to the said Churches, many Vessels of Golde and Siluer, and many vestments and ornaments. The election of the Pope taken from the Emperour. The Emperour Constantine mooued with the Popes sanc∣tetie,The election of the Pope. ordained that the election of the Pope from thence for∣ward made of the Cleargie and Romane people, should bee stable and sure without any more attending the authoritie of the Emperour, or of his Lief-tenant Exarche of Italie; without whose authoritie before it was not ratified. Naucl. and Supp. Chron. Iohn Pope, fift of that name, of Antioche in Siria,Iohn. 5. gouerned
the Romane Church a yeare: a man moderate, and subiect to diseases. He was consecrated (as also was Leo the second) by three Bishops,An other cere∣monie of con∣secrating the Pope. of Ostia, Portensis, and Veliterus. And this maner was alwaies after obserued. The Bishop of Ostia as hee sung Masse put the Crowne on his head. Before hee was onely ledde to the Chaire of S. Peter, and beeing there set, he was holden the true Pope, without other ceremonie. The Emperour Constantine died at Constantinople, hauing raigned 17. yeares. Conon Pope, borne at Rome, gouerned the Church of Rome one yeare.Conon. Fasci. temp. After the death of Pope Iohn the fift, there was great contention about the Popes election: for the people (or the Cleargie) elected one called Peter, Archbishoppe. The Romane Gendarmie corrupted by siluer, did chuse Theodorus a Priest, a pernitious man: After long strife be∣twixt these two, Conon by all their agreements was confir∣med. He fell sicke incontinently after his election: wherevpon he died. Some said he would neuer occupie himselfe in secular matters. Iustinian, or Iustin. 2.Iustinian, or Iustin, Emperour, second of that name, sonne of Constantine the fourth, began to raigne of the age of 16. yeares. Hee gouerned himselfe so ill, that after tenne yeares of his raigne hee was banished. See the Sea of Histo∣ries. A second Herodias.Quilian, an holy Scottishman, preached in Franconia. He conuerted Gosbertaine Duke of the same Countrey, who kept Ceilam, (Sillam or Gelana) his brothers wife. And for that he preached that he ought to leaue her, she made him secretly be slaine. Fasci. temp. and Sigeb. Beda the Venerable in this time, made many bookes, and wrote the liues of many Saints, Abb. Trit.
Sergius Pope, a Sirian, ruled at Rome tenne yeares;Iustinian. after  Chron. Euseb. a noble restorer of Churches. There was a great contention and debate for the electi∣on of the Pope after the death of Conon.Sergius Pope. Some had chosen Theodorus, a very rich man. Others, Pascall Arch-deacon, who had promised a great summe of money to Iohn Platina, Exarche, if hee were chosen. Each of them maintained his election ambitiously. But the Cleargie and Romane people seeing that this sedition would cause effusion of bloud, tooke counsell to remedie it. Wherefore they chose Sergius, reiecting the two others. The said Sergius was carried into the Church of Laterane, and hauing broken the gates, they cast out the factious, and constrained Theodorus and Pascall to salute Sergius Pope, and approoue his election. Pascal accused and conuicted of Art Magicke, was sent to a Monasterie, and there died obsti∣nate Naucler. It is attributed vnto him, to haue founded a good part of the holy Crosse, which euery yeare they worship at Rome. Nauclerus. Beleeue this who list. For in the time of Heraclius the Em∣perour, it was carried to Constantinople. The Church of Aquilea not wholly approouing the first, after Naucler. Chron. Segeb. Paul. Diac. or sixt, after (Fasci. Temp.) Councell of Constantinople, was reduced by Sergius. In this time the Saxons, yet Painims,Saxons. receiued the Chri∣stian Faith by the meanes of this Sergius. After Suppl. Chron. The yeare 688. Ebroine a French Tyrant was slaine in his bedde. Theodoricke the King of Franc, was buried in the Abbey of S. Vaast of Arras, whereof hee was founded, with his wife, called in her Epitaph, Doda.
Clouis, third of that name, King of France, 16. raigned 14. yeares. The Frisons conuerted to the faith.Sergius sent Vmbred to the Frisons to conuert them to the faith. Rabed their Duke would not accord thereunto: allead∣ging that it were more meete to followe many then fewe. But afterward beeing vanquished in warre by Pippin Grand∣maister of Fraunce, the Frisons receiued the Faith, bee∣ing instructed by Willibrot Bishoppe, or Clement after some. The Emperour Iustinian broke his faith giuen to the Sar∣rasins, and fought against them, wherein he was not hap∣pie. And after without necessitie brake the peace which his father hadde made with the Bulgarians, and entered  into the one and the other Misia, where hee put all to fire and sword:Iustinian Disloyall and cruell. but the Bulgarians ceazed vppon the passa∣ges and straights, and shut them in so well, that they constrai∣ned them to doo what they would. Hee beeing returned to Constantinople, did so many euils to the Christians that euerie one hated him, so that they conspired against him, and chased him away. Leontius vsurped the Empire, tooke Iustinian, and cut his nosthrills,Leontius. and sent him into exile into Pontus, and raigned three yeares. Some call him Leond second. Em∣perour. 68. The Sarrasins seeing such troubles among the Christians, came into Affrica. Childebert, second of that name, 17. King of France, raig∣ned 18. yeares. Hee founded the Abbey of S. Albane in Angiers. Lambert Bishop of Liege, was reuoked from exile, but be∣cause hee reprehended the adulterie of Pippin, hee was cruel∣ly slaine by Dodon, brother of the Adulteresse. The saide Dodon and his complices perished miserably within a yeare. Hubert succeeded the Bishop of Liege. The Histories of France. AbsimarusAbsimarus, otherwise called Tiberius, borne at Con∣stantinople, was chosen Emperour by the Souldiours
for the negligence which they sawe in Leontius,Iohn 6. that no aide was sent vnto them for the guard of Affrike, which they had recouered of the Sarrasins. Absimarus then came from Con∣stantinople and tooke Leontius, and cut off his nose, and impriso∣ned him in a Monasterie. He raigned seuen yeares. Naucler. Abb. Ʋrsp. Iohn Pope, sixt of that name, a Grecian, ruled at Rome 3. yeares. After the maner of other Popes,The deuotion of Popes. he was very curious to repaire Churches, to adorne Aultars, and redeeme captiues with the papall treasure. Some write him a Martyr, vnder the kings of Lombardie, for defending the rights of the church. Fasci. temp. The Venetians at this time beganne to haue a Duke to hinder quarells and disorders of such as gouerned,The first Duke of Venice. and the enuie which the Lombards bare to their libertie: but after, as it were repenting themselues, they caused many of their first Dukes to die. Moreouer, the Dukes ornaments differed not from those of a King, and all the Senates Letters, the publica∣tion of them were in the Dukes name: yet he had not the bridle loose for a full authoritie. Westfalia after some, was conuerted to the faith about this time. Iohn Pope, 7. of that name, ruled at Rome two or three  yeares, diligent to adorne and repaire Churches. This is from henceforth the chiefest studio of Popes and Papists. Iustinian hauing had succours from Bulgaria and Turkey, came to Constantinople, and againe obtained the Empire and raigned sixe yeares. He caused to be set out of prison, Leonti∣us and Tiberius beeing bound with chaines, which hee made to be tied to the tailes of horses, and being so drawne through the streetes, were brought againe and troden vnder feete, and finally caused them to be beheaded. All their partners were put to diuers torments, and great vengeance vsed towards them. He put out the eyes of Gallinicus Patriarke of Constanti∣nople,
and sent him to Rome into exile,Iustinian. and in his place appoin∣ted Cyrus Abbot, who had assisted him when he was in exile, and foretold him his restitution. Sarrasins in Graneda.The Sarrasins vnderstanding the debates betwixt the Em∣perours, occupied againe Affrike and Libbia, and a part of the kingdome of Spaine, and the kingdome of Graneda. Supp. Chrn. and Naucl. The faith began almost to bee cleane extinct in the East, because of the Lawe of Mahomet. Beda the Venerable, writ then to the Christians Princes, to driue the Sarrasins out of Spaine, but he spake to the deafe. Sisinnius Pope, otherwise Sosinus a Sirian, ruled onely 20. dayes.Sisinnius. For being tormented with the Gout both in feete and hands, and not being able to eate, he died suddenly. Schisme the seuenth.The 7. schisme was betwixt him and Dioscorus, and a great combat for the Papacie. The said schisme continued long time by his successors. A Famine at Rome by the space of three yeares, sharpe and rude. Constantine Pope, a Sirian, ruled at Rome seuen yeares, great∣ly beloued of euery one;Constantine. for he helped the people much during this famine. Iustinian. kisseth the Popes feete.Iustinian commaunded him to come to him to Constanti∣nople, which hee did, and being arriued the Emperour embra∣ced him, and falling on the earth kissed his feete, and de∣maunded pardon of him for all his faults, and that he would pray to God for him: and after receiued the Eucharist of him, and then were renewed and confirmed the priuiledges of the the Romane Church. Supp. Chron. Abb. Ʋrsp. Iustinian chaunged nothing his life passed, but that hee bare himselfe otherwise towards the Romane Sea then he was wont to doo, and maintained it. For vnderstanding that Fe∣lix Arch-bishop of Rauenna, would not yeeld accustomed obe∣dience to the Pope, that was, to send a certaine breuiat, where∣in he should acknowledge his obedience due, and a certaine summe of money: the Emperour sent a Captaine to Rauenna called Theodorus, who reprehended Felix, and sent him bound
to Constantinople; who was afterward sent into exile into Pontus, and after, both his eyes were put out. Many Citizens also of Rauenna were exiled with him, and others put to death, and their goods confiscate, and the Towne taken by force, as it is aboue said. Naucl. Constantine admonished Iustinian to attempt nothing against Phillippicus who was exiled into Pontus; wherevnto notwith∣standing, after hee obeyed not, but sent against him: but his people followed the part of Phillippicus, and they came to Con∣stantinople, whom Iustinian met. Phillippicus Bardanius, Captaine of the warre, had the vic∣torie  of Iustinian,Phillippicus. and caused his and his sonnes head to be cut off, and raigned Emperour a yeare and fiue monethes. He was of the Sect of the Monothelites, and sent Cyrus a Catho∣lique Bishop into exile into Pontus: or as Paul Diaconus saith, into his Abbey, and appointed Arch-bishop in his place, one Iohn, a Monke of his Sect. Supp. Chron. The beginning of the contention for the Images of Saints. Phillippicus made an Edict,Against Images. that all the Images of Saints should be taken from Churches, and that by the consent of Iohn, Patriarke of Constantinople; for which cause Constantine Pope excommunicated them, and declared them heretikes in a Sinode at Rome: hee likewise ordained that the Image of the said Emperour should not be receiued, nor ingrauen in Gold, Siluer, Brasse, or Leade; no not his name nor his figure should not be receiued, nor mention made of him in the praiers of their Masse. Abb. Ʋrsp. Idolatrie findes the Pope his Defender. But it is no maruell: Seeing the second Commaundement, Thou shalt make thee no grauen Image, &c. is omitted in the Com∣mandements which the Romane Church approoueth, which is a sacriledge against the word of God.
Anastatius Theodosius the 3. Leo the 3.Note that from henceforward the Romanists condemne for heretikes such as agree not to their opinions. On the euen of Pentecost, the Emperour Phillipicus after he had dined, as he was about to repose himselfe, was taken and bound, and his eyes put out. Ʋrsp. Anastatius, or Arthemius, was chosen Emperour, and raig∣ned three yeares. He hauing sent an Armie into Egipt against the Sarrasins, the souldiers created an other Emperour called Theodosius, who comming to the Empire, caused Anastatius to be made a Priest, to the end he might no more thinke of the Empire. Yet after, thinking to returne thither by the helpe of the Bulgarians, hee was drawne out. Dagobert, second of that name, the 18. King of France, raigned 14. yeares. Gregorie Pope, second of that name, a Romane, ruled 16. yeares and 8. moneths. Naucler. Hee sent Boniface (otherwise called Wenefride) an English Monke, into Frisia to preach the faith, where hee was martyred, and where before one called Vuillibrordus hadde preached in the time of Pope Sergius. Naucle∣rus. Tiber ouerflowing his bankes at Rome, destroyed the coun∣trie. Gregorie ouer all the Towne made often supplications and processions. Theodosius, third of that name, borne at Constantinople, ob∣tained victorie against Anastatius, and constrained him to leaue the Empire, and make himselfe a Monke, and raigned one yeare. Paulus. Diacon. He caused againe Images to be restored vnto Temples, which Phillippicus had taken away, and therefore he was held for a good Catholique. Hee is the 37. Emperour.Leon, an Isaurian by Nation, third of that name, chiefe of the Army which was in the East against the Sarrasins, depriued
Theodosius of his Empire, and raigned 24. yeares.Gregory. 2. Leo 3. He was called Iconomachus, that is to say, an Impugner of Images. Constantinople was besieged three yeares by the Sarrasins and Arabians, but they which besieged them bare as much euil,The Sarrasins besieged Constanti∣nople. as the besieged, because of famine and pestilence. There was also a great famine in the Towne: In so much that some write that there dyed 30000. persons. After the siege was leuied,Images taken away. Le∣on went into Sicilia and Italie, and beganne to cast Images out of their Churches. This was the 10. yeare of his Empire. The Emperour Leon made an Edict to take away & burne all the Images, Gregorie opposed himselfe against it,Sedition at Rauenna for Images. and gaue commaundement to all Christians not to obey the said Edict: In so much that they of Rauenna and the Ʋenetians, rebel∣led, wherein the Exarche and his sonne were slaine. Supp. Chro. Rome and as it were all Italie, withdrew their obedience from the Emperour, and would paie him no taxes nor tributes. Leo notwithstanding caused to be published againe; That all Ima∣ges and statues of gold, siluer or brasse, marble & wood, should be brought into the Market place, and incontinently burnt, ordeining the paine of death to the gainsaiers. Hee depriued Germaine Patriarke of Constantinople of his dignitie. Heere beginne Popes to lift vp their hornes against Em∣perours, and to oppose themselues against them. For this Pope durst excommunicate the Emperour Leo the third, in full Sinode, because he desired to abolish the adoration of Images. The office of Exerchate ceased then in Italie,The end of the Patriarke∣ship in Italie. which had endured 164. yeares or thereabouts, and was occupied of the Lombards. Supp. Chron. and Naucler. Touching the Kings of France. Because of the great troubles which at this time were in the kingdom of France, the greatest part of the kings of France was created after the appetite of him who was maister of the
Pallace.Leo. 3. Gregory. 2. The kings had but the title & their pleasures to build Monasteries and Temples as they thought good. This Maister of the Pallace had the Gendarmie in his power,The great Maister of the Pallace. as the Gardian and Protector of the dignitie royall. This endured vntill these  maner of kings were extinct; and that the administratiō Roy∣all was deuolued into the family of Pippin le Court, which is the 22. king of France, the sonne of Charles Marteil, Maister of the Pallace, bastard sonne of Pippin le Gros Duke of Austrasia, a va∣liant man, and an excellent warriour. Theodoricke Cala, the 20. king of France, had the title and dignitie of a king, and raigned 15. yeares. The Sarrasins of Spaine (which they had occupied) came into France, being called by Erido king of Aquitane, who felt himselfe too weake to resist Charles Martel: These Sarrazins discended in number 400000. with their wiues, children, and seruants, as meaning to occupie all France: wasting & destroy∣ing all places where they came. Endo who was their hoste to in∣uite them thither, seeing so great a multitude, made an agree∣ment and retyred on the side of France: And Charles Martel met these Sarrasins in Tourrain, and made an incredible slaugh∣ter of them: So that their king Abdirama was there slaine: and on the side of France there were no more slaine but 1500. It should be an incredible thing, if besides the Historio∣graphers of France, straunge writers had not witnessed the same, this so miraculous a deliuerance from so barbarous and horrible a multitude, beeing so autenticke and so generally knowne. The Eccleciastical people of France durst make the world beleeue (with lye and all) that this Charles Martel was dam∣ned, because hee exacted certaine tenths of the goods of the Church, to help the charges of this so daungerous a warre. Can there any Ingratitude or Couetousnesse be greater then is in this Papall Priesthood? Eucherius Bishop of Lion, of great authoritie, a little after the death of Charles Martel, namely the yeare 742. saith, hee
sawe in a vision Charles Martel in the paines of hell:Leo. 3. because he had vsurped the goods of the Church, and had not restored them as he promised. Fasci. temp. And others recite it. A lye which is for the profit of the Priests kitchin, Inconti∣nently findes his witnesses, yea by horrible absurdities. Iohn Damascene was in this time. Eutrop. and maintained the Popes quarrels touching Images. Gregorie Pope, third of that name, a Sirian, gouerned at  Rome 10. yeares and more.Gregory. 3. This Pope was cause that all Italie departed from the do∣mination of the Empire, because Leon the Empeour would that in Churches there should be no Images of Saints. And there∣fore the Pope made a Councell at Rome to be held, where were assembled as many Bishops as hee could get: And there it was decreed, that we may lawfully honour Images. And a generall sentence was pronounced against all violators and gainsaiers of their Canonike conclusiō and they excommunicated the Em∣perour, and depriued him of his dignitie. Emperours here may take a good example, that they suffer not themselues to be led by Popes, least finally they loose their Em∣pires. Gregorie restored many Monasteries, and builded new, adding great lands and reuenewes vnto them, for the Monkes liuing. He commaunded Priests to make a commemoration of the dead, and to pray for them:Praying and offering for the dead. and writ to Boniface Archbi∣shop of Magunce, that Christians might offer for their Parents which died faithfully. Naucler. Some attribute this to Grego∣rie. the 2. in the 2. volume of the Councells. He added to the seruice of the Masse (Quorum solemnitas hodie in conspectu tuae maiestatis celebratur, &c. Domine Deus no∣ster in toto orbe terrarum. Chron. Sigeb. Some Monasteries were richly founded in Almaigne,
at Fulden,Leo 3. Gregory 3. at Herfelden, and other places. Fasci. Temp. Rome was besieged by Luitprandus, King of Lombardes:  wherefore Gregorie sent to Charles Martel, King Pippins Fa∣ther, the keyes of the holy Sepulchre, and S. Peters bands, with other goodly gifts, to the ende it would please him to deliuer and take the Romane Church from the seruitude of the Lom∣bards. Charles Martel writ to Luitprandus, and intreated that which the Pope desired, Naucler. Before when the Citie of Rome endured any violence by other Princes, she vsed to demaund helpe of the Emperour of Constantinople; but Gregorie the third would not do this. So that the tutorship of the Romane Church was transported from the Emperour of Constantinople to other Princes; & by that meane came it to passe that Rome is retired and exempted from the o∣bedience of the Emperour of Constantinople. Naucler. The Masse beganne to be sung. Paulus Diaconus, lib. 6. chap. 17. saith, that Luitprandus king of Lombards, was the first of those kings which out of Singers did elect Priests and Clarkes to sing Masse, which fashion af∣terward was augmented in the time of Gregorie the fift, by the inuention of Robert Bishop of Chartres, wherevpon the Song was called of the said Gregorie, Gregoriall Song. Note that Singing came into the Church by the Lombards, which Gregorie the first of that name had renounced. Hen. Bullenger. Lieuen an English Priest, preached in the Countrey of West-falia. Fasci. temp. They of the Towne of Gaunt in Flaunders vse great Ido∣latries vnto him. The Popes come now as into their chiefe force. Childeric third of that name, 21. King of France, hauing
raigned nine yeares was chased away,Zacharie. and constrained to make himselfe a Monke. So from Pharamond vnto Pippin we account 331. yeares: From Merouee 302. From Clouis the first, made a Christian, 252. Zacharie Pope, borne in Greece, ruled at Rome 10. or a 11. yeares, an Inuentor of Cappes and other ornaments tissued of Gold and stones. He assigned certaine rents and lands to Priests to liue on, and for Lampes in Churches. He forbad the Venetians vnder paine of excommunicati∣on,Christians slaues. that they should no more sell Christians as slaues to the Sar∣rasins, as they accustomed to do. Pippin, surnamed le Court, of a Maister of the Pallace,The ambition of Pippin. became by ambition the 22. King of France, and besought the Pope, that by his authoritie hee would confirme the kingdome vnto him. Chilperic then King of France,The King of France depo∣sed and made a Monke. after hee had raigned nine yeares became a Monke, by the aduice and authoritie of Pope Zacharie, and his wife, was put into a Monasterie: and in his place the said Pippin sonne of Charles Martel, and Father of Charlemaigne was made King, and consecrated at Soisons by Boniface, Arch-bishop of Magunce, by the election of all the Barons of France, and by the consent and Councell of Pope Zacharie, being therevnto required: Who not only comman∣ded and confirmed the said election, but also absolued Pippin of the oath which he had made to the King and to the Crowne of France. Abb. Vrsp. This Pope did as much with the King of Lombards called Lachis.Lachis King of Lombards deposed. For he found meanes that he left his kingdome & made himselfe a Monke, and his children and wife, and his brother Astulfe, succeeded him. In the 2. volume of Councels. Carloman, Pippins brother, was also shauen and made a Monke at Rome, by the perswasion of Zacharie, and remai∣ned in the Abbey of the mount Srap in Lombardie, and after in the mount Cassin. Constantine the fift of that name,Cōstantine the fift. Emperour 74. sonne of
Leon,Cōstantine the fift. raigned 35. yeares. This as he was baptized made water in the Font, and ther∣fore was he called in Greeke Copronymos. What necessitie was there to hold a naked Childe ouer the Font? This gaue a forewarning that hee should be an euill Chri∣stian. Naucler. And indeed many crimes were imposed vpon him, because hee constantly maintained his Fathers opinion a∣gainst the Pope, touching Images: and from thence came al∣so that they say he dyed desperate, when he said I am deliuered from the fire eternall. Fasc. temp. Chron. Sigeb. and others. They which consent not to the Popes Decrees are Iudged damned. Sinode in France vnder Pippin.Vnder Pippin a Sinode was held in Fraunce, by Boniface Arch-bishop of Magunce, Bucardus, Guntarius, and other Bi∣shops, which had not beene in 80. yeares before: In so much that men said that Religion in France was dissipated and laide vnder feete. Naucler. Sinodes each yeare.It was then ordained that eache yeare there should be a Sinode in France. That no Church-man should beare Armes. That none of them should vse hunting, nor keepe Dogges nor Birds of pray. That euery Priest and Bishop should hold himselfe in his Parish, and do their diligence to roote out auncient heresies: that is to say,Paganisme. Paganisme, and errors of the sacrifices of the dead: diuinations, enchauntments, and other Immolations which are yet done after the manner of Painims nigh Churches, vnder the name of Martyrs and Confessors. Naucler. Paganisme of the Gods, was persecuted in France: but true Religion was not therefore established. In this time the Hunnes called Hungarians, occupiped Pan∣nonia.
They were diuided into seuen bands: euery band buil∣ded a Castle, which yet at this day are called Septem Castra in Latin, which is a strong place against the Turkes.Seuen Castles Edward King of England, who otherwise was reputed an vpright man, left his wife, and entertained Nunnes, who was ad∣monished by Letters from Boniface, to leaue off that vice. Nau∣cler. These be the fruites and enticements of that cursed single life. Pippin le Court dyed at Paris, after hee had raigned 17. or  18. yeares after some, leauing his two sonnes, Charlemaigne in Soisonnois, and Carloman at Noyon. Stephen Pope, second of that name a Romaine, ruled at  Rome sixe yeares.Stephen. 2. Hee was carried vpon mens shoulders vnto the Church of S. Lateran: and thereof it comes that at this day Popes cause themselues to be carried. The Emperour Constantine, the 14. yeare of his Empire, assembled a Councell at Constantinople of 330. Bishops,A Councell at Constanti∣nople against Images. where it was commaunded that all Images of Saints should be taken and burnt. Also he caused all his subiects to sweare, no more to honour any Image of God, nor of Saintes, but condemned to die all such as called to the Virgin Mary for helpe, and that had in their houses any Relikes of Saints. They commaunded Monkes to Marry,To marry. and Nunnes to follow the estate of marriage. Sigeb. After this the Emperor sent the defruition of this Councel to the Pope, commaunding him to cast Images out of Chur∣ches. Sabin King of Bulgaria, throughout his Kingdome caused all Images to be taken away, after the example of Constantine, whereby he came in grace with the Emperour. Naucler. Stephen went into Fraunce towardes King Pippin, de∣maunding aide and succours against Astulphus King of the Lombardes. This King Pippin went and met the Pope, and discended from his horse, tooke the bridle of the Popes horse in his hand, and so ledde him to the Pallace. Suppl. Chron.
Stephen.Stephen consecrated him and his two sonnes, Charlemaigne, and Carloman, in the Church of S. Denis in France, and confir∣med them in such manner as hee and his posteritie should holde the kingdome of France in heritage for euer, and excommuni∣cated all such which should set themselues against it. Fasci. temp. Also hee transported the Empire of Constantinople into France: which afterward Pope Leo approued, ratified, and put in execution. And therefore the Empire was parted into East and West. Supp. Chron. Fasci. temp. & Naucler. From whence came this authoritie to bestowe kingdomes of the world, but from the diuel, who is called the prince therof? Pippin went into Italie to the Popes succours, and obteined victory against the Lombards. Astulphe was constrained to agree to the Popes will. Sigeb. The Exar∣chate giuen to the Pope.The Exarchate which was occupied by the Lombards, and appertained to the Emperour, is giuen to the Pope by Pippin without any right. For the estate of such as held that dignitie  and office, were assigned the Townes that follow: Rauenna, Imola, Boulonge, Mutina, Rhegin, Parma, Placentia, &c. At this time happened an horrible thing in the Abbey of S. Martin at Tours. For all the Monkes which were giuen to pleasures and wickednes, dyed suffocated and choaked, except one. Fasci. temp. The Parliament Instituted in France. Constantine the Emperour sent gifts to Pippin, praying him to render vnto him the Exarchate. Pippin answered, that hee came not the second time into Italie for any temporall profit, but in dutie to guard the Church against the Lombards, and to take from them Rauenna, and the Exarchate and other goods of Italie, to giue them vnto the Pope. Naucler. Abb. Vrsp. Thassido Duke of Bauier, did homage to the King of France. Paul.Paul brother of the former Pope 94. gouerned 10. or a 11. yeares: In whose election there was great debate. For some had chosen one called Theophilactus.
Buggandus Bishop of Metes, at this time was very affectio∣nate towards holie bodies and heaped vp Relikes. He transpor∣ted from Rome into France the bodies of S. Gorgon, and Saint Nazare, and of many others. Rome which before was the butchery of Martyrs, now selles bodies and bones. Constantine seeing the foolish superstition of Christians at the Sepulchres of Saintes,Saints bones taken out of their graues and cast into the sea. kissing and worshipping their Re∣likes, caused their bones to be taken out of their graues and to be cast into the Sea. At this time it was that Sigebert reciteth, that in Berithe a Citie of Siria, was found an Image of Iesus Christ, wherevnto the Iewes did many outrages, pearcing his feete, hands, and side, from whence bloud came, wherwith many maladies were hea∣led. This thing being declared to the Bishop of the said place, he made that blood to be preciously kept, and shewed it, and carried it hither and thither: And therevpon ordeined each yeare a feast, called the Passion of the Lordes Image, the eight of Nouember. Of this blood there was brought to Mantoua. Supp. Chron. Who sees not that this Fable was inuented, to the end that vnder the shadow of miracles, the seruice of Saints and Images might be set forward against the Grecians & Emperours. Whē men haue no authoritie from the holie scripture, they cry, Mi∣racle, Miracle. Note hereby the refuge of Papists. There was a Sinode held in France against the Grecians touching Images, by the authoritie of King Pippin. Abb. Vrsp. In this time Saints liues were forged on all sides. Ʋerus Biship of Siuil, wrote the life of S. Eutropius Bishop. Abb. Trit. Wibaldus composed the life of S. Boniface his maister, Bi∣shop of Magunce. Tritem. Constantine Pope, second of that name a Romane, gouer∣ned  at Rome one yeare.Cōstantin. 2. By ambition and force hee occupied the Papacice. And
from the estate of a Laie-man being made Priest, hee was cho∣sen Pope by store of money and Armes, but after was taken and cast into a Monasterie, and his eyes put out. Philippicus an Antepope.In this time likewise there was an Antepope called Phil∣lippicus, or Phillip, who also was deposed, and Stephen the third constituted. Sergius Bishop of Rauenna, and Christopher, Authours of the former schisme, had their eyes put out. Stephen. 3.Stephen Pope, third of that name, Monke of Sicilie, ruled at Rome foure yeares. One Pope condemneth an other.This Pope assembled a Councell at Rome, where all that was reuoked, which Constantine his predecessor had ordeined: euen in disgrading them, which by him were consecrated. In the said Councell assisted 12. Bishops of France. Naucler. There was also ordeined, that no Laie-man should be made Pope or Bishop, but successiuely by order and Ecclesiasticall degrees.Gloria in ex∣celsis. Naucler. Item, that euery Sunday the Gloria in excel∣sis should be sung at Masse. There was condemned the Councell of Constantinople. 7. wherein the Emperour Constantine the 2. and the Bishops of Greece, had ordeined that Images should be laid downe. This Councell was declared hereticall, and againe Images comman∣ded, as worthie of honour and veneration. This thus agreed vp∣on, the next morning there was made a great procession, where the Pope went on foote in great deuotion, and all others. Naucler, and Supp. Chron. A great token of repentance for a Pope. Charlemaigne the sonne of Pippin, 22. King of France, had this surname of great, for his prowesses and vertues. Hee had maruellous warres.The warres of Chalemaine.The first in Aquitane. The second against the Lombards. And the third against the Saxons. He had also warre in Spaine, in Bauiere, and in Hungarie against the Hu∣nois: which Historiographers declare in their order.
Adrian Pope, a Romane,Cōstant. 5. Adrian. gouerned the Romane Church 24. yeares. This Pope shewed himselfe cruell against such as impug∣ned the seruice of Images, and made a booke Intituled, Of the worshipping of Saints. Chron. Sigeb. and Abb. Trit. Dedier 22. and last king of Lombards, desired the loue and friendship of this Pope, but he would not consent therevnto: Saying that he would not accord with him which so often had broken his promise: wherewith Didier being moued,The ende of the kingdome of the Lom∣bards. practised many euils against the Church of Rome, In so much that Adri∣an was constrained to demaund aide in Fraunce. Supplim. of Chron. Charlemaigne came into Italie at the request of Adrian, against Didier, and obtained victorie against him: after he had raigned 18. yeares hee sent him prisoner into France, with his wife and children. And the kingdome of the Lombards fini∣shed in Italie, which had endured 224. yeares, or 213. After hee had ouercome the Lombards, hee instituted the Vniuersitie of Pauie, and adorned it with learned people. Charlemaigne came to Rome and kissed the Popes feete.Kissing the Popes feete. Blundus and P. Emilius. He restored to the Romane Church his reuenewes & pri∣uiledges, and ratified all that which his Father Pippin had gi∣uen to the said Church. Wherefore this Adrian caused a Coun∣cell to be held of 153. Prelates: by which was giuen to Char∣lemaigne the right of Inuesture, placing Bishops in possession of their seates, and to elect the Pope of Rome from hence for∣ward. Distinct. 63. cap. Adrianus. This priuiledge endured not long, and was but feined & hy∣pocriticall. And the succeeding Popes obserued it not: saying it was but curtesie and a personable priuiledge which could not exceed the person of the Emperour which then was. Leon Emperour, fourth of that name, sonne of Constantine Emperour, raigned fiue yeares, his wife was of Athens,Leon. 4. named Hirene (otherwise also Theodora) a faire woman, and of great spirit. Naucler.
He loued precious stones, and hauing seene a Crowne full of precious stones in the Treasury of Saint Sophie, put it vpon his head: but by the coldnesse thereof, he fell into a Feuer, whereof he dyed. Chron. Sigeb. Fasc. temp. Naucler. Supp. Chro. After his wife Hirene raigned. Charlemaigne enterprised warre against the Saxons, Infi∣dels, and Painims: and this endured 33. yeares. Naucler. For they often reuolted and feined themselues to be Christians, a∣busing Charlemaigne. Abb. Vrsp. Finally they were made sub∣iect. Adrian builded certaine Towers and walles at Rome, and gaue great gates of Brasse to the Church of S. Peter: and ador∣ned the Aultar with a couering of Gold. Hee ordeined that an hundreth poore people should be nourished in the Court of Lateran. He restored S. Anastatius, and other ruinated Churches. He was puissant and noble of race, and none of his predecessours came to like temporal glo∣ry and riches. Supp. Chro. Fasci. temp. Charlemaigne displeased at the discord of the Church Mu∣sicke, betwixt the Romanes and the French, sent two Clarkes to Rome to learne the Song of the Romane Church, which first instructed the Church of Metes in Lorraine, and after al France, in the same singing. Supp. Chron. Constantine. the 6.Constantine 6. of that name, Emperour 76. of Leon the 4. raigned tenne yeares with his mother Hirene, but being come to age, he depriued her of the Empire, exhorting her rather to deale in domesticall affaires, without medling with gouer∣ning the Empire. Sigeb. Charlemaigne made warre in Spaine against the Sarrasins. Naucler. Where the Peers of France were betraied Ganelon. Hirene had her deuotion towards the virgin Mary, and all other Saints: And at the request of Pope Adrian, and of The∣rasius Arch-bishop of Constantinople, she assembled after Sigeb. a Councell at Nice, called the seuenth, of 350, after some: or of 325. Bishops, Naucler. Wherin it was decreed, that not only in Temples should be Images: but also that they should be wor∣shipped of right, & that al gainsaiers should be excommunicated:
but this decree was after abolished by Constantine. Chro. Euseb.Cōstantine the 6. Here tooke the Vniuersitie of Paris her beginning, by the  care of Alenin an English man, who was Charlemaignes maister.Erectiō of the Vniuersitie of Paris. Constantine the 11. yeare of his Empire, depriued his mo∣ther of the Imperiall gouernment, and caused all Images to be cast downe in Temples, and raigned aboue 7. yeares. At this time a Sinode was held in Spaine,Images pro∣hibited. Images for∣bidden in Spaine. in a Towne cal-Eliboris or Granado, where were congregated nineteene Bi∣shops, and thirtie sixe Priests. Felix Bishop of Aquitaine, was President there. Amongst other points, there was principally concluded that there should be no Images nor paintings in Churches. The yeare 793. an other Sinode was held at Francford, by  the Bishops of Almaigne & Franconia. The Pope Adrian know∣ing this, sent two Bishops, Stephen and Theophilacte, to vrge the Decree made for Images at the Councell of Niece, by the meanes of Hirene. In so much that the Sinode held at Eliboris in Spaine, was at the said Francford condemned. Abb. Ʋrsp. Seeing now Iesus Christ was left to be portraied by the prea∣ching of his pure word, Images were admitted into the Tem∣ples of Christ: therefore no maruell if so many contentious follow. Hirene greeued to be depriued of the Empire, by presents, sollicited certaine Captaines to kill her sonne. They watched him and put out his eyes, vpon such a day as he had put out the eyes of his Vncle (after Nicephorus) fiue yeares before, then put him in prison, where he deceased fewe dayes after. Hirene then his mother, gouerned alone by the space of three yeares. Shee also caused to be taken out of his graue the bodie of Constantine the fifth, Father of her dead husband, and made it publikely to be burnt, and the Ashes thereof to be cast into the Sea, because in his life time he had broken Images. This did she at the Instigation of Theodorus Bishop, who fauoured the Pope touching Images. Henry Bullenger.
Hirene. Adrian.Alcuin, or otherwise Albin, Disciple of Beda the Vene∣rable, Monke, and after Abbot of S. Martin of Tours, Char∣lemaignes maister, made three bookes of the Trinitie, and ma∣ny other bookes. Also the life of S. Vaast Bishop of Arras. Abb. Trit. Councells in the time of Charlemain.Charlemaine during his raigne, caused 6. or 7. Councels and Sinodes to be held: whereof fiue, that is to say, at Magunce, Wormes, Rhenes, Tours, & Arles, were assembled against the a∣buses of Ecclesiasticall persons which then were very great, and did much displease the Emperour Charlemaigne. Ansegisus Abbot of this time, made foure bookes of the Decrees of Charlemaigne, and of his sonne Lewis. Amongst other things, and aboue all, he wold that Bishops should preach to the people the true doctrine drawne out of the holy Scrip∣tures, and not otherwise: Therevpon alleadging the saying of Gregorie. That the Priest which goeth without the care of preaching, lightly, lighteth against himselfe the wrath of the hid Iudge. He also ordeined that no man should make profession of Monachisme, without demaunding the Kings licence to shun many fraudes. He would fewe Feasts should be ordeined. He repressed the superfluitie of Priests, and ordeined that they should be norished of the Ecclesiastical reuenews with ye poore. This was S. Boniface then accoun∣ted the Apo∣stle of Almaigne.He one day sharply reprehended the Archbishop of Ma∣gunce called Boniface, because he had vsurped a Crosse all co∣uered with gold, and enriched with precious stones, as an Im∣periall Scepter. For occasion thereof being offered in a publike assembly, he said to him in choller; Is it thus you make profes∣sion of the Crosse of Christ? Do you thus feed the flock, being rather in order of an Emperour then a shepheard? An other which on S. Martins euen was made Bishop, and for ioy therof forgetting to come the next day to the Temple, was dismis∣sed by Charlemaigne, saying: What wil he do hereafter, when at first he is so forgetful of his office? Also one other hauing recei∣ued a great benefice, for ioy, being vpon horseback, cast himself downe with great agilitie before the Emperour. To whom the Emperour said: So farre as I see you are an able man, and a good
horseman, I haue need of you: Leaue hardly this benefice to some weaker man. Auentinus the Historiographer in his bookes of the Annales of Bauaria. We may see by the recitall hereof, that Popes had not that soueraigne power which afterward their successours vsurped. The Emperours called Sinodes, and proposed statutes and de∣crees, and conferred and bestowed benefices. At Francfort whilest Charlemain wintered there, a Coun∣cell was held, wherin the decree of the Councell of Niece held by Hirene touching Images (as is saide) was declared false, and altogether condemned. And although the Popes Factors, as Vrspergensis and others do passe and dissemble it, yet so is the truth. And that the Pope Adrian sent thither his Embassadors, Stephen and Theophilacte Bishop. There also was condemned the heresie of Felix and Eliphandus, which acknowledged their fault, and asking pardon were restored to their dignities. Charlemaigne caused a booke to be published in his name, which agrreed with the Articles of the said Councell. Yea and moreouer, he answered two bookes which were found written by Adrian, to Therasius Patriarke, and to the Emperour of Con∣stantinople. By this writing Charlemaigne taxeth, and couertly condemneth Adrian, without naming him Idolater. There was also a Councel held at Cauaillon, vnder Charlemaigne, wherein amongst other superstitions which were there condemned, that of Pilgrimages in respect of Religion, was sharply repressed in the 45. Canon. Alledging that saying of S. Hierome. Men should not be praised because they haue seene Ieru∣salem, but because they haue liued well. Leo the third of that name, borne at Rome,Leo. 3. after he had re∣ceiued the Papall dignitie, Incontinently sent to Charlemaigne the Keyes of S. Peter, the Ensigne or Gonfanon (as they call it) of the Towne of Rome, with other presents: requiring him that he would doo so much, that the people of Rome might yeeld themselues subiect to the Pope in deliuering him their oath of fidelitie. For he feared the people one day would not stoope vnder his tyrannie.
But Charlemaigne willing to do a thing pleasing Leo,Constantine the 6. sent a cer∣taine Abbot called Agilbert, who by the Emperours comman∣dement constrained the Romane people to sweare fidelitie to the Pope. For this cause the people conceiued such an hatred against the Pope, that hauing found some which stirred them more to execute their fury, and to serue them for guides & Cap∣taines: as one day he went a procession, hauing cast him from his horse they spoiled him of his pontificiall apparell, and beat him well. In which tumult none put out his eyes nor cut out his tongue (as the Papists affirme, teaching that straightway he was diuinely healed, by so manifest lies to amplifie his authoritie): but indeed hee was only put in prison in the Monasterie of Saint Erasmus, as Mantuan saith in his fourth booke, des Fastes. Charlemain Emper. 801. the first name of treschristi∣an, the first of Emperours that were Crowned by the Popes.Finally, as Charlemaigne came to Rome, the people know∣ing how hee was affectioned towards the Pope, for the feare they had of him, changed the anger they had cōceiued against Leo into fauour, and durst not enterprise to proue the crimes whereof they accused him. After then they had bene exa∣mined touching his life, they cryed all with one voice, That the Apostolike seate ought not to be iudged by a Laie person. By which answere Charlemaigne being appeased, after also that Leo had affirmed by an oath that he was not culpable, he declared him absolued and innocent. The Pope for these benefites, willing to yeelde some pleasure on Christmas day, assoone as the King was come from the Church, he put the Crowne on his head, and pro∣nounced Charlemaigne Emperour of the Romanes, without that, he had aspired to receiue the Imperiall Crowne. And all the Romane people cryed saying; Life and victorie be to the thrice Christian Charles, alwaies August, Crowned of God; great and peaceable Emperour. And whereas before they vsed to call him by the name of Patrician, he was called Em∣perour: the yeare of his raigned 23. and of our saluation eight hundreth and three.
Hirene Empresse of Constantinople,Charlemain.Hirene. hearing what had beene done at Rome, sent three Embassadors towards Charle∣maigne to confirme the peace. Charlemaigne on his side also sent his Embassadors towards the Empresse for a greater confirma∣tion of peace, demaunding her in marriage; wherevnto she had consented, but for the hinderance by ambushes laid against it: as if she would haue solde the Empire by her marriage to stran∣gers. Nicephorus then was crowned Emperour,Nicephorus. and Hirene cha∣sed away; who passed the rest of her life in exile. Nicephorus sent his Embassadors to Charlemaine,Diuision of the Empire. to renew the alliance vp∣on those conditions; That both should be called Augustes and bretheren together: the one of the East, and the other of the West: That in Italie which is on the side beyond Naples,Accord of diuision. and on the other side beyond Sipont: namely, all that which stretcheth towards the Sea, should belong vnto the Greeke Emperour, and the rest to the French Emperour. That Ʋenice should be in the middest, and as the limitte and border betwixt those two Empires, and acknowledge the Maiestie of them both. That the Venetians should be subiect neither to the one nor the other, but should vse their owne lawes, and be the friend of both, whether in peace or warre. Some say, that the Emperour after his Coronation said, that if he had knowne the Popes enterprise, he would not that day haue entred into the Church. Aduertisement. Although successiuely there were alwaies Emperors of Con∣stantinople, which kept the Romane Empire vntill the Towne was occupied by the Turkes: yet because the true brightnesse and Maiestie of the name and of the tuition of the Empire, and of Italie, was in Charlemaine and his successors, we leaue in Nicephorus the Greeke Emperours, because they haue not bene like these. Therefore leauing the East, namely, that of Constantinople, we will set downe in order the Emperours of the West; namely of Rome.
Charlemain.Charlemaigne then deliuered the Romane seate from all molestations of forraine Princes, and atchieued that for which principally hee came into Italie: that is to say, at the siege of Pauie, hauing constrained Didier the last King of the Lombards to yeeld himselfe, hee got possession of all Lombardie. And to the ende they should no more molest Italie, hee droue them away as seditious persons, and sent Di∣dier Captiue with his wife and children into the Towne of Liege. Paul. Diaconus, an Historiographer, and Secretarie to the said Didier, was ledde with him; and from that time Charle∣maigne made his the Kingdome of Lombardie, leauing all the Townes of Italie in theyr accustomed libertie, to the ende hee might giue no occasion of trouble vnto the Greeke Emperour. The alliance of Scotland with France.About this time, Acayus the 65. King of Scots, made the first alliance with King Charlemaigne, and with Fraunce, which hath endured euer since, and yet at this present is main∣tained betwixt these two Nations. Bauiere conquired.Tassilo Duke of Bauiere, moouing warre against Charle∣lemaigne, lost his Countrey, and was put in a Monasterie with his sonne; and although hee was Charlemaignes kinsman, yet for his faith before violated, hee vsed this seueritie towardes him. Nicephorus.Nicephorus raigned at Constantinople eight or nine yeares, whom the Romanes would not acknowledge for Emperour: wherevpon there rose great enuie and hatred betwixt them of the East, and of the West. A Schisme betwixt them of the East, and of the West. Whatsoeuer agreement was made, there was stil enuie and enmitie betwixt the East and the West Emperours, and they could not suffer one an other: yet this dissention hapned not onely betwixt them, but also betwixt the East and the West Churches; wherof altogether the Pope was cause, in intent to withdrawe and exempt himselfe from the obedience of him of
whom he held all his good. Charlemaigne inriched many Churches, Abbeys, and Bi∣shoppricks; especially in Almaine, the Bishoppricks of Magunce, Strasbourge, Colongne, and Treuers, giuing them great priuile∣ges. Briefly, there were fewe renowmed Churches in Germa∣nie, nor in all the two Frances, which hee endowed not with some goods and reuenewes. Iohannes Scotus, a Monke of S. Benet, a Disciple of Beda, and a companion of Albin or Alcuin, Charlemaignes maister, wrote vpon S. Mathewe three bookes, and other things. Abb. Trit. Hinmarus Bishop of Rhemes, before Monke of S. Deuis, wrote two bookes of the life of S. Remy Bishop. Tritem. Charlemaigne at the last got the vpper hand of the Hunga∣rians, and tooke great riches from them: for it had bene two hundreth yeares that they did no other thing but pill and spoile all other Nations, without beeing pilled themselues. After, he tamed the Bohemians, hauing ouercome their King called Lechon. And so in the ende Charlemaigne was peaceable of Italie, France, Almaine, Hungarie, and Bohemia. So oftentimes the Lord sends puissant Monarkes to re∣paire things confused,Wherefore God sends great Monarks as also to represse the insolencie and disordinate dealings of great persons dispersed on the earth. Charlemaigne of the age of 72. yeares, died at Aix in Al∣maine, of a Feauer and a Plurisie, the yeare of his raigne, 46. of his Empire 14. and the yeare of Christ 814. hauing instituted the Vniuersitie of Paris and Pauie. Lewis, Charlemaignes sonne, by his wife Hildegarde, surna∣med  Le Debonaire, because he was of a soft and gracious spirit,Lewis surnamed the Debonaire, Emperour Stephen. 4. A subtill Foxe. was after the death of his father, pronounced Emperour by the chiefs of the Kingdome. Stephen, fourth of that name, a Romane, being substituted in the place of Leo, three monethes after went into Fraunce towards Lewis Debonaire the Emperours, to the ende to purge
himselfe concerning his election:Lewis. for that against the decrees of Adrian and Leo his predecessors, hee had beene chosen and confirmed Pope by the Cleargie and the people of Rome, without the counsell and authoritie of the Emperour. Where∣in we see that the Romane seate is so faithfull an obseruer of her owne lawes and ordinances, that the first that succeeds him which made them, breakes and transgresseth them. But to the end that this flatterer vsing hipocrisie might the rather for a time abuse Lewis, hee set on his head a faire Crowne (which hee brought with him) and an other on the head of the Queene Hirmingarde, calling her Auguste, or Empresse. But the subtil Foxe being recompenced by the Emperour, returning, and the Church of Reate in Italie, euen then falling vacant, he would not consecrate the Bishop who was chosen there, vnlesse hee would first acknowledge that the Emperour should approoue his election. But see what followed after. As soone as he was come to Rome, he beganne to thinke that the right and prehe∣minence giuen to Charlemagine and his successers, might bring with it many mischiefes, therefore taking the greater hardi∣nesse, by the softnesse and benignitie of Lewis, thought it good to abolish such a right: and there vpon pronounced that the Popes election ought to be in the power of the Cleargie, of the Senate, and of the Romane people; yet fearing to prouoke the Emperours anger against him, he added this Interpretation: namely, that it should be very lawfull for them to elect the Bishop of Rome without the authoritie of the Emperour, but that it should not be lawfull to consecrate him without the Emperours presence, or his Embassadors. So by this meanes for a certaine time were the Emperours kept from the elec∣tion of the Pope. Yet because Stephen occupied not the seate past eight moneths, hee could do litle of that hee forethought to encrease his authoritie. But he died in his accustomed super∣stition. Anno domini. 817. Pascal first of that name, a Romane Monke, following the traine of Stephen his predecessor, was chosen Pope by the Cleargie and people of Rome, without the consent of the Em∣perour. And as the Emperour complained of this election,
Pascal subtilly purged himselfe by his Embassadors sent thi∣ther. By tract of time this subtill and malitious Pope seeing there was daunger if he longer deferred to augment his autho∣ritie, so straungely enchaunted the Emperour Lewis,The right of choosing and Inuesture of Bishops, be∣longed to the Emperours. insomuch as he bare great honour to the Romane Church, that he con∣sented to remit into the hands of the Cleargie and the people, the right of electing of the Pope, which had beene giuen be∣fore to Charlemaigne; and also that hee should by his Letters confirme all Donations made by his predecessors, although they were made of things acquired by vniust & vnlawfull vio∣lence. This hee did as one ignorant of their cautelous and deceitfull dealings, and sealed them with his seales. But after he had Crowned at Rome Lotharie his sonne Emperour, (to the end that by that meanes he might more easily compasse that which he sought) he did so much by treason and secretly, that Theodorus and Leon, officers of the Emperours house, which faithfully held their maisters part, had their eyes put out, and after their heads cut off by the meanes of certaine muti∣nous and seditious people. And although he were accused to the Emperour, as well for the sedition which had bene stirred,The Pope purgeth him∣selfe by oath. as for the murder against their persons committed: after he had assembled a Sinode of a certaine number of Bishops, he pur∣ged himselfe by oath. Notwithstanding he accused of trea∣son them which were slaine, and pronounced that by good right they had bene slaine: declaring them to be absolued which murthered them. Behold the holinesse of these holy Fathers in their kingdome of perdition. Pascal honoured with a most magnificall Sepulchre in the Towne, two thousand bodies (if he faile not in his account) of Saints before dead, which were buried in Church yardes. He builded all new the Temple of S. Praxides, and set in it the bodies of S. Cecilie, Tiburcius, Ʋalerian, Maximian, and o∣ther Martyrs: also of S. Ʋrbain and other Bishops: He reedi∣fied some Churches which were like to fall with great age.
Lewis vpon great deuotion he had to the Apostolike Sea, bestowed vpon the people and Cleargie of Rome, the power to choose the Pope and the Bishops, which authoritie belonged to the Emperours. But hee reserued this prerogatiue; that the Pope beeing chosen, hee should alwaies send to the Empe∣rours to confirme amitie. Naucler. The Emperour also ratified the donation made to the Pope of Rome by his predecessors, and signed it with his owne hand, and his three children, tenne Bishops, eight Abbots, and fifteene Earles. The Copie of these Letters are in Volateran, in the third booke of his Geographie. Pascal then tarried not long after to commaund vnder paine of excommunication that none should presume to re∣ceiue an Ecclesiasticall Benefice of a Lay-man, whosoeuer hee be. Supp. Chro. Great signes and maruells happened in this time. In Saxe a great Earthquake; so that many villages (as Vrsp. saith) perished by fire. In diuers places it raigned stones amongst haile, which slew men and beasts. Naucler. Eugenius Pope, second of that name, borne at Rome, ruled three yeares.Eugenius. 2. Schisme. A Schisme rose vp in the Church, and there was great discord amongst the Cardinalls, some choosing Sozimus, but finally Eugenius obtained the Papacie, for he had in him great appearance of holinesse. At this time a Peace was confirmed betwixt Leo Em∣perour of Constantinople, and Lewis the Romane Emperour. Naucler. The King of Denmarke, named Hariolus, cast out of his Kingdome by the children of Godfrey, came for succours to the Emperour Lewis, and obtained helpe to be restored into his Kingdome. Chron. Sigeb.
Translation of holy bodies. Now was translation of the bodies of many Saints from Italie, into Almaine, France, and England. Fascic. temp. This was all the Religion of this time. Michael Emperour of Constantinople,Michael, Emperour of Constanti∣nople. sent Embassadors towards Lewis Debonaire, to vnderstand his opinion towching the Images of Saints; namely, whether they should keepe them, or reiect them. Lewis sent them to Pope Eugenius to heare his opinion. Bonif. Simoneta. This Emperour Mi∣chael, sent to Lewis the bookes of the Hierarchie of S. Denis. Chro. Sigeb. Lotharie King of Italie came to Rome, and was royally receiued of Pope Eugenius: hee reformed the estate of the Towne, and all Italie, and ceased all partialities,Rome then, was not yet the Popes. and ap∣pointed at Rome Magistrates to do right to the people. Nau∣cler. Blond. Ʋalentine, second of that name, Cardinall and Deacon, a  Romane, gouerned at Rome onely fortie dayes, an eloquent man. Bonif. Simoneta. Organes became first in vse in France about this time, by a Priest called Gregorie, who learned his cunning therein in Greece. See the Hist. of France. Gregorie Pope, fourth of that name, a Romane, ruled at  Rome 16. yeares.Gregorie. 4. This Pope would neuer accept the Popeship, vnlesse first the Emperour would approoue his election, and therof he was certified by an Embassage which the Emperour sent to Rome, to examine the said election. Naucl. and Abb. Ʋrsp. The Sarrasins with the Souldan of Babilon, came into Rome, and of the Church of S. Peter, made a stable for horses,Rome. and wa∣sted Pouille, Calabria, and Sicilie, and pilled and spoiled all where they went. Chron. Euseb. and Naucler. Naucler. saith, that in the Councell held at Aixle Chapele,A Councell at Aix wherin the superflui∣ties of Bishops were cut off. vnder this Pope, the yeare of Christ, 830. there was ordained a meane and rule for Monkes, Nunnes, Canons, and others to liue in.
There was also ordained that euery Church should pos∣sesse rents and reuenewes, that so Priests might haue whereon to liue, and so to keepe them from applying themselues to any prophane thing, or dishonest gaine. Prebendes were ordained for Monkes, that for necessitie they might not be withdrawne from holy things. There was also graunted Franches and li∣bertie to Monkes, Clarkes, and Priests, that they should not be subiect vnto temporall Lords, &c. The body of S. Marke was transported from Alexandria to Venice. Naucl. After this Councell, there were ambushes laid for the Em∣peror Lewis: euen his owne children, angry at the second mar∣riage of their father, with one called Iudith, an audatious wo∣man. He sent them farre from him; namely, Lotharie into I∣talie, Pippin into Aquitane, and Lewis into Bauiere. Notwith∣standing he was imprisoned in the Monasterie of S. Modard at Soissons. Iohn le Maire declareth this Historie as followeth. In the time of Gregorie the fourth (saith he) was held a Councell at Campaigne, which was detestable and pernitious, by the disor∣dinate Prelates of France, who grieued that at the former Councell the Emperour had corrected their pompes and dis∣ordered superfluities; hauing caused them to leaue their Rings, they conspired against him, and caused the children to take Armes against their father, and to take him and hold him in straight guard at Soissons; the Pope Gregorie aiding in this ex∣ploit. Moreouer, at the said Councell (or rather conuenticle and monopole) the said Bishops and Prelates coniured, con∣demned their soueraigne Prince and Lord to lay away Armes and his militarie Girlde, and to dispoile himselfe of his Imperi∣all dignitie, and in the place therof, to take the Monkes Coole or Frocke. O false, wicked, and Pharasaicall Priestly hypocrisie (saith he). This is not the first time that thou hast conspired in great disdaine against such as reprehend and correct thee. For thou begannest at the head, that is, at our Lord Iesus Christ. But afterward this said Emperour was againe established into his Kingdome by an other better Councell of Bishops and
Prelates of France, and by the conduct of certaine good Bar∣rons and loyall Captaines of his kingdome, being nigh touched with his troubles and griefes. His sonnes which had imprisoned him, demanded pardon for their fault and villainous enterprise, and obtained it. See Iohn le Maire. Ebdo Archbishop of Rhemes, and many other Prelates which had conspired against the king, were deposed from their dignities, condemned and banished out of France, Chron. Sigeb. Gregorie the fourth instituted the Feast of All-saints, vpon  the first day of Nouember. Rabanus first Monke of S. Benet, and Abbot of Fulden,Rabanus. af∣ter Bishop of Magunce, flourished at this time. He expounded all the Bible, as well the olde as the new Testament, and made many other bookes. Strabus a Monke of Fulden, a Disciple of Rabanus,Strabus. The Ordinarie Close. was the first which made the ordinarie Close, which after was augmen∣ted. Tritem. Bertramus Priest, a learned man, and well instructed in true pietie, made a booke of Predestination, and an other of the body and bloud of the Lord, wherein he speaketh very properly of the Lords Supper. He serued for a light to illuminate others in this darke time. Turpin, Archbishop of Rhemes, wrote two bookes of the actes of Charlemaigne. Abb. Trit. Lewis Debonaire died of the age of 64. yeares, hauing  raigned 26. and was buried at Mets in the Sepulchre of his mo∣ther Hildegarde. After his death, rose vp a cruell time: for whilst his children Lotharie, Charles, and Lewis, were in debates and warres, the Sarrasins on the other side lifted vp themselues, as also the Saxons, with others. At a battle giuen at Fountenay, a Towne of Auxerrois, Lotharie fled to Aixle Chapelle, and and from thence to Vienne. Lotharie or Lother obtained the Empire 15. yeares. The  felicitie of that Kingdome, acquired by Charlemaigne,Lotharie. soone finished in this man, whose Empire was diuided. He had such
debates with his bretheren,Lotharie. that one day at an Easter Feast, al∣most all the Nobilitie of France perished at a combat, where∣in Charles had the victorie. Finally, there was meanes found of agreement; namely, that Charles surnamed Le Chaune, should be King of France, Lewis King of Germanie, and Lotharie who was then the eldest, should haue Gaul, Belgique, Prouince, and that portion of the Countrey which of his owne name was cal∣led Lotharinge: that is to say, Lorraine. He already possessed Italie. Lothaire left three sonnes, Lewis, Lotharie, and Charles, vn∣to which he made a partition: to Lewis, the Empire, with Italie: to Lothaire, Austrasia and Lorraine: and to Charles the youn∣gest, the Kingdome of Prouince. This partition was during his life, in the presence of the greatest of his Kingdome. After, he tooke him to a Monasterie. Sergius. 2.Sergius Pope, the second of that name, a Romane, ruled  three yeares. His election was confirmed by Lewis, the Empe∣rour Lothaires sonne, who sent to Rome for that purpose, and the said Lewis was crowned King of Italie by Sergius. Nau∣clerus. This Sergius was before called Swines Snowte, and there∣fore chaunged his name, and so gaue first occasion to his succes∣sors to chaunge their names in their election. He then, and they which followed, esteemed more of the name which they receiue at their cursed vnction, then that they re∣ceiue at their baptisme: wherein there is an apparant marke of Antichrist. A marke of the beast.Some there are, which by reason of certaine misteries and secrets which were then reuealed, count the number of the Beast from this change of the name, vntill the 7. yeare of Iulius the second of that name: who casting S. Peters keyes into Ti∣ber, tooke Saint Pauls Sword: whereof wee shall speake in his place. Benefices sold to them which would giue most.This Pope had a brother called Benet, who outragiously vsursped to himselfe the Church goods: and there was so
great couetousnesse at Rome, by the carelesnesse of Sergius, that Bishopprickes were publikely solde to him that would giue most: and no man in authoritie sought any remedie for such an enormitie: which they said came because of the Sarrasins comming into Italie. Yet hee was very diligent to adorne and repaire Chur∣ches, and to place many holy bodies in them. Supp. Chron. He builded a Monasterie nigh the Church of S. Siluester. Supp. Chron. He added to the priuate Masse, the breaking of bread into three peeces. Leo, Pope, 4. of that name, a Romane, ruled 8. or 9. yeares.Leo. 4. Hee was presently chosen, euen before his predecessor was  buried. Hee repaired many Temples which the Sarrasins had de∣stroyed. He ordained that no Lay-man should presume to enter into the Quier of the Church,The people seperated frō Priest in the Church. nor to come nigh the Priest when he sung Masse, vnlesse it were to the offering. For that place is ordained for them which doo diuine seruice. Chron. Euseb. Hee also made many Collects and Orisons: as Deus cuius dextra beatū Petrū ambulantem in fluctibus, &c. Item, Deus quibeato Petro collatis, &c. Item, Deus quiab ipso huis mundi principio, &c. Item, Presta quaesumus, omnipotens & misericors Deus, &c. against the assaultes of the Sarrasins and Earth∣quakes. He builded the Castle of S. Angelo at Rome,The Castle of S. Angelo. repaired the walles and gates, and builded fifteene Bularkes for the de∣fence of the Towne. And he himsefle went to warre against the Sarrasins. It was hee which enriched the Crosse with precious stones, the which the Deacons vsed to carrie before the Popes. The yeare of Christ 849. Leo Emperour of Constantinople was slaine in his Pallace, hee beeing in his Chappell, by a conspiracie of his Nobles, and especially of Count Michael, who after obtained the Empire nine yeares. Naucler. Chron Sigeb.
A Sinode at Rome of 64. or after some, 47. Bishops, was assembled by Leo: wherein a great Cardinall was condemned and deposed, because he had left his Parish fiue yeares, and for other crimes. Notwithstanding, after this, the same Pope or∣dained that a Bishop ought not to be condemned vnlesse hee were euicted by 72. witnesses. A great mutation hapned in France by the Normanes, Frisons, Brittaines, and others: which wasted it. Adulphus (after the Chronicle of Eusebius) or Ethel∣wolphus, or Alidulphus, or Adolphus after some, the first Chri∣stian King of England,S. Peters pence in England. went to Rome on Pilgrimage with his sonne Alfredus. Nauclerus. And graunted to the Pope Leo of each house in his Countrey a certaine peece of Siluer for tribute, payable to the Popes of Rome euerie yeare, in the honour of Saint Peter, which custome was long time af∣ter kept. This Tribute was called S. Peters pence, or guilt, and so was all England made subiect to the Popes seate. Func∣tius. The body of S. Helena, mother of Constantine the great, from Rome, was transpoted into France. Chron. Sig. and Fasc. Temp. In Almaine vpon the coast of Rhene, a great famine came, and after that, a great earth quake: whereby S. Albons Church at Magunce fell. An Aduertisement. As for the Popes on the Romane seate, from Phocas the Emperour hitherto, they haue still multiplyed, newe traditi∣ons, ceremonies, buildings, pleasures, pompes, and warres, they haue deuised and practised murthers, alterations and chaunges of Kingdomes; in such sort, as finally the Church vnder their gouernmenment became altogether the whore whereof is spoken in the Apocalips: and the better to disco∣uer the thing, the Lord hath manifested the truth thereof to all the world in this Pope that followeth, Iohn. the 8. who being
a woman, and an whore, hath shewed in her body the true por∣traict of the great spiritual whoredome of the Romane Popes, which after, still more and more is manifested. Iohn, 8. of that name,Iohn. 8. The great whore. tooke the name of an English man, because of a certaine English Moonke of the Abbey of Fulden, which he loued singularly: as for his office hee was a Pope: but for his Sexe hee was a woman. This woman, beeing an Almaine by Nation, borne at Magunce, and first called Gilberte, feigned her selfe to be a man; hauing taken on her mans apparell, went to Athens with her amo∣rous Louer the Monke: In which place she profited excellent∣y in all kinde of Sciences; and after the Monkes death came to Rome, still dissembling shee was a woman: But because she was of a very sharpe spirit and had a notable grace, well and promptly to speake in disputations and publike Lectures, so that many maruelled at her knowledge, euerie one was so affectioned towards her, and so well shee gained the hearts of all, that after the death of Leo, she was chosen Pope. Into which office being brought, shee bestowed holy orders (as they call them) after the maner of other Popes: shee made Priests and Deacons: she ordained Bishops and Abbots: she sung Masses: shee consecrated Temples and Aultars: shee administred the Sacraments: shee presented her feete to kisse; and did all other things which the Popes of Rome vsed to do, and yet her Actes were then of verie litle or no valew. Whilest this woman was thus in the Papall office, the Emperour Lotharie now olde, tooke the habit of a Monke, and Lewis the second of that name beeing come to Rome,Lewis. 2. tooke the Scepter and Imperiall Crowne at her hands, with S. Peters blessing. In dooing whereof, this whore of Ba∣bilon shewed her selfe to haue that power, that she made Kings subiect vnto her. In her time Ethelwolphus king of England gaue cowardly the tenth part of his Kingdome to the Cleargie and Monkes (as Horeden saith) and his sonne Ethelbaldus espoused Iudith his mother in lawe, his fathers widow now dead. But whilest this Pope was in his estate, she was got with child by a Chaplaine of hers a Cardinal, who knew well of what Sexe she
was. And as she went on Procession solemnly to the Church of Lateran, she brought forth this child gotten in whoredome, betwixt the Collosse and the Church of S. Clement, in the mid∣dest of Rome in the publike streete, in the presence of all the people of Rome, and died in the same place, as she deliuered her childe, the yeare of our Lord, 857. Because of such a fault, as to bring forth a childe in a common streete, shee was depri∣ued of all honor accustomably done to Popes, and buried with∣out any Papall Pompe. Heere thou mayest see (Reader) how the Romane Church cannot erre, after they haue caused a Masse of the holy Ghost to bee sung. This Act alone certainly doth so eui∣dently shewe that it is the seate of the great whore, and the mother of all whoredomes, that there is no Apelles what∣soeuer that can better paint her in her colours. But to the end that Popes and annointed Fathers may seeme to detest such a sinne, they turne from that streete, as from a place which they much suspect, because of the euil luck. Func∣tius makes no doubt so say that this was permitted of God, that this woman should be created Pope: and withall, that she should be an harlot publikely prooued, because in these times she made kings subiects vnto her, (as Ethelwolphus and Alfredus were in England) that they might acknowledge Antichrist for their king. For God in this Papesse harlot would manifest to the world this whore of Babilon, whereof the holy Ghost hath foretold, to the ende the faithfull I might take heed of her. But to the end those good Fathers should no more fall into such an inconueniency, they haue ordained that a Deacon should han∣dle their priuie parts in an holied Chaire, to the ende hee may be knowne whether he be a man or no. But now whilest they be Cardinals, and before they be chosen Popes, they engender so many bastards, that none can doubt if they be males, neither is there any more need of so holy a ceremonie. Lotharie now old, hauing diuided his kingdome to his chil∣dren, and made himselfe a Monke (as is said) died the yeare 855.
Lewis, second of that name, the sonne of Lotharie,Lewis. 2. (vnto  whom his father had assigned whilest hee liued, the King∣dome of Italie and the Empire) was a kinde man, and one that feared God. Hee raigned nineteene yeares, and died the yeare, 874. Benet Pope, third of that name, a Romane, ruled at Rome about three yeares. This man when he was chosen Pope,Benet. 3. re∣ceiued the office weeping, taking God to witnesse that he was not meet for such a charge. Hee was three dayes in fasting and prayer, desiring the Lord to giue him grace wel to gouerne the Church. Sup. Chron. Naucler. The Emperours Embassadors came and confirmed his election. He visited the diseased, nourished the poore, cōforted the desolate, and defended Widowes and Orphanes. Supp. Chron. Hee ordained that the Pope by his corporall presence, should honour the obsequies of a Bishop, Priest, and Deacon. Boniface Simoneta. And commaunded all the Cleargie to assist the Funeralls of a Pope. R. Barns. He was deposed from his Papacie by the conspiracie of certaine wicked persons: and a Cardinall called Annastatius,A Pope depo∣sed, and after restored. vsurped the seate: but after, he was reiected and sent to pri∣son, and Benet was restored by the Emperours Embassadors. Chron. Sigeb. The English men came into France about this time, and wasted it. Chron. Euseb. Nicholas Pope, the first of that name, a Romane,Nicholas. 1. ru∣led at Rome about tenne yeares: or after Nauclerus seuen  yeares. He was esteemed so holy, that after S. Gregorie the great, there was found none comparable to him. He was created Pope in his absence, and placed in the A∣postolike seate against his will. R. Barns. He builded the Temple or Church of the Virgin Marie, which men call Lanoue. The same. He made many decrees, & amongst others, he ordained that that Emperours and secular Princes should be reiected from
the Counells of the Church, vnlesse there were some questi∣on of Faith. Dist. 91. Cap. Ʋbinam. Item, that secular men should not iudge the life of Clarkes. Dist. 28. Cap. Consulendum. Item, that it should not bee lawfull for any to preiudice or contradict his iudgment, neither to reprehend his sentence and opinion, nor to iudge of his iudgement. 9. q. 3. Patet. Item, that the Pope may not be bound nor vnbound by any secular power, because he is called God. Dist. 96. Cap. Satis euidenter. Item, that Bishops ought not to goe on warre∣fare, but occupie themselues in Prayers and Orisons. 23. quest. 8. Cap. Reprehensible. Item, that hone should assist at the Masse of a married Priest. Dist. 32. Cap. Nullus. Item, hee commaunded to take the Sacraments euen of such Priests as were of wicked life, if they be not reiected of Bishops, or excommunicated for some notorious crime. 11. quest. 8. Cap. Sciscitantib. Item, hee would that the decrees of his pred∣cessors and their Epistles, should obtaine euerie where vertue and authoritie. By his authoritie the Sequences were newly added and sung at Masse, at the sollicitation of Norgerus Abbot of S. Gall; who after was Bishop of Liege. Abb.Trit. He writ a long and very rude Epistle vnto Michael Empe∣rour of Constantinople, in mainteinance of his Apostolike Pri∣macie. He ordained that no secular Prince should presume to v∣surpe things belonging vnto Priests. Lotharie excommuni∣cated.Hee excommunicated Lotharius, brother of the Empe∣rour Lewis, because hee kept two wiues, Theoberge and Gal∣drada, and sent a writing against him to the Bishoppes of Fraunce, Almaine, and Italie. 2. quest. 1. Cap. Scelus. Item, to Charles le Chauue, Vncle of the said Lotharie, 2. quest. 1. cap. An non. Moreouer, hee excommunicated and de∣priued of their dignities, the Arch-bishoppe of Treuens Theogaldus, and the Arch-bishoppe of Coloigene Gontarius, because that consenting to the diuorce, they maintained and defended the said Lotharie, 9. quest. 3. cap. Precipue. cap. Thegaldum. Wherevppon Lotharie seeing himselfe accused,
and also that they proceeded against him by excommunicati∣on, he tooke againe Theberge his wife, and reiected Galdrada: but straight after hee againe forsooke his wife and called again Galdrada, and after could neuer be seperated from her for any correction. Naucler. Iohn Arch-bishop of Rauenna, meaning to maintaine the auncient libertie of Rauenna, which Constantine and Iustinian the two Emperors, and Leo the second Pope, had taken from them, was cited to appeare at Rome, and because hee appeared not, he was depriued of his dignitie. The said Arch-bishop went to the Emperour and besought him to entreate the Popes licence to goe to Rome to defend his cause without daunger: which the Pope graunted at the Emperours request. The Arch-bishop admitted to pleade his cause before many Prelates, confessed himselfe giltie of Treason towards the Pope, and therefore de∣maunded mercy and pardon of all them which were present. The Pope receiued him into grace vpon certaine conditions: namely that in full Sinode he should purge himselfe of heresie. That each yeare he should goe to Rome: That he should cease consecrating of Bishops although they were Canonically elec∣ted, vnlesse it were by the authoritie of the Pope graunted by his Letters. That he should chaunge nothing of Ecclesiasticall goods without the Popes licence, vnder paine of excommuni∣cation. The Bishop of Strasburge called Ratholdus, otherwise Ra∣dulphus, sent to Rome a Priest of his Diocesse, conuicted to haue slaine his mother: vnto whom although there was enioy∣ned hard penance, yet the Pope permitted him to keepe his wife with him, to auoyd the daunger of fornication. See 33. quest. 2. chap. Latorem. and Renamus in the annotations vp∣on on Tertullian, in the ende. But this Pope Nicholas made great haste to publish con∣stitutions and decrees touching the singlenes and continencie of Clarkes, but he could obtaine nothing therein. A Bishop al∣so of Aspurge in Almaigne, called Huldric, greatly resisted the said decrees, and writ an Epistle to Pop: Nicholas, which is wor∣thie wholy to be here inserted, to confound the Popish errour
of the singlenes of Priests. I haue therefore translated it word by word from his Latin originall, as followeth. One Epistle of Huldric Bishop, to Pope Nicho∣las.Huldric Bishop only in name, as a sonne promiseth and beareth loue, and as a seruant feare to Nicholas his Lord, Father and vigilant Pastor of the holy Romane Church. Father and Lord, after I knew thy Decrees made vpon the singlenes of Priests, lately brought vnto mee, to be farre from discretion, a feare vexed me with a sadnesse. I say feare, because it is com∣monly said that the sentence of the Pastor, be it iust or vniust, is to be feared. I was also afraid that the weake Auditors of the scripture (which sildome obey a iust sentence, yea often cast it off as if it were vniust) will not binde themselues vpon com∣maundement vnto an errour, or an importable transgression, for the pleasure of his Pastor. On the other side, heauinesse and compassion moued me: For I see not by what meanes the members can be guarded, when the head is deteined with so greeuous a maladie. For what thing is more greeuous, or more worthie of compassion towardes all the Church, then when the Bishop of the Seate (vnto whom appertaineth the examination of all the Church) withdraweth himselfe, and straieth, yea though neuer so little from holy discretion? Assuredly thou art not a little out of the way when thou wouldest that Clarkes (whom thou shoul∣dest admonish to keepe chastitie of marriage) should be com∣pelled by violence and imperious force, to keepe themselues continent. For is not this violence, yea euen after the common iudge∣ment of all that haue knowledge, when any is constrained to keepe a particular Decree against the Institution of the Gos∣pell and doctrine of the holy Ghost? And seeing there are many examples both of the olde and newe Testament, which teach (as thou knowest) an holy dis∣cretion, I beseech it may not be greeuous to thy Fatherhood, if of many I bring some fewe in this my writing. The Lorde in the olde Testament hath constituted and ordeined marriage for Priests: and we neuer reade that after he forbad it.
He saith well in the Gospell, That some are chaste which make themselues chaste for the kingdome of heauen:Math. 19. vers. 11. but hee addeth, that all men vnderstand not this word. Hee that can comprehend it, let him comprehend it. And therefore the Apostle saith, As for virgins I haue no commandement of the Lorde:1. Cor. 7. vers. 25. but I only giue counsell. Which counsell yet all cannot (as thoa maist consider) comprehend, after the sentence of the Lord. Thou feest notwithstanding many to whome this sentence of the Gospell is pleasant, and flatter themselues, being more willing to please men then God: and vnder a false appearance of cha∣slitie, commit many great and enormious sinnes; do subborne and corrupt other mens wiues: and which is more, do not ab∣horre to lye with Males, and with brute Beasts. And to the end the estate of the Church should not be so wasted and corrupted with such a pollution, infection, and contagious a pestilence, the Apostle S. Paul commandeth & faith: To auoyd fornication,1. Cor. 7. vers. 2. let each man haue his wise. But hypocrites corrupt this sentence, and say falsly that it only appertaineth to Lay people. And yet they make no difficultie nor conscience, in whatsoeuer holy order they be constituted, to abuse other mens wiues. And all those (which we cannot see without weeping) are abandoned to the aforesaid sinnes and enormities: surely they vnderstand not the scripture. And because they haue too rudely pressed the brest therof, in lieu of milk they haue drunk blood. For this sentence of the Apostle, namely: Let each one haue his wife: excepteth no person but him that hath the gift of continency, or him who hath purposed to perseuer in his virginity after the Lord. Wher∣fore (ô reuerend Father) it shalbe your part to see that whosoe∣uer either with hand or mouth hath made a vow of continency, and afterward would forsake it, should either be compelled to keep his vowe, or else by lawfull authoritie should be deposed from his order. An to bring this to passe, ye shal not only haue me, but all other of my order to be helpers vnto you. But ye you may vnderstand that such who know not what a vow mean, are not to be violently compelled thervnto, hear what the Apostle saith vnto Timothy. A Bishop saith he, must be irreprehensible, the husband of one wife. Which setence least you should turne and apply only to one onely Church, mark what he inferreth after.
He that knoweth not (saith he) how to rule his owne house and familie, how should he rule the Church of God? And likewise the Deacons (saith hee) let them be the husbands of one wife, which haue knowledge to gouerne their owne house and chil∣dren. And this wife how shee is wont to be blest of the Priest you vnderstand sufficiently I suppose by the decrees of holie Siluester the Pope.This decree is contrarie to the Bishops and Prelates in Queene Maries dayes. To these and such other holy sentences of the scripture, agreeth also he, that is the writer of the Rule of the Cleargie, writing after this maner. A Clarke must be chaste and continent, or else let him be coupled in the bands of Ma∣trimonie, hauing one wife. Whereby it is to be gathered, that the Bishoppe and Deacon are noted infamous and reprehen∣sible, if they be diuided in moe women then one: Otherwise if they doo forsake one, vnder the pretence of Religion, both they together, as well the Bishop as the Deacon, be there con∣demned by the Canonicall sentence, which saith; Let no Bi∣shop or Priest forsake his owne wife, vnder the colour and pre∣tence of Religion: If he do forsake her, let him be excommuni∣cate: and if he so continue, let him be discharged. S. Augustine also a man of discreet holinesse, saith in these words; There is no offence so great or greeuous, but it is to auoyd a greater euil. Furthermore we reade in the second booke of the Tripartite Historie, that when the Councell of Nice going about to esta∣blish the same decree, would needs enact, that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, after their consecration, either should abstaine vtterly from their owne wiues, or else should be deposed: Then Pathuntius (one of the holy Martyrs of whome the Emperour Maximus had put out the right eye & hockt his legges) rising vp amongst them, withstood their purposed decreement, cōfes∣sing marriage to be honourable, and calling the bed of matri∣mony chastitie: and so perswaded the Councell from making that lawe; declaring thereby what occasion might come of it to themselues, and their wiues, of fornication. And thus much did Pathuntius being vnmarried himselfe, and the whole Coun∣cell commending his sentence gaue place thereto, and left the matter free without compulsion, to the will of euery man, to do therein as he thought good. Notwithstanding there be some
which gatte S. Gregorie for their defence in this matter, whose temeritie I laugh at, and ignorance I lament: For they know not being ignorantly deceiued, how daungerous the decree of this heresie was, being made of S. Gregorie, who afterward well reuoked the same with condigne fruite of repentance. For vp∣on a certaine day as he sent to his Fish-poole for Fish,More then 6000. heads of Infants found in the Popes Moate, through the wicked decree Of the single life of Priests. and did see more then sixe thousand Infants heads which were brought vnto him out of the same Ponde or Moate, did greatly repent himselfe of the Decree before made touching the single life of Priests, which hee confessed to be the cause of that so lamen∣table a murther: And so purging the same with hartie repen∣tance, altered againe the things hee had decreed before, com∣mending that Councell of the Apostle which saith; That it is better to marrie then to burne. Adding moreouer himselfe there∣vnto and saying; It is better to marrie then giue occasion of death. Peraduenture if those men had red with me this which so hap∣pened, I thinke they would not be so rash in their dooing and iudging, fearing at the least the Lords commaundement: Doo not iudge that ye be not iudged. And S. Paul saith; Who art thou that iudgest an other mans seruant? Either hee standeth or falleth to his owne maister, but he shall stand, for the Lord is mightie and can make him stand. Therefore let your holinesse cease to compell and enforce those whom only you ought to admonish, least through your owne priuate commaundement (which God for∣bid) you be found contrary, as well to the old Testament as the new. For as S. Augustine saith to Donatus,S. Augustine to Donatus. This is onely that we doo feare in your Iustice, least (not for the consideration of christian lenitie, but for the greatnes and greeuousnes of trans∣gressions committed) you be thought to vse violence in the exe∣cuting punishment, which we only desire you (by Christ) not to do. For transgressions are so to be punished, that the trans∣gressors may repent their liues. Also an other saying of S. Au∣gustine we would haue you to remember, which is this. Nilfiat nocendi cupiditate, omnia autē charitate proficiendi, & nihil fiat, cru∣delitèr nihil inhumaniter. That is, let nothing be done through the charitie of profiting, neither let any thing be done cruelly, nor vngently. Item of the same Augustine it is written: In the
feare and name of Christ I exhort you, which of you so euer haue not the goods of this world, be not greedie to haue them. Such as haue them, presume not too much vpon them: For I say to haue them is not damnation, but if you presume vpon them, it is damnation. If for the hauing of them, ye shall seeme great in your owne sight, or if you do forget the common con∣dition of man through the excellencie of any thing you haue, vse therein due discretiō therefore, tempered with moderation: which cup of discretion is drawne out of that fountaine of the Apostolicke preaching which saith: Art thou loose from thy wife? do not seeke to thy wife: Art thou bound to thy wife? do not seeke to be loosed from her. Where also it followeth; Such as haue wiues, let them be as though they had them not. And they that vse the world, let them be as not vsing it. Item, concer∣ning the widow he saith; Let her marry to whom she will, only the Lord.What it is to marry in the Lord. To marry in the Lord, is nothing else but to at∣tempt nothing in contracting of Matrimony, which the Lord doth forbid. Ieremie saith also, Trust not to the words of lies, staine not the Temple of the Lord. The which saying of Ie∣remie, Hierome expounding saith thus. This may agree also and be applied to such virgins as bragge and vaunt of their virgini∣tie with an impudent face, pretending chastitie, when they haue an other thing in their conscience. And knowe not how the Apostle defineth the virgin, that she should be holy in bodie, and also in spirit.What a virgin is after the A∣postle. For what auaileth the chastitie of the bodie, if the minde inwardly be deflowred? Or if it haue not the other vertues, which the Propheticall Sermon doth describe? The which vertues, for as much as we partly see to be in you, and because we are not ignorant that this discretion (although neg∣lected in this part) yet in the other actions of your life to be kept honestly of you) do not dispaire, but you will also soone amend the litle lacke which is behinde. And therefore with as much grauitie as we can, we cease not to call vpon you to correct and amend this your negligence. For although touching our com∣mon calling, a Bishop is greater then a Priest, yet Augustine being lesse then Ierome, (notwithstanding the good correcti∣on proceeding from the lesser to the greater) was not to be
refused or disdained: especially when he which was corrected, was found to striue against the truth to please men. For as Saint Augustine saith writing to Boniface,Augustine ad Bonifa∣cium. The Dis∣putations of all men be they neuer so Catholicke or approoued persons, ought not to be had in steed of the Canonicall scrip∣tures. So that we may disproue or refuse (sauing the honour and reuerence which is due vnto thē) any thing that is in their wri∣tings, if there be any thing found contrary to the truth. And what can be found more contrary to the truth then this? When as the truth it selfe, speaking of continency, not of one onely, but of all men together (the number onely excepted of them which haue professed continency) saith: Hee that can take, let him take, Which saying, these men do turne and say: Hee that cannot take, let him be accursed. And what can be more foolish amongst men, thē when any Bishop or Archdeacon run them∣selues headlong into all kinde of lust, adultery and Incest, yet shame not to say, that the chast marriage of Priests do stink be∣fore them? And as void of all compassion of true righteousnes, do not desire or admonish their Clarkes or fellowe seruants to abstain, but command and enforce them as seruants, violently to abstain: vnto the which Imperious cōmandement or coun∣sell of theirs, they adde also this filthy & foolish suggestion:The absurd and filchy say∣ing of Papists. say∣ing that it is more honest, priuily to haue to do with many wo∣men, then openly in the presence of many men, to be bound to one wife. Which truly they would not say, if they were either of him, or in him which saieth: Woe be to you Pharisies, who doo all things before men. And the Psalmist, Because they please men they are confounded: for the Lord hath despised them. These be the men who ought rather to perswade vs to be ashamed to sinne in his presence, with whom all things are naked and discouered: ra∣ther thē to seeme pure and neate in the presence of men. These men therfore although through their sinful wickednes deserue no counsell of godlinesse to be giuen them, yet we not forget∣ting our humanitie, cease not to giue them counsell by the au∣thoritie of Gods word, which seeketh all mens saluation, say∣ing: Thou hipocrite, cast first the beame out of thine owne eye: and then thou shalt see clearly to plucke the Mote out of thy brothers eye.
Moreouer this also we desire thee to attend what the Lord saith of the adulterous woman: Which of you that is without sinne, let him cast the first stone against her. As though he would say; If Moses bid you, I also bid you. But yet I require you that you be competent Ministers and executors of the lawe: Take heed what you adde therevnto: take heed also I pray you what you are your selues. For if as the scripture saith thou well consider thy selfe, thou wilt neuer defame nor detract from an other. Gregorius.Moreouer, it is also signified vnto vs, that some there be of them which (when they ought like good shepheards to giue their liues for the Lordes flocke) yet are puffed vp with such pride, that without all reason they seeme to rent and teare the Lords flocke with whippings and beatings. Whose vnreaso∣nable doings S. Gregorie bewailing thus. Quid fiat de onibus, quando pastores Lupi fiunt?s That is, what shall become of the sheep, when Pastours themselues be Wolues? But who is ouer∣come but he which exerciseth crueltie? Or who shall iudge the persecutor, but hee which gaue patiently his backe to stripes? And this is the fruite which commeth to the Church by such persecutors, also which commeth to the Cleargie by such spite∣full handling of the Bishops, or rather Infidels. For why may you not call them Infidels of whom S. Paul thus speaketh and writeth to Timothie;2. Timo. 3. That in the latter daies there shall certaine depart from the faith, giue heed to spirites of errour, and doctrine of diuels, of them which speake false through hipocrisie, and hauing their consciences marked with an hotte Iron, forbidding to marrie, and commaunding to abstaine from meates. &c. And this is if it be well marked, the whole handfull of Darnel and Cockle, grow∣ing amongst the Corne: yea this is the accomplishment of all madnesse, that whilest they of the Cleargie be compelled to re∣linquish the company of their owne lawfull wiues, they be∣come afterward fornicators and adulterers with other women, and wicked ministers of other sinfull filthinesse. These be they which bring vnto the Church of God this Heresie (as blinde guides leading the blinde) that it might be fulfilled which the Psalmist speaketh of, as foreseeing the errours of such men, and accursing them after this manner. Let their eyes be blinded that
they see not, and bowe downe alwaies their back. For as much then (ô Apostolicall Sir) as no man which knoweth you, is ig∣norant, that if you through the light of your discretion had vn∣derstood and seene, what poysoned pestilence might haue come vnto the Church through the sentence of your decrees, they would neuer haue consented to the suggestions of cer∣taine wicked persons. Wherefore we counsell you by the fide∣litie of our due subiection, that with all diligence you would put away so great slaunder from the Church of God, and through your discreet discipline you would remooue the Pha∣rasicall doctrine from the Flocke of God: So that this only Sunamite of the Lordes (vsing no more adulterous husbands) doo not seperate the holie people and the kingly Priesthood from her Spowse Christ Iesus, through an irreconciliable di∣uorcement: seeing that no man without chastitie (not only in the virgins state, but also in the state of Matrimonie) shall see our Lorde Iesu, who with the Father and the holy Ghost liueth and raigneth for euer. Amen. This Epistle, sheweth vs as it were with a finger, that in all times the truth of the Lord hath found a passage through the middest of the Furies of this world, raising vp faithfull Ministers to oppose themselues against the horrible disci∣pations of the aduersaries. The Sarrasins came from Affricke into Italie, vnto the Territorie of Beneuent, before whome went the Emperour Lewis the second, being ayded by his brother Lotharie, who dyed in the way at Plaisans. Pal. Floren. The King of Bulgaria receiued the Faith, made himselfe a Monke, and left the kingdome to his sonne, who reiected the Faith: In so much as his Father came out of the Monaste∣rie, and went against him in battaile, and hauing obtained victorie put out his sonnes eyes, and held him in prison, gi∣uing his kingdome to his younger sonne, and after returned to his Monastery. Naucler. and Sigeb.
The body of Saint Innocent Pope, was transported from Rome into Saxonie, by the Duke of Saxe. Chron. Sigeb. Michael Emperour of Constantinople, made a fellowe and companion of his Empire, one called Basile, a Macedonian, a puissant man, by whom afterward hee was slaine. Nau∣clerus. Lewis sonne of Lewis de Bonaire, king of Germanie, Vncle of Lewis 2. Emperour, obtained a victorie against the Cleuois, and caused their Dukes eies called Rastrix, to be put out, because he had falsified his faith. Naucler. After the death of Nicholas Pope, the seate was emptie eight yeares, seuen moneths, and nine or ten daies, as some say. Abb. Vrsp. The Britons were vanquished of the French, vnder Charles le Chauue, king of France. Naucler. The Normains being ouercome, receiued the faith. Naucl. The Countrey of Holland was erected into an Earledome or Countie, and Flaunders likewise, whereof Baudwin was the first Count. Adrain. 2.Adrian Pope, second of that name, the sonne of Talarus  Bishop, ruled at Rome fiue yeares. The Emperour hauing sent his Embassadors for the Popes election, the Cleargie and Ro∣mane people, attended not their comming, but vsurping the authoritie of choosing, proceeded to the election. The Em∣bassadors mal-contented, the subtil Romanists laid the fault vp∣on the common people, as hard to represse and appease, being stirred. They satisfied with this excuse, saluted Adrian with the name of Pope. Platina. R. Barns. Soone after came Letters from the Emperour, signifying that the election pleased him, and because strangers could not know the qualitie of him which should be elected, he graunted the election to the Citizens. Naucler. and Cor. Abb. Adrian then ordained that no Lay-man should thrust him∣selfe into the election of the Pope. Naucler. & 63. Dict. Cap. Nullus. He sent three Legates to the Bulgarians, who were newly conuerted, namely, Siluester, Leopard, and Dominic, to ordaine
the affaires of that Church, after the Romane fashion: but af∣ter perswaded of the Grecians, they cast off the Latine Priests,Diuision be∣twixt the La∣tine & Greeke Church. and receiued the Greekes: which afterward engendred great hatred betwixt the Latine and Greeke Church, and all the di∣uision of the aforesaid Churches came onely for the Primacie, and for the diuersitie of Ceremonies. Robert Barns, and Nau∣clerus. Edmond the last King of the East Angles, was slaine by the Painims of Denmarke, Anno. 871. and was Canonized a Martyr. Alfredus, or Aluredus, the 7. English king, was crowned by the Pope Adrian. Polydore. Lib. 5. The Greciās vsed bels by the benefit of the Venetiās. Sabell. About this time a Councel was held at Constantinople, which was called the eight generall Councell. Adrian sent thither his Legates, Donatus Bishop of Ostia, Stephen, Nephesin, and Mari∣nus, a Deacon of the Romane Church. R. Barns. Ignatius who vniustly was depriued of his Patriarchall dignitie, was restored: and Photin (some call him Phocas) was reiected and excommu∣nicated. Sabellicus in his 9. booke. 1. cap. It was there ordained that they of Bulgaria should be subiect to the Romane church, the Emperour Basilius contradicting it. Here it was also ordained, that no Lay-man should be ad∣mitted to the election of a Pope, an Archbishop, a Patriarke, or Bishop, but that the Bishop should be chosen by the Clear∣gie, of the Chapter. R. Barns. Adrian excommunicated Lotharius King of Lorraine, bro∣ther  vnto the Emperour Lewis, for his adulterie: but comming to Rome as he returned from the warre against the Sarrasins, (as some say Nauclerus alleadgeth) to excuse himselfe, receiued the Communion with his Princes: but they all died within the yeare. And the King Lotharius himselfe died in the way in the Towne of Plaisance. Fascic. Temp. Chron. Vrsperg. and Sigeb. In Lombardie nigh Brize, it raigned bloud three dayes  and three nights, after Nauclerus, and the Chron. Sigeb. And in Fraunce there was a great multitude of Graffe-hoppers
with sixe winges,Chales. 2. fiue feete, and two teeth, which destroyed all grasse, hearbes and Trees. They were driuen into the English Seas, by the force of exceeding great windes: and againe by an other winde they were returned vpon the Sea sandes, vpon the putrifaction wherof came such a pestilence, that great mul∣titudes of men dyed saith Sigeb. Naucler. saith that the third part of men died. This is not Fryer Scotus.Iohn Scotus, a learned man, was called from France in∣to to England, by Alfredus, King there, who founded the Schoole at Oxenford, where the said Scotus gouerned: but after making himselfe a Monke, he was slaine by the Monkes of that couent as he was teaching: he was cunning in the Greeke tongue, and translated into Latin the Hierarchie of S. Denis. Naucler. Iohn 9.Iohn Pope, 9. of that name a Romane, ruled at Rome ten  yeares. Suppl. Chron. being a Cardinall Deacon, he wrote Saint Gregories life in foure volumes. Lewis the Emperour being in Italie dyed, hauing raigned 19. yeares, and was buried at Milaine. His successour was Charles the second of that name, surnamed, le Chauue, the sonne of Lewis le Debenaire, of his second wife Iudith, & vncle of the dead Lewis the second. After he was King 36. yeares, he heard say that the Emperour his Nephew was dead, and in∣continent went to Rome to receiue the Crowne of the Em∣pire, hauing ordeined Boso his wiues brother, King of Pro∣uince. Pope Iohn in a small time crowned three Emperours, and after gaue occasion of great contention and warre. First hee crowned Charles le Chauue, who two yeares after he came in∣to Italie to driue the Sarrasins out of the kingdome of Naples, was taken with a Feuer at Mantone, where hee dyed, being poysoned by his Physitian a Iewe, called Zedechias, the yeare 878. hauing bene King 36. yeares, and Emperour two yeares, and was buried at Ʋerseile: and after (as some say) was transpor∣ted to S. Denis. The Pope vnderstanding of his death, would that his sonne Lewis le Begne should be chosen Emperour. But the Romanes contradicted it, and would that Charles the third surnamed le Gros, sonne of Lewis king of Germanie it should be chosen.
The Pope remaining still in his opinion was sent to prison:Lewis le Begne. but he escaped by the helpe of his friends, and fled into France, where he remained a yeare, first in Arles, and after at Lions: Fi∣nally, some say at Troy in Champaigne, where he assembled the Councell of the French Church, and there created and crow∣ned Lewis le Begne Emperour, and saluted him Augustus. In the meane while Charles the third was at Rome & kept it. He sent for the Pope, who returned to Rome,Charles. 3. and pro∣nounced, that the saide Charles might dwell at Rome, and crowned him Emperour: And so they raigned together two yeares. Finally, Lewis was poysoned, and Charles raigned a∣lone 12. yeares. Plat. Florent. and Robert Barns. This Pope at the same Councell, gaue to the Flemings a Bishop in Tornay. Lewis le Begne, two yeares after he was crowned in France, 1. of that name, died at Champaigne, and left his wife great with childe, who after brought foorth Charles le simple. Naucle∣rus. Charles called le Gros,Charles le Gros. the sonne of Lewis King of Ger∣maine, being at Rome, occupied the Empire and raigned alone. And by him the Empire or the French men returned to the  Almaines. Naucler. and R. Barns. and came not at the wish of the French, nor according to the imaginations and subtill deuices of the Pope. This Pope Iohn, ordeined that such as offended in Sacri∣ledge  should be excommunicated, & amerced at thirtie pound of siluer. 22. quest. 4. Chap. Quisquis. Iohn le Maire saith that this Pope was a cruell man, and disgraded Formosus, Bishop of Portensis, which was an occa∣sion of many mischiefes. Fasci. temp. Some Historiographers say, it was for that he was the cause that the said Iohn Pope was imprisoned at Rome. Finally he was poisoned, or as some say, slaine with the blow of a Mallet, vpon a conspiracie made against him. Chron. Abb. Vrsp. R. Barns. Pascasius about this time was Abbot in Saxonie; he writ a Booke of the Euchariste, and most men followed his opi∣nion,
which pleased the Schoole-men more then the opinion of Iohannes Scotus,Charles le Grosse. or of Bertramus, which were reiected, as shal be told in his place. Martin. 2.Martin, second of that name, a French man, by euil arts entered into the Popedome. Supple. Chron. and gouerned a yeare and fiue moneths, before he was called Marin. Betwixt Martin Pope second of that name, and Adrian  the third. Sigebert and Visperge, place Agapetus: but other Historiographers make no mention of them. Adrian. 3.Adrian Pope, the third of that name, ruled at Rome a yeare and three moneths. Hee ordeined that from thenceforth the Emperours should not meddle with the election of the Pope: And that his aurhoritie therein should be no more any thing requisite, but that the election of the Cleargie should be free. Dist. 62. chap. Nullus chap. Adrianus. Hee made this Lawe whilst the Emperour was occupied in the warre against the Normains, which then endured not long. For Leo the eight, Pope, did ordaine cleane contrary, as shall bee saide after∣ward. The order of Clugny, Ber∣no, and Odo.Platina saith heere, that William Pyon Duke of Aquitane, and Counte Auerne, founded the first Monasterie of the or∣der of Clugny, vnder the rule of Saint Benet, and made Berno Abbot there, after whome Odo succeeded, who ha∣uing bene a Musitian at Tours, came to be a Monke at Clugny. Chron. Sigeb. The Emperour Charles became iealous of his wife for the great familiaritie shee had with Luitwaldus Bishop of Ʋerseil, who in a full assembly protested that hee neuer had her com∣pany. Shee notwithstanding accepted the diuorce, and with∣drew her selfe vnto the couent d'Aulaui, where shee made an end of her dayes. Sigeb. and P. Phrig. 9. At this time the Normains Northerne people did great hurt in France, after they had spoyled Artois, Cambray, Liege, Brabant, Gelders, and Treuers, &c.
Charles being not able to resist them, finally agreed with them, in giuing in marriage the daughter of Lotharie his cousin germain called Gille, to Geffrey or Rotfrid their King, and assigned for her dowrie the Countrey of Frise, vpon conditi∣on he should be baptised. Notwithstanding those Normains afterward afflicted France, and besieged the Citie of Paris, as shall be said. The subiects of Charles le Gros greeued at his cowardli∣nesse, because he let France be so outraged by the violence and crueltie of the Normains, and that also hee had forsaken his wife a good woman, they deposed him as vnworthy and vnprofitable for the gouernment of the Empire, and gaue him a Curator named Arnulfe, or Arnould,Curator. who was his brothers sonne. Some say that Charles le Gros finished his dayes in great pouertie, in the Abbey of the rich Angell, called in Alemand Richenna, nigh vnto Constans by the Lake,The end of the Emperour Charles. without any great honour of Sepulchre. Others say he was strangled by his owne people. This is a glasse for great Princes of the world, and an ex∣cellent patterne of the humaine condition. Arnulphus thē his Nephew by his brother Carloman Duke of  France, Orientall (which then was called the Teutonique King∣dome, comprehending Bauier, Sorabe, Saxe, Turinge, Frise, and Lorraine) was made Emperour. Hee was a valiant man, and re∣pressed the Moranians and Slauonians, after hee made strong warre vpon the Normains, nigh the Riuer of Mense. Stephen Pope, fift of that name,Stephen. 5. ruled 6. yeares & ten mo∣neths, in the Romane seate. It was in his time that the tale of S. Michael in the Mount Bargamus in Pouile is said to bee true.The signe of the Crosse. There was one of his Decretals to Hubert Arch-bishop of Manyeance. 2. G. v. c. Consuluisti. ordeined the song of Crosse, de consecrat, 6. dist. v.c. Nunquid. Odo 31. King of France, raigned nine yeares. He was Tutor vnto Charles le Simple, and crowned King to resist the Normains which then vaunted they would destroy all France.
Arnulphus.We must not here forget that Odo brought vnto France  the noble Armory of the field, of Flowers-delyce, without number, which endured vnto the time of Charles, the sixt king of France. Formosus.Formosus Pope, before Bishop Portuensis was appointed Pope, and ruled fiue yeares and sixe moneths, against the will of some Romanes, which pretended that Cardinall Sergius was chosen. But in the meane while Sergius conceiued a mor∣tall hatred against Formosus, and went into France. And there∣fore there was a great Schisme, which was the ninth, cruell and scandalous,Schisme. 9. and endured a long time, as shall be heereafter seene. This Formosus bought the Papacie (as Iohn le Maire saith) during which time he did nothing of account, vnles some will say he whitened the Church of S. Peter. Suppl. Chron. He called Arnulfe to Rome, and consecrated and crowned him Emperour, who afterward beheaded the chiefe enemies of Formosus. Chron. Abb. Vrsp. In this time was held a Councell at Vienna in Dauphine, where two Cardinals of the Romane Sea, Paschal and Iohn, pre∣sidented: and yet was it lawfull for Priests to espouse wiues if they were maides and not widowes, to shunne bigamy. Iohn le Maire in the second and third part of Schismes and the Coun∣cels of the Church. The Priests then had power to marry in France, almost nine hundreth yeares after the Apostles. Arnulphe subiected Italie and Burgongne. Benafice 6.Boniface 6. of that name, a Tuscane borne, ruled at Rome  fifteene dayes. There was a sharpe and great famine in this time. Vrsperge. There fell a great debate for the bodie of S. Denis Ariopa∣gite. The Almaines said it was transported by the Emperour Ar∣nulphe, into the Towne of Reinsbourge, and there was shewed a Bull of Pope Lewis the 10. approuing that translation: but the Chronicles of France say the contrary, that it is in the Abbey of S. Denis in France.
Note againe (Reader) the life of these Popes, from For∣mosus or from Iohn the 9. which excommunicated the said Formosus, vntill Leo the 8. and consider the sancti∣tie of the Apostatike Sea, the contentions, aemulations, en∣uies, ambitions, and persecutions. O vnluckie time saith Fa∣scic. Temp. This Pope gaue three thousand yeares of true pardons to all Priests,Messe deno∣mine Iesu. which deuoutly should sing the Messe of the name of Iesus: that is, three thousand yeares of true pardon for euery Masse which should be sung with three Sierges lighted. Mis∣sale Rom. witnesseth it. Stephen Pope, 6. of that name, a Romane,Stephen. 6. ruled a yeare and 4. moneths. R. Barns. This Pope did euill recompence his predecessor Formo∣sus, who made him Bishop of Anania. He by Councell cut off his ordinances. He caused his body to be drawne out of his Tombe, and put vpon it a Papall habit, and after tooke it off and put vpon it Lay-apparell: then finally he buried it in that habit. Platina. Naucler. and R. Barns. The Sarrasins of Affrike againe occupied Sicile. Palen. Florent. Stephen Pope, at the last repented his faults, and became a Monke. Supp. Chron. Romaine Pope, borne at Rome, raigned 3. or 4. moneths,Romaine. and 22. dayes, a seditious man, and contrarie to his predecessor  Stephen, for he established the Acts and Decrees of Formosus, and ceased and annulled them of Stephen, Naucler. The intention of these Popes (saith Suppl. Chron.) is to a∣bolish the renowne one of an other. The yeare of Christ, 900. or there abouts, Arnulphus Em∣perour being too voluptuous and rebellious against the Clear∣gie men, the Author of Suppl. of Chron. saith hee was eaten with vermine. Sigibert saith, that after long sicknesse and lan∣guishment
he died. He was carried and buried at Ratisbone in a Monasterie. Nauclerus. But Palmerius who added vnto the Chron. of Eusebius, saith hee died making warre vpon the Normanes. Others say he was poisoned the 12. yeare of his Empire, leauing his sonnes named Alnulphus, the wicked Duke of Bauiers, and Lewis of an other wife, who succeeded in the Empire After his death the Hungarians came into Germanie, vpon a people called Marauani, or Morauians, which Arnolphe had already conquered by the help of the Hungarians as is said, and put all to fire and sword. Behold the fruite of calling the enemies of the Faith into Chri∣stendome, saith Abb. Visp. Charles le Simple, sonne of Lewis le Begne, 13. king of France, raigned 27. yeares. The Sea of Hist. In his time the Danes and Normanes returned in greater companies then euer they did, their Captaine was called Rolle, a cruel man, louing the effusion of Christian bloud. Hee burnt on a S. Iohns day the Church of Naules, & Martired S. Guiniard, Bishop of the said place, before the Aultar as he said Masse, and after burnt the Citie of Angiers, of Tours, and many others. In Aquitaine they destroyed Charlemaignes Pallace, & ceased not to do infinite euils, vntill by a neare accord they had gotten a new habitation; that is to say, Neustria, which of their owne name they called Normandie, and Rolle was called Robert or Rubert, after he was baptised. Lewis. 3.Lewis Emperour, third of that name, the sonne of Arnolphe,  obtained the Empire, and raigned 12. yeares. Naucler. The Hungarians made warre in Baeieaire, vnto which the the said Emperour Lewis was made tributarie, and gaue a great summe of siluer to escape. Naucler. For in pursuing his enemies which feigned to flie, he was surprised by Ambushes. They to satisfie their rage, ranne all ouer Almaine. Chron. Abb. Vrsp. Theodorus. 2.Theodorus Pope, second of that name, a Romane, raigned at Rome 20. or 22. dayes, a seditious man, a very monster in
nature, and wholy aduersarie vnto Stephen.Lewis. 3. He receiued all such as before had bene ordained by Formosus, and greatly esteemed the fauourers of the said Formosus. Naucler. Who would not maruell that eight Popes should obtaine in so litle space the Romane seate vnder the Emperour Lewis the third? that is in the space of 12. yeares, saith Naucler. Iohn Pope, 10. of that name, ruled at Rome two yeares and more. This also was a very seditious monster,Iohn. 10. and reuiued con∣tentions alreadie buried: whereby there was great sedition and tumult amongst the Romaine people, because some maintai∣ned one side, some an other: wherefore for feare he fled to Ra∣uenna. Where he assembled a Councell of 74. Bishops in the Emperour Lewis his presence, the King and Archbishops of France, to confirme the ordinances of Pope Formosus, which before were reiected by Stephen. In the said Councell was all that disanulled which Pope Stephen had practised against For∣mosus; yea the ordinances of Stephen were burned. R. Barns. and Sigeb. Lewis the 3. was not crowned for the discention which then was in the Papacie: and withall, that the Popes would not crowne for Emperor such as were chosen out of the countrey of Almain, but onely such as came out of Lombardie. Palin. and Supp. Chron. Benet Pope, 4. of that name, a Romane, gouerned 3. yeares.Benet. 4. Supp. Chron. and 4. moneths. Naucler. In those great troubles of his predecessors, he did nothing worthy of memory, saith Plat. At this time in Italie, Calabria, and Pouille, the Sarrasins did infinit mischiefes. Leo 5. of that name, gouerned 40. daies. Supp. Chron. A Cardinall Priest his familiar, called Christopher,Leo. 5. impri∣soned  him, and by violence obtained the Papacie. Leo died of griefe, seeing himselfe thus handled of him vnto whom hee had done so much good. In what authoritie is this Papall seate which is so easily vsurped by a priuate person, by force and faction in a mo∣ment? saith Naucler.
Christopher. To be a Monk the refuge of the miserable.Christopher Pope, ruled at Rome 7. moneths, as hee acqui∣red the Papacie, so lost he it. For he was deposed and impri∣soned. Some say he was constrained to make himself a Monke, which was the onely refuge of the miserable. For at this time Church-men being insolent and giuen to wickednesse, were not sent to the Iles: but for their disorders were deteined and enclosed in strong Monasteries. Naucler. and Chron. Abb. Sergius then, third of that name, was Pope, and ruled se∣uen yeares,Sergius. 3. and three moneths: after some, eight yeares, and 15. or 16. dayes. This was he, who in the election of Formosus was cast off, and who returning into France, secretly returned into Rome and vsurped the Popedome: yet fearing that Christopher should worke some treason, he caused him to be drawne out of the Monasterie, and put him in a common prison, and yet putting him in a straighter prison, poorely and miserably he fi∣nished his dayes. Suppl. Chron. The Westerne Empire diuided. The Occidentall Empire was at this time diuided. For there was one Emperor in Almaine, and an other in Lombardie. The first in Italie was Beringer, who made a great Armie a∣gainst the Emperour Lewis the third, and gaue him battaile in the Plaine of Verone, and discomfited him; whose eyes after∣ward he caused to be put out, so the Lombards for a time had the Empire by force. A Monster re∣presented the estate of that time.A Monster was presented to Lewis the third, which had a dogges head, and all the other members as a man. A figure of that time. For men were then without an head, and as dogges barked one against an other: yea both the Popedome and Em∣pire were diuided. Fasci. temp. The Hungarians pilled and destroyed the Countries of Saxe and Turinge. Chro. Abb. Vrsp. And from thence entred in∣to Italie vsing the like crueltie. Thē was there the Duke of For∣nil, called Berēger, who vsurped the title of the Empire in Italie, and raigned 4. yeares: against whom, came the Emperour
Lewis the third. But he was betrayed by his people,Conrade. 1. who in the night time tooke Berenger into the Towne of Verone; In so much that he was taken and had his eyes put out, so he dy∣ed soone after. Thus the Empire which had endured an hun∣dreth and tenne yeares in France since Charlemaigne, was trans∣ported vnto the Lombards. Chron. Sigeb. and Naucler. Conrade first of that name, Duke of Franconia, was made Emperour after Lewis the third, who deceased without a sonne, so that this Conrade is esteemed the last of the race of Charle∣maigne, which had the gouernment of the Empire more then an hundreth yeares. All the Great men of Germanie did elect without consent Otho Duke of Saxe: but Otho feeling himselfe olde, excused himself, and appointed them this Conrade, a mag∣nanimous man, sonne of Conrade Earle of Franconia and Hes∣set. And Arnold the wicked sonne of the Emperour Arnulphe, was Duke in Bauiers. In the succession of Arnulphe aforesaid, there are amongst the Historiographers, some vncertain things touching their genealogie. But we haue here set in order all such as discended of Char∣lemaigne, to shewe the maruellous change in the greatest things of this world. Who can read them without being rauished in admiration, when we consider the greatest Kingdomes and dominations to flourish for a time, and in the end being ming∣led with turbulent deuotions, are in such sort debilitated and weakned, as they come to nothing. Wherein we must acknow∣ledge the admirable prouidence of God.
Charlemaigne the sonne of Pippin, left his sonne Lewis de Bonaire Emperour: who had Lotharie Empe∣rour: who had Lewis of Bauiers, King of Germanie, who brought vn∣der the Bohemians had Charles le Chauue Em∣perour. Lewis Emper. 1. of that name. Lewis the young king of Germanie, Franconia, and Tu∣ringe. Lewis Emperour 3. of that name surnamed le Begue, which raigned but two yeares, had Lothairie King of Austrasia cal∣led Lorraine. Charles le Grosse, Emperour, who tooke the Empire frō Lewis le Begne. Charles le Simple. 30. King of France. Charles king of Prouence. Carloman Duke of Bauiere, and of the kingdome thē cal∣led Teutonique, had Arnulphe Emperour, who was father of Le∣wis Emperor, 3. of that name; and of Conrade last Emperour of the race of Charlemaigne. The Empire then of Germanie was transported frō the ligne of Charlemaigne to Conrade, Duke of Franconia: but the king∣dome of France remained certaine yeares in the house of Char∣lemaigne, seeing there was yet some remaining of the race of Charles le Simple. Anastasius. 3.Anastasius Pope, 3. of that name, gouerned at Rome two  yeares and two moneths. Supp. Chron. He bare himselfe honestly without committing any act worthy of reprehension. Laudo. 1.Laudo Pope, a Romane, ruled at Rome fiue or sixe mo∣nethes. About this time the Venetians obtained a licence and pri∣uiledge of the Emperour to beate money. Hubert in Lorraine flourished now, & was made a Saint.
The Sarrasins destroyed Calabria, Ponuille, Beneuent, and other Regions of the Romanes. The Sea of Hist. Beringer, second of that name, raigned in Italie 7. or 8. yeares.Beringer. 2. Some say he was chased away the third yeare of his raigne by Rodolphe, king of Burgongne; and that the same Rodolphe hauing raigned three yeares, was after also driuen away by Hugues king of Arles. Iohn Pope, 11. of that name,Iohn. 11. before Archbishop of Rauen∣na, hauing bene deposed by a popularie tumult, ruled after at  Rome 13. yeares and two moneths. Naucler. He was Pope Sergius his sonne, and prooued no better then his father, sauing hee was a good souldier. For he chased the Sarrasins out of Calabria, with the helpe of one called Alberic, Marquis of Tuscane. Finally, as the saide Iohn gloried in his victorie, attributing all by great insolencie to his owne prowesse, hee stirred against himselfe the furie of his owne souldiers, who stiffled him to death. Iohn le Maire. Hee had cast out of Rome the said Marquis Albert, who to auenge himselfe of the Pope, brought the Hungarians into I∣talie, which pilled and wasted all. Finally he was put to death by the Romanes. Henry, first of that name, Duke to Saxe,Henry. 1. surnamed the Faulconer, sonne of Otho Duke of Saxe, who had refused the  Empire, was chosen Emperour by Conrade his predecessor, who being sicke in his bedde, sent his brother Eberard towards the saide Henry, with the Mantle royall, the sword, the Lance, the Diademe, and other Imperiall ornaments, who found him at his pastime with his Haukes, which was cause that hee was called the Faulconer. For there he was saluted Emperour. Nau∣clerus. He made warre against the Hungarians, Slauonians, and Bohemians. The combat of Tournois was inuented by him. Hugues raigned in Italie tenne yeares, whom Lotharie his sonne succeeded. King Charles the Simple was by treason taken of Hubert, Earle of Ʋermandois, and poysoned in the Castle of Peronne,
where he died,Henry. 1. and was buried in the Church of S. Foursi. See the Sea of Histories. Rodolphe Bourgongne, 31. King of France, raigned two yeares. Before this time there were not so many degrees amongst Gentlemen and Noblemen, nor so great diuersitie as there are at this. Dukes, Marquesses, Counts, or Clarkes, simple Counts and Knights, were rather names of offices, then hereditarie Seigniories. For Dukes, Marquesses, & Earles, or Counts, were Gouernours of Countries and Lands: wherevpon they were committed by Emperours and Kings. Duke.Duke was a soueraigne, chiefe, or head of souldiers, as may be seene by auncient Letters. Coūt or Earle.Count or Earle, was a Iudge and Goueruernour ordai∣ned in a certaine Towne or Region; and so Germanie was full of Countes:Lantgraues. amongst which, some were called Lantgraues, that is to say, Countes of Regions or Countries. Some Marue∣graues,Marqusses. Palatins. or Marquis: that is, Countes of certaine Marshes or Countries. Some Countes de Palatin, which were Gouernors of some Kingdome subiugated or conquered. This may bee seene in the second booke of the Lawes of the Lombards. Some were gouernors of Bourgages,Bourgraues. and so were named Bour∣graues. The most auncientest name of dignitie after Kings and Princes,Baron. is the name of Baron, which signifieth Lord, whose sonnes were called young Lords. And this say some was the estate of the Nobilitie before the Othons raigned. Af∣ter their time all things chaunged. For then Counts were made hereditarie, and were lifted vp aboue Barons, Marquesses,  Lantgraues and Palatins: and that more is, Bishops haue bene made Princes: yea many Counts Abbots, Abbesses haue ob∣tained the title of Prince. Lewis 4. of that name, surnamed Vltramarin, 32. King of France, the sonne of Charles le Simple, after his fathers imprison∣ment got with his mother Ogine, towards his Vncle King of England: but as soone as he retutned, he was in strife for the Kingdome with Rodulphe of Burgongne, who died about eight yeares after at Auxerre, Anno. 937. and so Lewis raigned alone.
Leo Pope,Leo. 6. sixt of that name, ruled at Rome 7. moneths and 15. dayes. The Danes at this time were conuerted to the faith. Stephen Pope, 7. of that name, a Romane,Stephen. 7. ruled at Rome 2. yeares and 12. dayes. Supp. Chron. The Duke of Bohemia Spireneus, receiued the Christi∣an faith at the perswasion of the Emperour Henry. Suppl. Chron. Iohn Pope, 12. of that name, a Romane,Iohn. 12. ruled at Rome 4. yeares, 10. moneths, and 15. dayes. Supp. Chron. He did nothing worthy of memorie, a coward, and is not numbred in the Catalogue of Popes: after some Historio∣graphers. Lotharie the sonne of Hugues, raigned in Italie two yeares. The Sarrasins in Italie tooke the towne of Geans, and spoi∣led it. Naucler. Berenger third, the Nephewe of Berenger the first,Berenger. 3. raigned in Italie 11. yeares, with his sonne Adelbert. In this place Histories are very confused. The Emperour Henry the first dyed of the Palsey, the yeare of his age 60. and of his Empire seuenteene: hauing or∣dained Otho the great his sonne, successor of the Empire,Otho the great. by the consent of all the great and Noble men, who after was conse∣crated by the Arch-bishop of Magunce, Hildebert. Hee  had three Competitors which would needs hinder him to bee Emperour: that is to say, Henry his elder brother, Gisel∣bert Duke of Lorraine his brother in lawe, and Eberhard Earle of Franconia: but he droue them all away, and reduced all vn∣der his obedience. Wencelaus Prince of Bohemia,Wencelaus. was slaine by his brother Boislans vppon ambition to raigne. But Otho reuenged the death of the said Wencelaus, making warre vpon Boislans, which
endured fourteene yeares:Otho the great. and finally hauing vanquished him, he brought the Countrey into his obedience. Chron. Sigeb. and Supp. Chron. Leo. 7.Leo Pope, 7. of that name, a Romane, ruled at Rome three yeares, 6. monethes, and 10. dayes. Supp. Chron. Anthropo∣morphites.The heresie of Anthropomorphites (which say that God hath a corporall forme) was at this time renued. Rotherius Bi∣shop of Verone, writ against them. Stephen. 8.Stephen Pope, eight of that name, an Almaine, or a  Romane, after some, ruled at Rome three yeares, foure moneths, and 12. dayes. R. Barns. Some say he was murthered by cer∣taine Romanes in a sedition: In so much as he was neuer pub∣likely seene. Chron. Abb. France was afflicted by an horrible pestilence and by in∣ward contentions. The faction and puissance of Hugues of Pa∣ris, troubled King Lewis exceedingly. Martin. 3.Martin Pope, 3. of that name, a Romane, ruled 3. yeares,  6. moneths, and 14. dayes. He was peaceable, and gaue himself to repaire Temples and nourish the poore, saith Supp. Chron. Agapetus. 2.Agapetus Pope, second of that name, a Romane, a magna∣nimous  man, ruled at Rome 9. yeares, 7. moneths, and 10. daies. Supp. Chron. He called againe the Emperour Otho to Rome, against Be∣renger. Berenger. 4.Berenger 4. the 7. Emperour of the Lombards, raigned 13. yeares. The Sea of Histories. The Hungarians againe in Italie. Chron. Abb. Vrsp. Iohn. 13.Iohn Pope, 13. of that name, a Romane, ruled 9. yeares and three monethes. His father called Alberic, seeing himselfe one of the greatest power at Rome, caused all the noblest and principallest rulers of the Citie of Rome, to promise and sweare that after the death of Pope Agapetus, they should elect his sonne Octauian. Which promise was kept, and he was called Iohn. This Pope was so excessiuely giuen to lecherie, that he main∣tained a publike stewes: for the shame wherof, some Cardinals
writ to the Emperour Otho, that he would remedie the publike scandall and infamie which the Church then suffered:They were called Cardi∣nalls, as chiefe of the Clear∣gie. and that it was needfull he should in haste come to Rome. As soone as the Pope heard of this newes, he caused the nose of a Cardi∣nall a Deacon called Iohn to be cut off, beeing the principall councellor herein: hee commaunded also that the hand of an other Cardinall a Subdeacon called also Iohn to be cut off, be∣cause hee writ the Letters. When the Emperour vnderstood that for no admonition the Pope would amend, he caused him to be deposed, with note of infamie. Otho was crowned by him, after he hauing sworne that hee would exalt the Romane Church and the Pope, and that in nothing hee would hurt him: as more at large is contained. Dist. 63.100. Tibi domino. Otho remained a certain time at Rome after his coronation, and admonished this Pope to change and amend his wicked life, whereof hee was blamed. Otho depar∣ting, came against Berenger his enemie. Albert the sonne of Berenger, who with his father retired at Otho his comming, seeing Otho departed, came to Rome, and with the Pope com∣plotted against the Emperour. Two Cardinalls aduertised O∣tho of this conspiracie, and of the Popes wickednesse. Otho then returned to Rome, and the Pope fled, after he had reuenged himselfe of the two Cardinalls. Otho beeing at Rome, caused the Pope to be thrice called, commanding him to returne and feare nothing, and he should be in suretie: but hee would not returne. Wherefore he caused a Councell to be held, where∣in the Pope was condemned and deposed for his euill life. And there was substituted in his place, Leo a Romane, 8 of that name,Leo. 8. but soone after the Emperours departure, the seditious and inconstant Romanes droue away Leo, and recalled the afore∣said Iohn, receiuing him in great pompe. Leo got him to the Emperour, who fearing to molest the Church with a greater schisme, permitted the said Iohn to hold his seate. But finally beeing surprised in adulterie, hee was slaine by the womans husband. Robert Barns. Chron. Sigeb. Nauclerus. and Iohn Maire.
Conferre (good Reader) these Popes with the first, and see the difference. The yeare of Christ 958. there hapned at Ʋenice a me∣morable thing. The Duke of Venice, Peter of Candie, was be∣sieged in his Ducall Pallace, and the Venetians angrie against him, set fire on the Pallace: in so much that not onely the Pal∣lace burnt, but also the Church of S. Marke nigh vnto it, and more then three hundreth houses about it. And as the Duke thus pressed retired into a secret place of the Pallace which was not yet touched with fire: the people altogether enraged ha∣uing found him, holding yet his onely sonne (a young Infant) betwixt his armes,Crueltie of the Veneti∣ans. and requiring vpon both his knees and in great pittie the mercie of the people: they were not content most cruelly to murther him with his innocent sonne and wife, but after their deathes the bodies of the father and sonne were carried vnto the butcherie and hewen in peeces, and after cast vnto dogges. Iohn le Maire. and Sup. Chron. The cause of this massacre was, because he had constrai∣ned his first wife to make her selfe a Nunne, to the ende hee might with colour espouse the sister of Hugo, Marquis of He∣truria, of whom he had alreadie had one sonne. Wherefore ha∣uing married her, the Allies and kinsfolkes of his said wife, stirred the people vnto sedition, and so they perished vnhappi∣ly. Supp. Chron. About this time flourished Windichinne, a Monke of Cor∣ney in Saxonie. Smaragdus Abbot of S. Michael, of the order of S. Benet, wrote the booke called Diadema monachorum, a right Monkish booke. Item vpon the rule of S. Benet, and vpon the Psalter another: two vpon the Euangelists and Epistles. Item, one of diuers Sermons. Trit. Abb. Spauher. Benet. 5.Benet Pope, fift of that name, a Romane, ruled (after Naucle∣rus)  6. monethes and 5. dayes, or 2. moneths and 5. dayes: af∣ter Supp. Chron. hee was chosen by the Romanes against the Emperours will, after Iohn was slaine in adulterie.
The Emperour vnderstanding these newes,Otho. 1. returned to Rome, besieged the Towne, and so afflicted it, that they were cōstrained to present Benet vnto him at his pleasure. The Em∣perour restored Leo to the seate, and Benet was depriued, not onely of the papall dignitie, but disgraced also of his Sacerdo∣tall, and after banished and sent into Almaine: where hee died in the Towne of Mamburge: others say he was put in prison and there strangled. Leo then eight of that name, a Romane,Leo. 8. was restored into the Popedome, and raigned a yeare and foure moneths. This  Pope minding to shunne the fury of the Romanes which pro∣ceeded to the Popes election by corruptions, menaces,The Empe∣rours right to chuse the Pope set vp againe. and sub∣till deuices, ordained in a full Sinode, that none should be made Pope without the consent of the Emperour, vnto whom aboue belonged the right of election from Charlemaine and others. Naucler. and 63. dist. cap. in Sinodo. He restored also to Otho all the donations made to the Ro∣mane Church. And this was it which they say Constantine, Iustinian, Pippin, Charlemaigne, Lewis le Debonaire, and Arit part had giuen to the Church. All this he reuoked and accor∣ded to Otho the first of that name and to his successors: to the end to keepe Italie from oppressors. R. Barns. The Abbey of S. Quintin in Vermandois was in this time founded. Chron. Sigeb. Richard Duke of Normandie founded and restored many Churches and Abbeys: amongst others the Abbey of Fesa∣nan, of S. Ouan at Roan, and the Abbey of S. Michael nigh the Sea. An Aduertisement. Note heere Christian by the passed and subsequent Histories, how in this time Christian Religion was so annihilated, that it was altogether set to gather dead bones, to build Churches and Monasteries, to reare vp and transport dead bodyes, to honour reliques, to dreame miracles, to make themselues Monkes and Nunnes, to dedicate and consecrate Churches, to compose Hymnes, and praises of Saints, to sing and pray
for the dead, and such like ceremonies. About this time also began the fourth pestilence of the Church: that is to say, the Schoole Diuinitie mingled with Aristotles Philosophie,Scholasticall diuinitie. which after engendred Transubstantiation and other new doctrines by the Questionaries, as thou shalt vnderstand by this dis∣course. Iohn. 14.Iohn Pope, 14. of that name, an Italian, a Bishops sonne  called Iohn, gouerned Rome sixe yeares, eleuen monethes, and tenne dayes. Supp. Chron. Hee beeing apprehended by Peter Prouost of Rome, was put in prison in the Castle of S. Angelo, where he remained a 11. monethes: but when they heard say the Emperour Otho came against them with a strong hand, they tooke him out and established him. Some say he was sent into exile & banished into Campania; frō whence he came again af∣ter 2. monethes. For the Emperor tooke vngeance on thē that persecuted him; causing many of them to die by diuers kindes of death, such as were found culpable of the fact, and banished some into Saxe. As for Peter Prouost, he was deliuered to the Pope to doo with him at his pleasure. Who gaue him into the tormenrers hands: so hee was vnapparelled, and his beard be∣ing cut off, he was set vpon an Asse, his face towards the taile, and his hands bound vnder the taile of the said Asse, and so was ledde through the Towne and beaten with Roddes. After this he was againe brought to prison, and finally sent into exile in Almaine. Naucler. Otho. 2.Iohn Pope, in recompence of the benefite receiued of Otho, called and declared Otho the second, sonne of Otho the first, Augustus. Palin. In the time of this Pope, Theodorike or Deodorike, Bishop of Mets, caused infinit holy bodies to be transported from Italy into France, with a peece of S. Stephens Chaine, and a part of S. Lawrence Grate, which the Pope Iohn gaue him. Chron. Sigeb. These bee the Iewels of this darke time. The King of Denmarke and all his Countrey were con∣uerted to the faith by Popon Clarke. Chron. Sigeb.
Benet Pope, sixt of that name a Romane ruled a yeare and sixe moneths. He was put in the prison S. Angelo,Benet. 6. wherein he was strangled, by one called Cinthius, or Cincius: Others say he dyed of hunger: for which iniurie, he neuer did Iustice nor ven∣geance. Naucler. Roger Bishop of Liege, founded the Abbey of S. Iohn the Euangelist, in the Ile of Flaunders. Chron. Sigeb. The heroicall acts of this Emperour Otho the first, do suf∣ficiently shewe him to bee one of the number of such excel∣lent persons as the Lord giueth to repaire and restore things throwne vnder feete. He I say redressed the Romane Empire, and pacified Europe. By his succours, Italie and Germanie were guarded and warranted, hauing tamed the Hungarians and French. Briefly, during his life the Empire tooke again a bright∣nesse and face of maiestie. He founded the siluer Mines in Mi∣sua, and exercised great munificence towards many Bishoppes which held the chiefe place in the Religion which then was. Many Ciuile Lawes were made by him: Amongst which, that of the succession of Nephues in hereditarie goods in the place of their Fathers is greatly commended. After then in this sort hee had delated the Empire, being made stoope with great age, finally he was surprised with a suddaine maladie, and dyed the yeare 973. and of his raigne thirtie seuen: of his Empire thirteene, and was buried at Mag∣deberge, in Saint Martins Church, which he had caused to be builded. Otho 2. of that name, sonne of Otho the great,Otho. 2. and of Ade∣theide, Queene of Burgogne, during the life of his Father, was  declared at Aix le chappelle King of the Romanes,The Duke of Lorraine Vassal of the Empire. Lorraine made lesse. he appea∣sed the mutinies which were in Lorraine, and gaue the Duchy of Lorraine to Charles, brother of Lotharie King of France, and made him vassall of the Empire; but the limits were cut off: For one good part was adiudged on the one side to the Church of Colongne, and the other to the Church of Liege. Hee espowsed the sister of the Emperour of Constanti∣nople.
Otho. 2.Donus. 2.Donus Pope, second of that name, a Romane, ruled at Rome a yeare and fiue moneths. It was said of him, that he was of great modestie and integritie, and that no iniurie was done him Supp. Chron. Many holy bodies as of Patroclus, Priauatus and Gregorie, With S. Peters Staffe, were transported from Rome to Colongne, by Bruno Bishop of the said place, and by the Bishop of Can∣terburie, called Odo. Fasci. temp. Aldebert of Bohemia, Bishop of Prague, went into Panno∣nia to preach the faith, and baptised the King of Hungaria: From thence hee came into Brusse, where hee was Mar∣tyred. Boniface. 7.Boniface Pope, 7. of that name, gouerned at Rome 7. mo∣neths:  by vnlawfull meanes he entred the Popedome, and by the same meanes fell out thereof. The greatest of Rome con∣spired against him. But seeing himselfe in daunger, he secret∣ly pilled the most precious treasures of the Church of S. Peter, and so fled vnto Constantinople, where when he had remained 8. monethes, he solde and turned all into siluer, and after retur∣ned vnto Rome. In his absence they lifted vp one of Pauie called Iohn the 15. He ruled 8. moneths. Boniface then being returned, drew the Citizens vnto him, and with siluer corrup∣ted the vilest and wickedest persons of Rome. This done, hee tooke the Pope Iohn, and hauing put out his eies, made him die with hunger in the Castle of S. Angelo. Againe then he occupi∣ed and vsurped the seate, but incontinently after he dyed of a sudden death: his corpes was drawne with a corde by his feete through the streetes, and pierced with pikes by the Ro∣manes: but finally the Clarkes buried him. Naucler. Robert Barns. Cor. Abb. Benet. 7.Benet Pope, 7. of that name, gouerned 8. yeares and sixe  moneths. Suppl. Chron. or 10. yeares and 6. monethes, after Fa∣sci. temp.After some, 77. This Pope at the Emperours desire, imprisoned many se∣ditious Romanes. The Sea of Hist. Otho the 2. enterprised a war against the Greekes which held Calabria and Pouille,Otho. 2. but he sought to reduce them to the
Romane Empire, pretending a right by reason of a dowrie for Theophaine his wife, who was the Greeke Empresse: but his en∣terprise was vnluckie.Otho the 2. taken by Py∣rates. For he was taken by Pirates and brought vnto Sicilia vnknowne. Afterward being ordeined by a Slauo∣nian Marchant which knew him, he gathered together the rest of his Armie, and returned against the Grecians and Sarrasins, and pursued them very vndiscreetly: In so much that hee was strooken with an inuenomed arrow, so returning vnto Rome he dyed, a litle after the tenth yeare of his Empire,The Dukes of Sauoy discen∣ded from Saxonie. leauing Otho the third, and other his children, and amongst them Frederic and Valderic, Dukes of Saxonie, of whom after discended the Countesse and Princes of Sauoy. Otho third of that name,Otho. 3. after the death of his Father was very young when he was designed the Emperour, but of such  quicknesse and moderation of spirite, that for his excellent gifts he was named, The Maruell of the world. Lotharie King of France dyed at Rheimes, being impoy∣soned  (as some say) by his adulterous wife, leauing his sonne Lewis fift of that name King of France, last of the line of Charlemaigne, who raigned a yeare and litle more, and dyed al∣so of poyson, and was buried at Campaigne, leauing onely the memorie of his name. A third sort of Kings beganne to raigne in France. From Pharamond a Painim, vnto Hughe Capet, are accounted 587. yeares. From Clouis the first Christian, 487. From Pippin the Father of Charlemaigne, 237. yeares. Hughe Capet, 35. in number, and the first King of France, raigned nine yeares, and began the third sort of Kings which yet endureth in the kingdome of France. Dantes a Florentine Poet, in his Purgatorie saith, that Hughe Capets Grandfather was a Butcher. Of a Counte of Paris by the fauour of souldiers he was first saluted king in the Towne of Noion. Raigning then
newly in France,Otho. 3. he caused a Councel of Prelates of the French Church to be assembled at Rheimes in Campaigne. And because he feared the posteritie of Charlemaigne (vpon which hee had vsurped the kingdome) he caused in the said Councell to be de∣posed, the Arch-bishop of Rheimes called Arnulphe, or Arnoul, bastard brother of the king Lotharie, & set in his place a Monk, a Philosopher, and Magician called Gilbert, or Gerbert: vnto this deposition consented all the Prelates of France, except Ser∣gius Arch-bishop of Sens, who was sent prisoner vnto Orleans with Arnulphe, but three yeares after they were deliuered. See Iohn le Maire in the 2. part, and others. Against the said Coun∣cell, Pope Benet made an other be held in the same Cittie of Rheimes, wherein the said Arnulphe was restored, and Sergius or Serinus, and Gerbert or Gilbert, was deposed: who notwithstan∣ding was after Archbishop of Rauenna, & at last Pope of Rome by diuellish meanes, whose end was miserable. Iohn le Maire. Many holy bodies S. Landoul. S. Adrian, S. Amand of Hasban, were transported into the Towne of Gaunt. Chron. Sigeb. The Abbey of S. Magloire at Paris was founded by ye king. Iohn. 16.Iohn Pope, 16. of that name, ruled at Rome 4. moneths: his  Father was called Leo a Priest. He distributed the goods of the Church, to his parents, friends, and Allies. Therefore he was hated of all the Cleargie and people: and was enclosed in the Castle S. Angelo, where he dyed of hunger. Supp. Chron. and R. Barns. This custome was afterward much vsed in the Romane Church. Iohn. 17. Naucler. Supp. Chron. Platina.Iohn Pope, 17. of that name, a Romane, ruled at Rome 9. or 10. yeares, 6. or 7. moneths, and 8. or 10. dayes, after the di∣uersitie of writers. In this time Crescentius Momentanus, a Consull of Rome, had vsurped rule ouer the Towne of Rome, and perswaded the Romanes & Italians to take againe the Empire. Hee so per∣secuted this Pope Iohn, that hee was constrained to flie out of Rome, and to soiourne in Tuscane and Lombardie. But when he heard that the said Iohn, had now the third time sent for succors of the Emperor Otho, he sent messengers towards the said Pope
to recall him! At whose request the Pope returning, Crescentius demaunded pardon of him. Otho desiring to haue the Emperial crowne, hauing gathered together a great army, and before hee entred Rome hee made a peace betwixt the Duke of Beneuent and the Duke of Capuae: from thence hee came to Rome, and was crowned by Gregorie 5. of that name, his cofin, before called Bruno,Gregorie. 5. son of Duke Otho of Saxonie, whō he made Pope in the place of Iohn, maugre the Romans, and by him was crowned Emperour. Cer∣tain time after Crescentius Conful of Rome corrupted with aua∣rice, procured yt the Bishop of Plaisance,Schisme. who was a Grecian by nation, a very pernitious man, was constituted Pope,Iohn. 18. & was cal∣led Iohn 18. and held the seate 10. months. Gregorie then rety∣red towards the Emperour, to bee reuenged of the iniurie was done him. The Emperour sore mooued at that outrage, with great power returned to Rome. Crescentius vnderstanding of his cōming, not trusting in the Roman people, caused the Castle de S. Angelo to be fortified. And as these things were in doing, the Emperor besieged the towns. The Romane people more meet for seditiō then to fight, desired pardō of ye Emperor, & opened the gates vnto the Almains. Crescentius & Pope Iohn being destitute of Councel, retired into the fort of the said Castle. Some by treason promised them assurance if they would demand pardon of the Emperor.A true reward of ambition. They then came downe, & as they came were surprised. Pope Iohn after his eies were put out & his mēbers mutilated he was slain. Crescentius was set vpō a Mare, his face towards the taile, & his nose & eares being cut off, hee was led before the Towne, for a spectacle vnto all. Some say he was hanged without the towne, others say his head was cut off. R. Barns. Therfore Gregory being restored into his Bishoprick, seeing the troubles yt in time past had bin for the electiō of Emperors, and the variable issues therof, assembled a Councel, wherein the first ordinance & establishment of Electors was decreed, to the end the dignitie Emperial should no more remain in one house & family by successiō of line.The begin∣ning of Elec∣tors. This electiō then was giuē to the Germanike natiō, which yet holdeth it at this day. Sixe Princes
were established: three Ecclesiasticall, that is to say, the Arch∣bishoppe of Magunce, of Treuers, and of Colongne: the three other secular, were the Marquesse of Brandeberge, the Duke of Saxonie, and the Counte of Palatine, vnto which was giuen the right and power for euer to elect the Emperour. With them was ioyned the Duke of Boheme, (Boheme then had not obteined the title of a kingdome) as the seuenth to ac∣cord them, if peraduenture they were euen in yeares. If it be demaunded wherfore so high a dignitie of election was not rather committed to other Princes, which then were puissant, namely he of Bauieres, Sueuia, and Franconia, Histo∣riographers make no mention thereof. But if it be lawfull to set downe some appearance of cause, it is certaine that Boheme was a Country meete to maintaine the right of election, as a Coun∣trey inuited by nature. Saxonie had that honour, because the Emperour descended out of that house, as also for that it is a very large and puissant Country. The Country of Brandeberge held then also on the house of Saxonie, and it is likely the Em∣perour Otho desired to aduaunce that which was of his owne house. The Counte Palatine sued to haue that prerogatiue, by rea∣son of the posteritie of Charlemaigne. For the Countie of Pa∣latine was then of the line of Charlemaigne. After that this election was thus established, the Italians stirred many troubles against the Emperour: new matter of se∣dition wanted not therevnto. Iohn. 18. Inuention for the dead.Whilest Iohn 18. ruled at Rome, and that Gregorie the fift was absent and deiected (as is said) one called Odillo a Monke, and afterward the Abbot of Clugni, instituted in his Monaste∣ry the day of All-soules, the next day after All-saints: which in∣stitution was incontinently receiued and approoued by all the Church. The occasion hereof was, that this ignorant Monke had vnderstood of an Hermite returning from Sicilie, that great noyses and lamentations were heard in the Mountaine Aetna, who hee thought were the soules of the dead which suffered paine in Purgatorie: therefore hee thought they might be hel∣ped by Orisons and prayers. See Iustine in his booke, 3. Chron.
Sigeb. and Polyd. Ʋerg. lib. 6. cha. 9. The house of Sauoye issued from the Dukes of Saxonie, as is said, is raised into a Counte. The Emperor Otho espoused the daughter of the King of Arragon, a very intemperate woman, who maintained a young man in womans array, as one of her Chamber-maides: but the thing discouered the adulterer, who was burnt aliue, and by intercession of friends the Empresse was reconciled: but for all this she desisted not from perseuering in her incontinences, of∣ten requiring men, before she were required. In the Towne cal∣led Modena in Italie, she was imbraced with the loue of a Count very faire and of good grace, and sought by all meanes to cause him to condiscend to her luxutious desire, which he would not, fearing the losse of his estate. She accused him to the Em∣perour, saying he solicited her of dishonour. The Emperour angred hereat, in his furie caused him to be beheaded. But the truth afterward being knowne, she was burnt aliue, and foure goodly places were giuen to the wife of the saide Counte in re∣compence. Ammonius a Monke of Fleury, in this time wrote a booke of the myracles of S. Benet, and Herigerus Abbot of Lob, wrote an other of the dissonance of the Church, & an other booke of the diuine office. Also of the bodie and blood of the Lord, and others, Abb. Trit. Robert 36. King of France, raigned 34. yeares, a learned  and very studious man. He went to Rome vpon deuotion. The Sea of Histories. Constance his wife founded the Abbey of Poissi, wherin she was buried. The same. Siluester Pope, second of that name,Siluester. 2. of the Countrey of Aquitane, called before Gilbert, or Gerbert, a Magician, & Ni∣gromancer  (as hath bene saide) came to the saide seate by the art of the diuel, vnto whom he had done homage, that all his af∣faires might goe after his wish. In his youth he was a Monke of Fleury, in the Diocesse of Orleans: but for the ardent desire hee had of learning, left his Abbey & got him to Siuile in Spaine, which then the Sarrasins
held, and gaue himselfe to a Magitian Philosopher, who had a booke none like it in the Art Magicke. Gerbert sought often to steale it from him, but by reason his maister kept it very care∣fully, hee could not come by it. Yet hee perswaded the Phi∣losophers daughter with whom hee had great familiaritie, to get the booke and lende it him to reade, which shee did. Hauing then the saide booke, hee retired, and fearing to be surprized with it, hee vowed himselfe to the Diuell, vppon condition hee would bring him to Fraunce. Being returned, he kept a Schoole, and taught the liberall Arts with great ad∣miration of his Auditors. After he was Maister vnto Otho the the fourth, of Robert, sonne of Hugo Capet King of Fraunce, and of Lotharie, who afterward was Arch-bishop of Sens: by whose helpe hee was aduaunced: First to be Arch-bishop of of Rheimes as is saide, and after of Rauenna, and finally Pope. During which time hee alwayes dissembled his Art Magicke, and the communication hee had with the Diuell. Of whom once desiring to knowe how long hee should liue in the Pope∣dome, the Diuell answered him that he should liue til he said Masse in Ierusalem. Siluester then giuing himselfe altogether vnto his delights, hoping to liue long, and thinking of nothing lesse then of go∣ing to Ierusalem, It came to passe that one day in Lent as he ce∣lebrated in the Church of the holy Crosse of Ierusalem, he was suddenly taken with a great Feuer then did he remember yt the said place was called of ye crosse of Ierusalem, & so had bin sedu∣ced by the ambiguity of the answer. Straight heard he great tu∣mults of diuels in his presence, & being surprised with feare be∣gan to lament. And although he was a very wicked man, yet fel he not into dispair: but seeing he must needs die, called his Car∣dinals & told vnto them all his life: and the art Magicke which he had vsed to come vnto that dignitie, exhorting them to liue holily: and before all men cōfessed himself miserable: & ordei∣ned that his body should be hewen & cut in peeces, but especi∣ally such of his members wherby he had worshipped the diuel: and then that they all should be put in a cart, and in what place soeuer the horses which drew ye cart should stay, there he should
be buried. And it came to passe that the horses without any cō∣duction of man, carried his body into the Church of Laterane; where he was laid in a Sepulchre. And at this day his Sepulchre is a pronosticke token of a Popes death. R. Barnes. Suppl. Chron. and Nauler. An Aduertisement. From the time of Iohn the 8. which was the whore, vntil the yeare after the Natiuitie of Christ, Antichrist raigned at Rome a brazen faced harlot, which had despised and troden vnder her feet holy mariage. All the Popes which were within this time, which conteineth about an 150. yeares, were plunged in all vo∣luptuousnes, impudency, and carnal villanies: in arrogancy, kis∣sing of feete, Sacriledges, horrible dissentions, homicides, & vn∣brideled impudencies, as may easily be perceiued by the dis∣course of those proceedings. In this time now following, after the thousand yeare, the diuel is wholy vnchained: And rightly may this time be called The kingdome of the great Dragons.Apoc. 20.2. Siluester the second by his Necromancies began to vnloose Sathan, hauing couenanted with him to haue the Popedome. Benet the 9. did homage to the diuel in woods & mountaines. In Hildebrand or Gregory the 7. and other Popes, thou shalt see what Arts they vsed. Otho the 3. the 18. yeare of his Empire, was poysoned by a Romane woman (which had bin the wife of Crescentius) at the houre of his departing from Rome, by the gift of a paire of per∣sumed gloues being poysoned. And this was in reuenge of her husbands death, as saith Crantius. Henry second of that name, Duke of Banier,Henry. 2. and Counte of Bamberge, surnamed the Lame, obteined the Empire by electi∣on, and raigned 22. yeares.After Abb. Vrsp. Iohn Pope, 19. of that name,Iohn. 19. surnamed le Sec (as Iohn Blun∣dus) by Nation an Italian, succeeded Siluester the Magician, euen in the same art and studies which he practised. Berno saith that there were great cōtentions amongst the Necromancians, such as were fauourers of Siluester & this Iohn: but in the end he carried all away. Some say he was poysoned, after he had gouer∣ned 5. months. This Pope gaue himself altogether to idlenes & pleasure, as witnesseth Crantius. Hydromany was his studie.
Henry. 2.He commanded the Feast of the Commemoration of the dead (newly inuented and instituted in the Abbey of Clugny, by Odillo as is said) which was in the moneth of March, to be re∣mitted vntill the second day of Nouember, and then obserued also through all Churches. R. Barns, and Supp. Chron. The name of a Cardinall appointed as a dignitie. The Historiographers say, that at this time the name and appellation of a Cardinall beganne to be in great account, as we see at this day. Baconthorpius Ro. Barns, and Carion. Iohn. 20.Iohn, Pope 20. borne at Rome, called, Fasanus, was suspec∣ted  to haue made away his predecessor. These Popes from Sil∣uester vntill Hildebrand, gaue themselues to nothing but diabo∣licall arts. This man after he had gouerned foure yeares & fiue moneths dyed. Naucl. not without some suspition of poyson. In this time there was an horrible pestilence, yea almost through the whole world. Sigeb. Fulbert Bishop of Chartres, wrote these Respondes to the praise of the Virgin Marie. Stirps Iesse, &c. Et Chorus nouae Hierusalem, &c. and other prayers. Salue Regi∣na.Herman a Monke of S. Gall, wrote that Salue Regina & Alma redemptoris mater. Trit. Abb. Sergius 4.Sergius Pope, the fourth of that name a Romane, gouer∣ned the Sea two yeares, and sixe moneths. Suppl. Chron. Burchardus, first a Monke of Lob, the Disciple of Albert aboue mentioned, was Bishop of Wormes: He compiled the auncient Canons, which afterward were abridged by Gratian: yea rather corrupted, which is easie to iudge in comparing them together. Rhenanus in his Annota. vpon Tertullian. Ierusalem was taken, and the Lords Sepulchre destroyed by the Sarrasins and Mahumetists. Nancl. and Suppl. Chron. Benet. 8.Benet Pope, 8. of that name, a Tusculan, gouerned the Ro∣mane  Church 12. yeares, or thereabouts. He crowned the Emperour Henry at his comming to Rome, and saluted him Augustus.
Henry the second builded at Bamberge the Church of Saint George, and prayed Benet it might be a Cathedrall Church:Conrade. 2. which the Pope agreed vnto, vppon condition that the saide Church should paye to the Pope euery yeare an hundreth markes of siluer, and a white horse with all his furniture. Plati∣na, and R. Barnes. Conrade 2. of that name, obteined the Empire, and raigned 15. yeares. Naucler. He was the sonne of Herman Duke of Fran∣conians, and was called Salicus, because he came of the Sicambi∣ans, from whom came the Salicke lawe. And the French them∣selues were called Salickes, which vsed that lawe, whereof we haue made mention in Pharamond. After the death of Henry the 2. Benet was deiected frō his dignitie by violence, and a popular sedition of the Romans,Schisme 14. and an other ordeined in his place: but after the Antipope was re∣iected, and Benet established in his Popedome with great ho∣nour, who soone after dyed. Supp. Chron. The Historiographers doo heere alledge Peter Damianus a Cardinall of Hostia, who saide that this Pope Benet after his death appeared to a Bishop his Familier, vpon a blacke horse: and the Bishop said vnto him, Art not thou Pope Benet which art gone out of this world? Hee said, I am that vnhappie Benet.This was to get siluer, and to maintain Purgatory. Being againe asked how he did: he answered; I am greeuously tormented: but yet I may be helped with the mercy of God, by suffrages, Masses, and Almes deeds. Therefore saith he, goe to my successor Pope Iohn, and tell him in such a coffer he shall finde a great sum of siluer, let him distribute it all to the poore. The said Bishop hearing these words accomplished them, and after dispatched himselfe of his Bishoppricke, and entered into Religion. This is recited by Naucl. R. Barnes. Suppl. Chron. Fasci∣temp. Iohn le Maire. Bonif. Simo. Et Cora. Abb. Thus played Sathan with his Instruments, to establish his kingdome by Infernall Idolatries, by Purgatories, Masses, and such suggested things.
Iohn. 21.Iohn, Pope, 21. of that name, a Romane, the sonne of Gre∣gorie,  Bishop of Port. Suppl. Chron. ruled 9. yeares, 7. moneths, or about 11. yeares after Naucler. And was chosen before hee was promoted to Ecclesiasticall orders, against their rights. He had great troubles against the Romanes, but finally he was deliuered by the Emperour Conrade his helpe. Supp. Chron. whom also hee crowned vpon an Easter day: there being pre∣sent, Rodolphe King of Burgongne, and the King of England. Naucler. Henry 31. King of France, raigned thirtie yeares. He had great contentions with his brother Robert touching the king∣dome: but they agreed. He founded the Pryorie of S. Martin in the fields nigh Paris, and put therein Regular Chanons. He raigned 27. yeares: some say 28. hauing caused his sonne Phi∣lip to be crowned. At this time flourished in Italie, Guido Aretin, a Monke of the order of S. Benet, an excellent Musitian, who first inuented the Gamma to learne vpon the hand,The Gamma inuented. and the notes Vt, re, mi, fa, sol, la. See The Sea of Histories. He writ also against Berenga∣rius. Trit. Abb. Benet. 9.Benet, Pope, ninth of that name, a Tusculan, before called Theophilact, the Nephewe of Benet the eight, surpassed in ma∣lice his vncle, and gouerned the Romane Church tenne yeares, foure moneths, and 9. dayes, after Suppl. Chron. Conrade dyed at Trect, and was enterred at Spire. Henry. 3.Henry the third of that name, surnamed the blacke sonne  of Conrade the Emperour, and of Giselle, was chosen King of Romanes by the Electors: he was a courteous Prince, merrie and liberall by nature. He appeased Hungarie, which was trou∣bled with diuers seditions. He did as much at Rome to the three Popes which were there. His wife was Agnes, daughter of the Duke of Aquitaine, and the marriage was at Ingelheim, at which he did an act worthie of memorie. For he cast off all pompes, and put away all Moris Players, Dauncers, and such like: and in their places brought poore people. The Pope Benet was accused of many crimes by the Ro∣manes, and therefore the third yeare hee was driuen from his
promotion,Henry. 3. and in his place was ordained the Bishop of Saint Sabine, called Siluester the third: who likewise was reiected af∣ter fortie nine dayes, because he was vnprofitable. Benet re∣couered his dignitie, but hee was againe cast off, and it was giuen to Iohn Arch-bishoppe of Saint Iohn Port Latin: who was called Gregorie the sixt. Others say that Benet after he was againe receiued into his Popedome, solde it for money. And so at one same time, the seuenth yeare of the Empire of Henry the third, there were at Rome three Popes: Benet the ninth, Siluester the third: and Gregorie the sixt. One held his seate at Late∣rane in the Pallace. An other at Saint Peters. And the third at Saint Maries. A Priest called Gratian, mooued with zeale, went vnto the Popes, and perswaded them each one to take some good some of money & depose themselues from the Papacie. Which they did. R. Barnes, and Naucl. Vpon these stirres, the Emperour Henry the third ha∣uing heard of those tumults and scandalles at Rome, to abo∣lish them, was constrained to goe into Italie, with a great power. Gratian Pope, met the Emperour, and gaue him a crowne of great price. The Emperour receiued the Pope honoura∣bly, and they came together vnto Rome. The Cleargie as∣sembled, and shewed that Gratian was a Simoniacke: hauing with money caused others to yeeld vp their rightes, that he himselfe by that meanes might come vnto the Popedome. R. Barnes, and Naucler. The Emperour then caused a Councell to be held, wherein all those Schismatickes and Simoniacke Popes were deposed, and new created. See Reader, and note the honour hereof, as true ensignes of the seate of Antichrist. The heresie of Transubstantiation commenced. At this time Lanfrancus an Italian borne, of Pauie, flouri∣shed in France. He was one of the first inuentors and authors of
Transubstantiation and hereticall doctrine, new and pernici∣ous, before wholly vnknowne of the auncient Doctors, not∣withstanding receiued since the yeare of Christ 1053. at the Councell of Ʋerseil as shall be said. The new Doctors which haue written touching Tran∣substantiation, were Iohn Scotus and Bertramus, both which guided with the spirit of truth, writ properly touching the bo∣dy and bloud of Christ in the Supper. Abande of such new Doctours as opposed themselues a∣gainst the true doctrine of the Supper. 1 Pascasius Abbot of the Abbey of Corbey in Saxonie, in the time of Charles le Gros, the yeare of Christ. 880. 2 Ratherius Monke of Lob, after Bishop of Verone, vnder Henry the first. 3 Herigerus Abbot of Lob, of Saint Benet, vnder Otho the third. 4 Guido Monke, & Abbot of S. Benet, vnder Conrade the 2. 5 Adelmanus Bishop of Brixe, vnder Henry the third. 6 Guimondus Monke, and after Archbishop vnder Henr. 3. 7 Algerus Monke of Corbey, vnder Henry the third. 8 Lanfrancus Archbishop of Canterbury in England, before Monke of S. Benet, vnder Henry the third. 9 Hildebert Bishop of Mans, and after Archbishoppe of Tours, a Disciple of Berengarius, but after a great persecutor of the holy doctrine thereof, vnder Henry the fourth. 10 Honorius Priest, vnder Henry the fift and others, as Nol∣sus, Ancelmus, Lomberdus, Petrus Commestor, and Innocent the the third, which came after. Siluester. 3.Siluester Pope, third of that name a Romane, Bishop of S. Sabine, before called Iohn, after Benet was driuen away as is said, was chosen by gifts and corruption, and ruled 55. dayes, or two moneths. Behold the time of horrour and confusion. He which then was most wicked, and would giue most, obteined the feate soo∣nest. Supp. Chron.
Gregorie Pope, sixt of that name,Gregorie. 6. ruled two yeares & sixe moneths: in the time of the former Schisme, hee had bene ad∣iudged a Simoniacke and Homicide, yet he bought the Pope∣dome of Benet. R. Barnes. There was great trouble in Hungarie vnder the King Andrewe, and after vnder his brother Vela, against such as de∣maunded againe to returne vnto their Paganisme and aunci∣ent superstition. Naucler. Clement Pope, second of that name,Clement. 2. before called Werdi∣gerus, or Singerus, or Sindegerus Bishop of Bamberge, was  Canonically elected in full Councel, after that the foure others aboue named were deposed. He crowned the Emperour Hen∣ry the third, and his wife Agnes, on a day of the Natiuitie of Christ. Naucler. Henry before he departed from Rome, constrained the Ro∣manes by oath to renounce their right of election without any more medling therein thereafter, to auoyd Schismes and scan∣dales, which commonly rise of such election. Others say the poore gaue them that commaundement and defence. Nau∣cler. The Romanes after the Emperours departure forgetting their oath, impoysoned this Pope, after he had gouerned nine moneths. Some say that Stephen his successour (who was cal∣led Damasus) was authour thereof. Benno saith it was Gerard Brazure, a friend of Theophilact, and of Hildebrand, a man ex∣pert in poysoning. In this time men forged Visions and miracles,Sacraments of the Aultar. to establish the Sacrament of the Masse, which then was called of the Aul∣ter. Many durst not speake what they thought therein for feare of Popes. The wickednesse of Popes merited, that the power of ele∣ction should be taken from Ecclesiasticall persons by the iust iudgement of God, saith Nauclerus. This Pope was poysoned soone after the Emperours de∣parture. Damasus Pope, second of that name,Damasus. 2. otherwise called S. Stephanus Baguiarius, borne in Bauiere, Bishop of Brixe, ruled
by force the seate 23. dayes, as Histo, and Chron. say. For he occupied the Popedome without election, either suffrage of people, or Cleargie. R. Barnes. Leo. 9.Leo Pope, 9. of that name an Almaine, of the Countrey  of Alsac, the Earles of Ausperge, and being Count or Earle of Etisheim, called Bruno, Bishop of Tulles, a man of good na∣ture, was sent to Rome by the Emperour, at the request of the Romanes, and being chosen Pope, gouerned fiue yeares, two moneths, sixe dayes, after Suppl. Chron. Some say, that as he came to Rome, Hugo Abbot of Clugny, and Hildebrand the Monke, encountred and met him in his pontificall attire: they perswaded him to take off that habite, and to enter into Rome in his vsuall and priuate attire; vpon this reason, that the Emperour had not giuen him the right to chuse the Pope, but only the people and Cleargie of Rome. Bruno agreeing to their speech confessed his fault, and accused himselfe, that he had rather obey the Emperour then God. At Hildebrandes perswasion the Cleargie elected him for this, that hee con∣fessed that the election ought to appertaine to the Cleargie, and not to the Emperour. Leo then to recompence Hildebrand, created him Cardinall, and committed vnto him the Church of S. Paul. The yeare of Christ one thousand fiftie one, Leo assem∣bled a Councell at Verseil: where was first handled the opini∣on of Transubstantiation, (although that word was not inuented of long time after) and there was condemned the opinion of Iohn Scotus, of Bertramus, and Berengarius Doctor, borne at Tours, Arch-deacon of Angiers, who maintained the opini∣on of Scotus, and of Bertramus, touching the Eucharist. In the said Councell Berengarius appeared not, but sent thither two Clarkes: and as they would haue excused Berengarius, and haue told the reason, they were laid hold on and put inprison. Be∣hold how they disputed, O Ecolampadius. These be the pooceedings of the aduersaries of the truth, to ioyne tyrannie with ignorance.
Berengarius had Lanfrancus for his aduersary, who main∣tained the opinion of Pascasius, the first author of this doctrine against Scotus and Bertramus. Hubert Cardinall, Rogerius & Guimondus maintained Lan∣fancus his part, which mingled subtilties with outrages against Berengarius, who shewed himselfe litle constant. For although he had the truth on his side, yet had he a certaine hatred against Lanfrancus & Rogerius, mingled with glory & hope of victorie, which made him loose the desire he had to maintaine the puritie of the doctrine. For he mingled withal certain speeches of mar∣riage & the Baptisme of litle children, and therfore they stifled amongst some errours by his fault. So commeth it to passe, whē without the feare of the Lord we wil maintaine the cause of the Gospell. O Ecolamp. At this time the Emperour caused a Sinode to be held of an hundreth and thirtie Bishops at Magunce. Some write that Leo was there, and there it was ordeined that the Clarks should nourish no dogges for hunting, nor hawkes. That Clarkes should deale with no secular nor prophane affaires. That none should be admitted or receiued into a Mona∣sterie for a Monke, vnlesse hee were of a lawfull age, and that hee should come in of his owne good will without con∣straint. Simony and marriage, was forbidden Priests. That the houses of Clarkes should be builded nigh vnto Temples and Churches, 12. quest. 2. cha. Necessaria. Henry the third gaue to Leo the Towne and Countrey of Beneuent, to redeeme the yearly rent of an hundred marks, paid (as is aboue said) yearely out of the Cathedrall Church of Bam∣berge: and Leo confirmed the priuiledges graunted to the said church, & accorded to the said Archbishop the Mantle (which they call Palilium) to vse three times in the yeare. At Easter, at the Feast af S. Peter, and S. Paul, and vpon S. George his day, the Patrone of that Church. Naucler. Vpon the aforesaid Sinode, Nicholas a Monke of Constan∣tinople, writ a Booke against the Latines, Intituled De nuptijs
Sacerdotum. Of the marriage of Priests: which was condem∣nemned by Hubert, the said Popes Legate, and sent to Constan∣tinople. Trit. Abb. For the Pope is ignorant of nothing.This Pope being at Ratisbone, the Legates of Paris being present, approued the Relickes of S. Denis, whereof there had bene a long doubt, whether they were Saint Denis his Re∣lickes or no. Chron. Abb. Ʋrsp. Vnder Henry the third, the Hungarians returned vnto Paganisme, and hauing reiected the Faith, put to death all their Bishops and Cleargie. Naucler. Vpon a Christmas day, Leo the ninth, and Henry the third, being at a great Masse, in the Towne of Wormes, after the Subdeacon had sung the Epistle in the accustomed maner and Tune, the Pope presently deiected & depriued him of his of∣fice: because he sung the Epistle in the Popes presence, in an other Song and Tune then the Romane Church did. The Arch-bishop of Wormes who saide Masse that day, greeued that his Subdeacon should be so handled, after the Gospell was sung, retyred into his Episcopall seate, leauing his office vnperfected, saying he would make no ende if the Pope would not restore his Subdeacon to his former state. The Pope because hee would not hinder that the seruice should not be ended, restored his Subdeacon. R. Barn. Albert. Crane lib. 4. Saxo. ca. 45. Anne Queene of France, wife of Henry the first, founded in the Towne of Senlis a Church of S. Ʋincent, where are Regu∣lar Chanons, and an other in the suburbs where were Nunnes. The Sea of Histories. After the death of Leo the third, the Romanes fearing the puissance of Henry the third, durst not attempt a news thing against their oath, which they made in the time of Cle∣ment the second: wherefore they sent Hildebrand towardes the Emperour to chuse a Pope: who vsing the authoritie of his Legation, designed Henry the fourth, the sonne of Henry the third Emperour.Victor. 2. And in the meane while Ʋictor was cho∣sen Pope, second of that name, not so voluntarily as to please the Emperour, in electing an Almane borne of Bauier, before
called Gebhard, who ruled two yeares and three moneths. Naucler. Hee assembled a Councell at Florence against Fornca∣ting and Simoniacke Priests:He calleth married Priest For∣nicatiors. whereat hee deposed many Bi∣shoppes, Prelates, and Priests, which hee called Fornicators, which had not left their wiues according to the Councell of Magunce. There were Clarkes threatened with great pu∣nishments if they did not obey the Decrees and Cannons of Popes. There was also confirmed the opinion of Paschasius, con∣trary to Scotus, Bertramus, and of Berengarius. Hildebrand by authoritie of the said Councell was sent into France to Tours, to assemble a Sinode touching the matter of the Sacrament and of Transubstantiation. There was Beren∣garius permitted to defend his opinion: But seeing all went by affection, and that hee could not maintaine his opinion with∣out daunger, vppon pusillanimitie and cowardise, hee saide hee held the opinion of the Catholicke Church: by which wordes hee rather satisfied the Legates and the said Coun∣cell, then kept the libertie worthie of a Chistian man. Oecol. lib. 3. Pluralitie of Benefices. Pluralitie of Benefices beganne about this time, and after  neuer ceased in the Church, Fascic. temp. The yeare of our Lord 1056. Henry the third dyed the  tenth yeare of his Empire, and of his age 39. leauing 3. daugh∣ters and two sonnes: that is to say, Henry which succeeded him, and Conrade Duke of Bauiers. Henry Emperour, fourth of that name,Henry. 4. obteined the Em∣pire, and raigned fiftie yeares. Stephen Pope, 9. of that name, borne of Lorraine,Stephen. 9. Abbot of Montcassin, called Fredericke, brother of the Duke of Lor∣raine, ruled at Rome ten moneths. Naucler. After others foure moneths.
Henry. 4.He brought vnder the obedience of the Romane seate, Millane: which since the time of the Apostles hath neuer sub∣iected, saith Platin. and R. Barns. Others, as Naucler. and Supp. Chron. say 200. yeares. Stephen accused the Emperour Henry the fourth, of heresie, because he diminished the authoritie of the Romane seate. Platina. And hauing heard that the Churches of Italie and Bur∣gongne were corrupted with Symonie, he sent Hildebrand to roote out that Cockle. Hildebrand and hauing made his commis∣sion returned to Rome, and found the Pope very sicke: who thinking to die, caused his Churchmen to come vnto him, and made them sweare that they should neuer suffer any to sit in the Apostolike seate, vnlesse he were chosen by the consent of all: yet comming againe to his health, he came to Florence, and cal∣led a Councell: but he died there eight monethes after. Nau∣clerus. A Scottish Monke called Patermis, being in Almaine in a Towne called Paderbrune, fire was put in the Abbey wherin he was: yet though he might, he would not come out: chusing rather to be burnt for the vow of his obedience, then to shunne the daunger by going out. Sigeb. The opinion or obstination of vowes is founded vpon such ex∣amples. Benet Pope. 10. of that name, of Campania in Italie, was a Bishop of Vileterne, before called Mincius, and ruled at Rome 9. monethes.Benet. 10. The Romanes corrupted by siluer, elected him against the Canons, although the Cleagie were against it, but he was con∣strained to giue ouer the Popedome. For Hildebrand returning from Florence,Schisme. brought with him Gerard Bishop of Florence, who after was chosen at Senes. And after his election was as∣signed a Councell in a Towne called Sutry, against Benet. And thither came Goafred Duke of Italie, the first husband of Ma∣tilde, and Guillebert great Gouernor. Item, the Bishops of Lom∣bardie and Hetruria, and others. Which thing Benet vnderstan∣ding,
fled, putting off his pontificall habit, and after led a pri∣uate life. Nicholas Pope, second of that name, borne of Sauoy,Nicholas. 2. called Gerard, Bishop of Florence, gouerned three yeares, and sixe mo∣nethes. He was eleced at Senes, by the instance of Hildebrand, be∣cause he thought it no sure thing that the election should bee at Rome, seeing Benet the tenth and his friends were there pre∣sent. Nicholas comming to Rome, assigned a Councell nigh La∣terane, of an hundreth and fortie Bishops. Wherin it was or∣dained that the election of the Pope should be made by Car∣dinalls, Clarkes, and the Romane people: And that whosoe∣uer should attempt to come to the Popedome, by siluer, fa∣uour, ambition, or other vnlawful meane, and not by Canonike election, that he should be held for an Apostare, and an ex∣communicated person, deiected of euery one, without any aide or fauour. Dist. 33. cap. In nomine Domini. That ordinance endured not long: For afterwards Car∣dinalls alone without either Cleargie or people vsurped that election. In this Councell Berengarius Deacon thinking rather to saue his life then to maintaine the truth, denied it,The pusilla∣nimitie of Berengarius. submitting himselfe to the will of the Councell. His confession (or rather recantation) is contained Deconsecrat: dist. 2. cap. Ego Beren∣garius It was at this Councell of Rome, that transubstantiation was decreed; that is to say, that after the bread is consecrated, we must beleeue the bony of Christ to be so in the Sacrament, that sensibly and really he is between the hands of the Priests: broken & bruised with the teeth. And the Pope Nicholas con∣strained Berengarius so to say & confesse: the said Nicholas be∣ing so taught and perswaded by Lanfrancus. Vadian. But the first opinion of Berengarius which he pronounced for temporall feare, was this that followeth, as Lanfrancus
himselfe reciteth in his booke of the Sacrament of the Eucha∣rist,The words of Berengarius touching the Sacrament. against Berengarius. The sacrifice of the Church (saith Be∣rengarius) is made of two things: that is to say, visible and in∣uisible, of the Sacrament, and of the thing of the Sacrament. Which thing yet (that is to say, the body of Christ) if it were before our eyes, if it were present, it should be visible, but bee∣ing eleuated vnto heauen, and being set at the right hand of the Father, vntill the restoration of all things (as saith S. Peter the Apostle) it cannot be drawne from heauen: for the person of Christ consisteth of God and man. But the Sacrament of the Table of the Lord (that is to say) the bread and wine consecra∣ted, are not chaunged but remaine in their substances, hauing Similitude with the things whereof they are Sacraments, &c. He said moreouer, that the bread and wine after the consecrati∣on were onely the Sacrament, and not the true body nor the true bloud of the Lord: and that they could not sensibly, but sacramentally be administred of the Priests, or broken and bruised with the teeth of the faithfull. In the same Chapter, Ego Berengarius. Golfred, Count of Pouille and of Calabria died, leauing his sonne Bagellard his heire: but Robert brother of the said Gol∣fred, and vncle of the said Bagellard, hauing taken from him all that his father had left him, vsurped Beneuent, which belonged to the Romane seate. Wherefore the Pope excommunica∣ted him. Robert then knowing that he had taken the aforesaid Countries from his said Nephew, did what he could to returne into the Popes fauour, and prayed him to come into Calabria for the good of peace. Being come, he absolued Robert of the Bond of excommunication. After, he adiudged him Pouille and Calabria, vpon condition he would yeeld him Beneuent and Troy, Townes of Pouille, and all that which belonged vnto the Romane seate. Item, that he would giue him helpe in his necessities. Robert promised all this, and gaue him an Armie by which the Pope recouered many places about Rome, and made them subiect to the seate. As Prenesta, Tusculum, Numen∣tum, and beyond Tiber certaine Castles, euen vnto Sutri. Rob. Barns.
The Pope is content to make his profit to the damage of Orphelius: he consented vnto the Rapines of Robert, so that he might haue his helpe. Ancelmus the disciple of Lanfrancus, succeeded his maister in the Priorie of Bec, and Lanfrancus was made Archbishop of Canterburie in England. Chron. Sigeb. Phillip the 38. King of France, sonne of Henry,Philip. raigned 49. yeares. Alexander Pope, second of that name, of Millaine,Alexander. 2. ruled at Rome a yeare and fiue monethes, whose Historie is this. After  the death of Pope Nicholas, one Ancelme Bishop of Luques was chosen for the renowne of his vertues, without the Empe∣rours knowledge, and was chosen being absent from Rome. For he resided in his Bishoppricke of Luques. After the election, the Cardinalls went for him and conducted him to Rome, and was named Alexander. But some Bishops of Lombardie (whom Alexander pleased not because he was not of their band) stir∣red a schisme, and vnder shadowe that they said he entred by Simonie, they would needs haue an other, such as they liked: and at the instigation of Gilbert Bishop of Parme, a man migh∣tie amongst others, they drew towards the Emperour, to shewe that the election hath alwaies appertained vnto the Emperors. Briefly, they obtained of him to chuse an other Pope at theyr pleasure, seeing Nicholas the second was chosen without his knowledge. As soone as they were returned into Lombardie, they assembled a Councell, and did chuse one called Cadolus of Parme, a rich and maruellous puissant man, vnder whom all Italie bowed, except the Countesse Martilde, or Mehaut. Cadolus then beeing so chosen Antepope, drew towards Rome with a strong band, and the power of the Lombards. The Pope Alexander met him,Homicide committed for the Pope∣dome. accompanied with his Romanes, and the batraile was hard and sharpe, nigh Neron vn∣der the golden Mountaine, where was a great slaughter: but finally the victorie turned on the part of Alexander. Yet Cadolus for one euill encounter lost not courage, but before a
yeare was passed, by the meanes of certaine friends which held his part (which he had gained by force of siluer) entred into Rome. The Romanes yet ranne to Armes: but Cincius the Prouost, his sonne of Rome, put Cadolus in the Forte of S. An∣gilo. The war betwixt those two, endured the space of 2. yeares. Finally, Cadolus was constrained to yeeld himselfe, and re∣deeme his life with 600. Markes of siluer. After to content the Emperour who fauoured the said Cadolus, a Councell was assembled at Mantua, where were the Emperor and the Pope Alexander,A Councell At Mantua. & there in the presence of all the Prelates, the Pope purged himselfe both of Simony & Ambition & matters were agreed both of the one partie and the other. Iohn le Maire. 11. The determinations of the Councell.1 In the said Councell was ordained that none should heare the Masle of a Priest that had concubines. 17. dist. c. Preterhoc. 2. Whosoeuer wittingly should be promoted by a Simoniake, he should be reiected and deposed. 1. q. 2. c. De caetero. 3. That Cloister Monkes should not be admitted to the of∣fices of Clarkes. 16. q. 2. c. iuxta calced. tenorem. 4. That Clarkes should take no Ecclesiasticall Benefice of a secular person. 16. q. 1. c. Perlaicos. 5. That men should giue Benefices & Ecclesiasticall orders to learned people, without selling or buying any of them with any contract. 1. q. 3. c. Exmultis. 6. That he which should be excommunicated, cannot ex∣communicate an other. 14. q. 1. c. Audiuimus. 7. That Alleluia should be banished out of the Church from Septuagesima, vntill Easter. Whilest this Councell was held at Mantua, Richard the Normane with his sonne William, tooke and occupied certaine places of the Romane seate, as Capua, Beneuent, and others. Hil∣debrand was sent against Richard, and constrained him to yeeld vp againe such places as he had taken. The Pope attending Hil∣debrand at Pise, they returned together from thence vnto Rome, R. Barns. This Pope Alexander gaue Lanfrancus Archbishop of Can∣terburie, for the victorie obtained against Berengarius, touching Transubstantiation, two Archiepiscopall Mantles, or Palls, the
one of honour, and the other of loue. Histories recite at length how the Pope Alexander was handled by Hildebrand, who succeeded him, and how finally he detained him in great miseries, after hee had beene beaten and outraged of him. And after this time Hildebrand retained to himselfe all the reuenewes of the Church of Rome, & assembled great summes of siluer. After then that Alexander was dead, vnder the miserable seruitude of Hildebrand, the yeare of our Lord, 1074. the same day at night he was Inthronized in the Papall seate by his souldiers, without the consent of the Clear∣gie or people, least if he had tarried too long, an other had pre∣uented him. In his election none of the Cardinalls had subscri∣bed. Wherevnto when the Abbot of Clugny was come, Hilde∣brand said vnto him: Thou hast tarried too long brother. The Abbot answered. And thou Hildebrand hast made too much haste, that occupiest the Apostolike seate against the Canons, before the Pope thy Lord be buried. But how Hildebrand was put in possession, in what maner he liued, how he drew Cardinalls to him which should be wit∣nesses of his life and doctrine, how miserably hee tormented them, and with what heresies he infected the world, what per∣iuries, what great treasons he committed, hardly can many de∣scribe them. Yet the bloud of so many Christians shead, where∣of he was author and principall cause, cryeth yet higher then all that. Behold what Benno saith. Hanno the second Archbishop of Colongne, caused both the eyes to be put out of certaine Iudges which had condem∣ned a poore woman: of which, one Iudge lost but one eye, for that he brought the other vnto triall. In memory of this Iudge∣ment, were erected Images without eyes. Naucler. Nauclerus also and others do tell here of a rich and mightie  man, who was so persecuted with Rats, that finally he was con∣sumed, yet no man touched that was with him. Gregorie Pope, 7. of that name, before called Hildebrand,Gregorie. 7. borne at Siennes in Tuscane, ruled at Rome 12. yeares, and one  moneth: rather a Monster in nature then a man. Hauing abandoned the Monasterie of Clugny, where hee
was a Monke, and being come to Rome, he insinuated himselfe into the familiaritie of Laurence an Archpriest, of whom hee learned Magike Arts and Negromancie: which Arts the said Laurence being yet young, had learned of that diuellish Mon∣ster Syluester, Pope, second of that name, with certaine others. There was a certaine particular intelligence betwixt this Lau∣rence Thoaphilacte, Iohn Gratian, and Hildebrand, all Archpriests or Cardinalls of the Sinagogue of Rome.Archpriests & Cardinalls. Wherfore Hildebrand did whatsoeuer he would with Theophilacte, whilest hee was in the Popes office, vnder the name of Benet the ninth. But which is more, vntill he came to be Pope, nothing was done vnder the other Popes but at his pleasure. When hee list (as Benno saith) he would shake his skirtes, and fire would come out like sparkes: and by such miracles he abused the eyes of simple people, as if it had bene some signe of sanctetie. And therefore saith Benno, when the diuell could not persecute publikely Ie∣sus Christ by the Painims, he disposed himselfe fraudulently to destroy his name by that false Monke, vnder the shewe and colour of religion. Authors rehearse that this Hildebrand poysoned seuen or eight Popes, by the seruice of Gerard Brazut, to the ende by that meanes he might the sooner come vnto the Papacie. Yet during those great troubles, he handled all things so sub∣tilly, that none doubted he by any meanes aspired to the seate. And although he was not Pope by name, yet in effect he was the Organe and onely Instrument of him that was ordained Pope, or of all his wicked inuentions: and by litle and litle, he practised vnder the other Popes, that which he executed in his owne Popedome. This notable Hypocrite vnder the co∣lour of Canons, and a certaine pietie, hee did whatsoeuer hee would, although he was the most vniust and the wickeddest in the world. He accused Alexander the second his Lord and Maister, because he had sought succours and helpe of the Em∣perour against his aduersaties: and said it was not reasonable (according to Canons) that he should enioy the Papall digni∣tie, which had demaunded succours of a prophane Prince. Ha∣uing dismissed the said Alexander of his dignitie, he imprisoned
him, and caused him secretly to die, and incontinently vsurped the Papall seate, whilest men prepared for the obsequies and funeralls of the dead. He communicated his siluer and counsell with Brazut, and certaine Iewes his familiars, by the meanes of which, he found many tongues at his hire, which cried with an high voyce (yea euen before Alexander was buried) S. Peter the Apostle hath chosen Hildebrand: and they placed him in the Papall Chaire vnder the name of Gregorie the 7.The 1000. yeare after the destructiō of Ierusalem. And this was done the 1000, yeare after the destruction of Ierusalem: In the which yeare the 6. Vicars of Sathan began to attribute vnto themselues openly the name of God, and the office and vertue of Iesus Christ, true God, and true man. For as soone as the said Gregorie had bin declared and ordained Pope, the same was proclamed, that the true Vicar of Christ Iesus was chosen. And also the same Gregorie appropriated vnto himselfe that which is said of Iesus Christ in the second Psal. Hee ouerthrew the lawes of God in forbidding marriage to Priests, and casting kings out of their seats.Apoc. 20. c. 8. Croisaides a∣gainst the Turkes. It was he which shead out the first seeds of the warre of Gog & Magog, which were the most pernitious and bloudie that euer was, and which his familiar Vrbain 2. of that name, afterward pursued. Baleus Anglus. The beginning of the mischiefes and extreame calamities of Croysades against the Turkes, vnder a shewe of reco∣uering Ierusalem. Benno a Crdinall, rehearseth the history folowing.The Historie of Hilde∣brand his Negromancie. One day (saith he) as Gregorie came frō Albe to Rome, he forgot to bring with him a booke of Negromancie which he held very deare, and without the which hee neuer went, or at least very seldome. Whereof remembring himselfe at the doore of Laterane, hee called hastily two of his most familiars which accustomed to serue him in all his wickednesse and villanies: and commaun∣ded them that they should bring him the said booke with all expedition, straightly charging them that they should not pre∣sume so much as to open the booke by the way, and that vpon curiositie they should not enquire vppon the secrets thereof. But the more he commanded them, the more inflamed he their
curiositie diligently to seeke the secrets thereof. As then re∣turning, they had opened the booke, and had curiously read the diuellish commaundements of that Art, suddenly the Angells of Sathan presented themselues: the multitude of which, and the horror of them, brought those two young men almost out of their wits, that with much adoo could they come to themselues. And as they themselues rehearsed it, those euil spirits insisted strongly, saying. Wherefore haue you called vs? wherefore haue you disquietted vs? Commaund vs quickly what you will haue vs to doo, else we will fall vpon you if you keepe vs any longer here. One of the young men then answe∣red; cast vs downe these walles straight. And saying so, hee shewed thē with the hand certaine high walles nigh the towne of Rome, which in a moment these euill spirits ouerthrew to the earth. They then thus terrified, trembling & almost out of breath, scantly could come to Rome vnto their maister. Behold what Benno saith, who was in that time. Gregorie being come to the papall dignitie, began inconti∣nently to sollicite that the Canons which his predecessors had made by his cautelous Councell, touching Simonie and singlenesse of life in Priests and Monkes, should be obserued: not to the end hee might wholy abolish the wicked and dete∣stable marchandise which was made of Ecclesiasticall Bene∣fices: but that vnder some colour of honestie, hee might take from Princes the power to conferre and bestow them, and to the end that by that meane all Bishops might be reduced and brought vnder the power and authoritie of the Romane seate; which because of the right of Inuesture, were obliged and beholding vnto Princes, more then vnto the Pope of Rome. And although that the Emperour Henry were the greatest of all Princes, yet this arrogant and proud marchant iudged it best,A Councell at Rome. first to touch and deale with him tragically for the cause of Simonie. Hee assembled a Councell at Rome in the place of Laterane, touching these things: but the Em∣perour beeing hindered because of his warres, could not in∣tend to debate his right in the Sinode. The Pope notwith∣standing
had taken the matter so at heart, that for that cause he ceased not to vse both treasons and murders, and that more is, he stirred in many places intestine and inward warres, which engendred all maner of calamities. For first he laide ambushes for the Emperour, hee sought by diuers meanes to cause him to die. In so much as hee sought to haue slaine him euen in the Church as he should be at his prayers. The Cardinall Benno rehearseth thus the Historie. The Emperour (saith he) had a custome often to goe make his pray∣ers in the Church of S. Marke, in the Mount Auentine. As then, Hildebrand enquired diligently by certaine spies,What treason is there that Popes will not excogitate? of all that he did: hee gaue charge to marke the place wherein the Emperour prayed oftnest either standing or on his knees, and suborned one, promising him a great summe of money, to lay great stones on the beames or vpper lofts of the Church (see the holy councell of this Pope) and that he should lay thē so wel, that when the Emperour should make his prayers, he might let them fall on his head to dash out his braines. But as he which had enterprised such a villanie, was at hand to accomplish it, and went about to handle and remoue a stone, the heauie for him, the stone by the waight deceiued him: and the scaffold which was on the beames being broken, the stone and the poore mi∣serable man, by a iust iudgement of God, fell vpon the paue∣ment of the Temple, & was all burst with the same stone. After the Romanes vnderstood how all things was past, they bound the feet of that wicked villaine, and by the space of 3. daies trai∣led him through the streets of the towne. But vsing their accu∣stomed humanitie, commaunded he should be buried. The sonne of Benno saith here yet further: that Iohn Bi∣shop of Port, who was Hildebrands Secretarie and great fami∣liar, comming into the Pulpit which was in S. Peters Church, said amongst many other things, in the hearing of the people and Cleargie, Hildebrand hath done such a thing, and we also as deseruers, should all bee burned aliue:The Host cast into the fire by Gregorie the seuenth. meaning to giue to vnderstand that which hee had done of the Sacrament of the body of our Lord. Whereof Hildebrand demaunding Coun∣cell of a certaine thing (as of old the Painims did of their Idols)
cast it into the fire, because it gaue him do answere, although the Cardinalls which were then present spake against his deed. This is a beginning of the fruite of that cursed decree of Transubstantiation, applied vnto Charmes and Inchaunt∣ments. The Emperor excommu∣nicated.He excommunicated also the said Emperour Henry, with∣out lawfull accusation, without Canonicall appellation, with∣out forme of iustice: yea euen for that he was but too obedi∣ent vnto him. Hee diuided also from him the Princes of the Empire, and sought by secret treasons to destroy him, but God preserued him. O straunge treason proceeding from the sanctuarie, or rather frō him who seemed to be the high Priest to gouerne the Church, to haue superintendancie ouer Iudges and Elders. By menaces also he constrained Bishops to sweare that they should not defend his cause, neither should they fa∣uour or helpe him in any thing, drawing violently the scrip∣ture to make them serue his false dealing. Notwithstanding (saith Benno) so soone as hee arose vp from his seate to excom∣municate the Emperour, the seate (which had lately bene made of new and strong wood) by the will of God, of it selfe brake in many peeces in a terrible maner. In such sort as it gaue to know, that he that did sit vpō it, would sowe terrible schismes against the Church, by so arrogant and presumptuous a maner of excommunication. This saith Benno. But when he sawe that all his Ambushes could serue him for nothing, he beganne to vse open force and emnities, and after he had excommunicated Henry, declaring all his subiects acquited of their oath of fidelitie, which they had deliuered him, he sent the Crowne of the Empire vnto Rodolphe Sauoic, with this Latine verse, such as it is. Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diàdema Rodolpho. That is to say, the Rocke hath giuen the Diademe vnto
Peter, and Peter giueth it vnto Rodolphe. Henry then being for this cause sore troubled, laid downe his royall apparell and came towards him into the Towne of Canuse, with his wife and litle sonne, in the time of a strong and sharpe winter, & through a very daungerous way. Being before the gate of the Citie (sayth Benno) from morning till night, without hauing eyther meate or drinke, in apparell of cloath, and barefooted, beeing made a spectacle for Angels and men, hee required pardon in all humilitie. He endured three whole dayes in a very lamen∣table affliction; In so much that Hildebrand (who tooke his pleasure the meane while with his whores and Monkes) moc∣ked him. He desired sore that he might haue entry into the Citie, but it was refused him: And as with great instance he de∣maunded it by the space of three dayes, he was answered that the Pope had no leisure to speake with him. Henry taking not in euill part that they would not suffer him to come into the Ci∣tie, remained in the suburbes not without great grieuance. For the winter was sharper then of custome. Yet to the end he would offend no person, he kept 3. whole dayes there without departing. Finally, the fourth day, at the request of the Coun∣tesse Matilde (who as Histories say, loued a litle too much the Pope) and of the Abbot of Clugny, and of the Earle of Sauoy, called Adelrans, he was permitted to enter of the Pope. But when he demaunded pardon of the Pope,Arrogance diabolicall. setting his Crowne betwixt his hands and in his power, he would neither pardon nor absolue him of excommunication, vnlesse first he promised to purge himselfe in a ful Sinode of his fault, with other vnlaw∣ful and vnreasonable conditions. All which things he promi∣sed and confirmed them by estate: yet would they not remit him into his Kingdome. Can any body haue haue a more liuely portraite of the Image of An∣tichrist? The Princes of Italy, after they knew this,Sledan reci∣teth it in his 3. booke of the 4 Monarchies. were exceedingly offended that the Emperour had so made his agreement with Hildebrand, and that so dishonestly and vilely he had submitted himselfe to him, who had inuaded the Papacie by wicked prac∣tises, and who had polluted and defiled all with murders and adulteries. &c.
After this, the Pope with his Cardinalls glorying that he had brought the Emperour into seruitude, durst now aduen∣ture to enterprise greater things. But the Emperour afterward tooke courage, and straightway dispatched all that, by taking Armes:Warres be∣tweene the Emperor and Rodolphe. And after many sharp and hard warres he vanquished Rodolphe in battaile. Who hauing his right hand cut off, made call all the Bishops and Priests on his side. Which being come, after one had brought him his hand, he spake in this sort. I con∣fesse that this is worthily come vnto me, and wel bestowed vp∣on me.Rodolphe his repentance. Behold the hand wherewith I haue deliuered the oath of fidelitie to my Lord Henry: but at the sollicitation of you, I haue so many times vnluckily fought against him, and also falsi∣fied my faith vnto him: and therefore I haue receiued a reward such as my periurie meriteth. See if you haue guided mee in a right way. So then and now keepe to your Prince the fidelitie which you haue promised vnto him. As for me, I goe to my Fathers: and incontinently after, Rodolphe yeelded vp the spirit. After this man was dead, they elected an other by the com∣mandement of the Pope: namely, Herman of Saxonie, Count, or Earle of Lucenbourg, who not without the Lords will, was slaine by a woman, who let fall a great stone vpon his head as he assailed a Castle in Almaine. And the malice of this cruel ti∣rant could not be repressed, but it stirred vp a third Competi∣tor to this good Prince:Egbert of Misue slaine namely one Egbert, Earle of Misue, his parent: but being surprised by the Emperors people, he was miserably put to death. What man would not bee mooued by such iudgements of God, to obey his Magistrate, and abhorre all rebellion and sedition: yet this Romane seate was neuer stirred therewith: but finally wrought the Emperours sonne Henry to rebell a∣gainst his father. The writings of Henry the 4. sent to the King of France, by which he complaineth of his sonnes iniuries, and of such as drew him on to do them, do at large declare this tragedie, and at this day are to be seene. Matilde Countesse, kept ordinarie company with the
Pope, and neuer departed from him, as his harlot,Matilde the Popes harlot, named the daughter of S. Peter. despising A∣ron her husband, Marquesse of Est. In so much that shee was commonly called S. Peter his daughter. Shee was diuorced by the Romane seate for some affinitie that was pretended to be betwixt them. From thence came it as Lambert Hirsuelden∣sis hath left in writing, that all people accused them, that there was a villainous and dishonest loue betwixt them: and euerie one said she lay with the Pope, and had vnlawfull company of him which had taken frō Priests holy & honest marriage. The Abbot of Ʋrsperge, called Conrade de Lihtenaw, addeth this in his Chronicle. Certaine it is that Hildebrand was not chosen of God, but brought in of himselfe by fraud and force of siluer, who ouerthrew the Ecclesiasticall order, troubled the King∣dome of the Christian Empire, procured the death of a peacea∣ble King, maintained periuries, entertained noyses and dissen∣tions, sowed disorders, stirred scandalles, made diuorces, and shooke and ouerthrewe all which seemed well ordained a∣mongst them which liued holily, &c. First, he was a great hypo∣crite, who with force of excommunications, depriued Ministers of the Church, of their wiues, and filled the world with an infi∣nit number of buggeries. In such sort, that that great Citie which is spiritually called Sodome and Egipt: that is to say, the Romane Church, was made after this time, a true Sodome and Egipt, his buggeries and Idolatries. In the meane time he mooued maruellous tragedies in I∣talie, France, Almaine, and England,Troubles on all sides stir∣red by the Pope. which would be too long to rehearse in this place; and such dealing displeased many per∣sons and wise men which were in that time. For to speake nei∣ther of England nor Italie, as well in Almaine as in France, there was 24. Bishops and more, which together with their Clear∣gie were married, and defended, and constantly maintained their marriage. He commaunded Clarkes to vow singlenes, that is to say, not to marry: briefly, the most tiranically that could be, he for∣bad Priests marriages, commanding them to leaue theyr wiues; or otherwise to be depriued of their offices & prebēds. He wil∣led that from henceforth none be admitted to Ecclesiasticall
orders, vnlesse he first promise and vowe chastitie. Also he ordained that none should heare Masse of a Priest that had a concubine. He forbad Monkes to eate flesh at any time. De consec. dist. 5. c. Carinum. He commanded that no Christian should eat flesh on the Saterday. De consec. dist. 5. Carinum. 36. Why doo not Monkes obserue that commaundement as well as they pretend to obserue their vow of chastitie? For they are for like power. He ordained the offering of the Masse. He Canonized one named Liberius an Arrian, and com∣maunded his Feast should be celebrated, as Benno witnesseth. He commanded tenthes should be paid to Priests. And tooke from the King of Poloigne his Crowne, interdicting his King∣dome. Hee condemned the opinion of Berengarius touching the Sacrament, & was the first they say, that preached Transub∣stantiation. He condemned as sacriledge, a Lay-man possessing Tithes. Him that gaue Inuestures of Benefices, as an heretike: and he that receiued them of a Lay-man, as an Idolater. So by this meanes made he the Popes leaden dagger so strong as her power was able to driue backe the Iron force of the Empire. The Emperour Henry opposed himselfe against the force and enterprises of the said Hildebrand, and the yeare of our Lord, 1083. in a Sinode that he caused to assemble at Bresse, af∣ter all crimes were laid against him, before the assēbly by good right he was deposed from his Papall seate, and so appointed in his place an other Pope,Clement. 3. which they named Clement the third. He sent straight his Army to Rome, driue out Gregorie, and to bring in Clement. The towne was by him brought vnto such pouertie, that the Inhabitants were constrained to purchase peace. But Hildebrand not thinking to be in presence of the Em∣peror, & being abandoned & reiected of the Romanes, fled vn∣to Salerne, the yeare of the Lord, 1086. where hee finished his life in exile, which had caused so many to die, by the sworde,
by famine, by poysons, and other sorts of deaths. Yet the Papists made a brute runne, that after his death he wrought many miracles: yea euen after, a Priest of Saxo∣ny, (as Sigebert witnesseth) as he died, had seene him tor∣mented in hell. Antonine and Vincent rehearse that this Hildebrand being at the article and point of death, readie to yeeld vp his soule, cal∣led to him a Cardinall his familiar, vnto whom hee confessed both to God and S. Peter, and to all the Church, that he had greeuously sinned, and had not done his office and dutie in the Apostolicke state, and that by the perswasion of the diuel, he stirred hatreds, enmities and warres amongst many through the world. Hee commaunded the said Cardinall to transport him towards the Emperour Henry the fourth, and to crie him mercy for the faults he had committed against him, and that he should deliuer him from the excommunication, and likewise all his, as well aliue as dead. Anto. and R. Barnes. Multiplication of the orders of Munkerie. In this time the order of the Templers beganne,Templers. Rugular Chanons. Grandmont. and the order of Regular Chanons, in a difference from secular Cha∣nons. Volateran. The order of the Monkes of Grandmont, of the rule of S. Benet, tooke his beginning of one named Stephen of Fraunce, which carried haire vpon his flesh. Ʋolaterane. The order of Charterux began, Bruno borne at Coloigne,Chartreux. a Schoolemaister, and after a Chanon of Rheimes, hauing heard the voyce of a Doctor renowmed in his life, when he made his obsequies saying, I am cōdemned by a iust iudgement of God, was afraid, and for suertie entered into an Hermitage with cer∣taine Disciples, and founded the Charter house in the Country of Dalphine, in the Diocesse of Grenople, by the meanes & help of Hugues Bishop of Grenople, who also receiued the habite of
Chartreux. And so beganne the order, the yeare of Christ, 1084. Chron. Sigeb. and Emil. lib. 5. and Plati. The yeare of Christ 1089. in the time of Gregorie the se∣uenth, and of the Emperour Henry the fourth. The Abbey of S. Sauiour of Andim, of the order of S Benet, in the country of Hai∣nault, in a litle Iland called in Latin commonly Aquacinctum, or Aquis cinctum, was beganne by two noble persons, Sicherus, and Gualterus, which went vnto Ancelme of Ribemont, a noble man, and demaunded the saide Ile,The Abbey of Andim. Victor. 3. beeing part of his patrimony, where the Abbey was builded. Sigeb. Victor 3. of that name, borne in Italie, called before Didier,  Abbot of Montcassin, and Cardinall of the Court of Rome, was made Pope, not by election of Cardinalls, or of the Romane people, but was there inthronized by that harlot Matilde, and the Normaines of that faction, and gouerned a yeare and foure moneths. After he had receiued the Papall dignitie as Gregorie his successour, he beganne lustily to maintaine his part against the Emperour and the Pope Clement: and hee which was a Monke to defend his predecessor Monke, according as he had bene in∣formed by the said Matilde, the louer of Gregorie. But death kept him from shewing by effect, yea with some great publike calamitie, that poyson which hee had hidde in his heart, and the inraged hatred which hee had conceiued against them. For the yeare of the Lorde 1088. hee finished his life with his Papacie, and that sooner then he looked for. Some Authors, as Herman. Contract. Carsulan, Peter de Premonstre, and many others, recite that he died of poison which was put in the Chal∣lice by his Subdeacon as he sung Masse. Yet Ʋincent is of an other opinion as Platina rehearseth it, when he saith that he dy∣ed of a Fluxe of the bodie, and that is not farre from a suspi∣tion of an impoysonment: For they which take poyson doo sometimes fall into a Fluxe of the belly, because the guts and inward parts are wasted & corrupted. Some Historiographers, slaues of the Romane seate, haue maliciously said that this was procured him by the Emperour Henry, others by the Pope Cle∣ment, although this wicked act was done by no other but by his
Chaplaine, doing his office of Subdeacon. Some haue left by writing, that in this time many prodigious & straunge things a∣gainst nature appeared. For domesticall birds, as hennes, geese, pigeons, and peacocks, fled into the mountains & became wild, & that the greatest part of fishes, as well of Riuers as of the Sea, died. Philip King of France forsooke his wife Berthe, the daugh∣ter of Baudwin, Counte of Holland, of whom he had a sonne and a daughter. Chronicles of the Kings of France. The Relickes of S. Nicholas, were transported from the ci∣tie of Mirrhe, into the Towne of Bar. Whereof came that fa∣mous Idoll which giueth the name of Saint Nicholas in Lor∣raine. Chaunges of many Dukes in the Country of Almaigne. Who can here expresse how many euils & calamities that Intestine and ciuil warre of Almaigne hath caused, being stirred by the Pope, not onely amongst the greatest Princes which were slaine therin, but also in change of siegnories? The Empe∣rour Henry, after that his enemy Rodolphe was dead,The calami∣ties of the ci∣uil warre of the Almaines. (about foure yeares after hee had bene placed in his Imperiall seate) gaue the Duchie of Sorabie to Fredericke de Stanfeu his sonne in lawe. The race of Franconian Dukes in a small time perished al∣together. Egbert Marquesse of Misue, vnto whom the Bishops had giuen hope to haue the Empire, after the death of Rodolphe was also slaine in the battell of the Saxons, which the Emperour Henry gained. Also Gebbard Father of Lotharie, who after was Emperour, dyed in the warres. Briefly, the forces of Almaigne were wholy debilitated and chaunged in this vnluckie warre of the Popes.
Vrbane. 2.Vrbane 2. of that name, borne of Tuscane, called before Otho a Monke of Clugny, and vnder Hildebrand, Cardinall of Oftie, was inthronized in the Papacie against the wil of the Em∣perour, by such as had inthronized Victor, namely by that har∣lot Matilde, and the Norans then Lordes of Pouille, and ruled 12. yeares 4. moneths, and 19. dayes. This is the Disciple and houshold seruant of Hildebrand, whom Benno calleth in despight Turban, a schismaticke, an he∣reticke, and companion of Liberius the Arrian, which Gregorie the seuenth canonized as hath bene said. Who (saith hee) for feare that the poyson of their errours might not be knowne, af∣ter the manner of Sorcerers mingled hony therewith: For sub∣tilly and vnder an intent to deceiue, hee added holy scriptures to his lyes, and perseuering in his errours with his Hildebrand, he was sent into hell with the Apostate Angels. Ʋrbain (say some Authours of our time) perturber of the world, or rather whirle-winde of the tempests of Townes, the familiar of Hildebrand, watered, maintained, and caused to grow the pernicious seeds which his predecessors had before dispear∣sed here and there. He excommunicated Guibert Arch-bishop of Rauenna, which was named Clement the third, because hee had bene chosen by the Emperour. At this time all things were in great trouble, as well in Al∣maigne as in other Nations, by the disputations then happening betwixt the Cleargy and the people, but because Vrbane would not absolue any which had beene excommunicated by Hilde∣brand, fearing to fall in daunger of his life, went secretly out of  the Towne, and after this celebrated many Sinodes. The first at Melphe: the second at Troy in Pouillie: the third at Plaisance: the fourth at Cleremont, the yeare of the Lord, 1094. and the fift at Tours; in which he confirmed the acts of the monster Hil∣debrand, and made new Ecclesiasticall ordinances: to the ende the Papall authoritie might in nothing be diminished in that which had bene acquired by violence and deceit. He ordeined that a Clarke might not receiue Inuesture of a benefice of a secular Prince whatsoeuer: hee be. Hee writ to Matilde, an auncient friend and louer of the Romane Church,
and armed all her sinagogue against them of the Emperours side, whom he calleth heretickes. He gaue also to the Arch-bishop of Millaine, the Pall Ar∣chiopischopall, and so confirmed the orders and Sects of Char∣treux, and of the Monkes of Cisteaux. Such as had wiues, after they were promoted vnto the order of Deacons, he depriued thē of their offices, taking also frō Priests, their sons, their estates, and administrations. He made the Arch-bishop of Toledo (who had made an oath vnto him) Primate of all Spaine, to the end by that meane the beast of Rome might make subiect all Spaine vnto him. He stirred Christian Princes to take armes against the Sarasins, vnder colour to recouer the Towne of Hierusalem. And for that purpose hee marked with the signe of the Crosse three hundreth thousand men; and in the meane while he gui∣ded all things for his own profit. For the yeare of Christ 1095. because hee would not finde meanes to doo his businesses as he would, for many tumults and seditions raised against him, he tooke occasion to depart from Rome and come into France. He commanded to assemble an vniuersal Councel of all the church in the Citie of Cleremont in Anuegue:Councell at Cleremont. and made an Oration of great efficacie. For straight there crossed themselues to the combat at least three hundreth thousand men, all readie to goe vnto Ierusalem, of the number of which, there were many vali∣ant Princes, who to make mony, solde their owne landes and signeories, as Hughe the great, the King of Fraunce his brother. Robert brother of the Duke of Normandie. Robert or Rambert, Count of Flaunders. Raimond Count of S. Giles. Stephen Count of Blois. Brunamon or Bayamond, Prince of Pouille: and God∣phrey de Bullon, who was the chiefe, with his two brethren, Eustace and Baudwin. Also Ansele of Ribemont, and many o∣thers. He excommunicated the King of Galatia, because he had put a Bishop in prison, and exacted this oath of such as he would promote to orders. So God helpe me, and these holy Euangelists of God. Hee made also certaine their statutes, namely Clarkes should euery day say the houres of the Virgine Mary (a verie Idolatrous thing) and vnto her to dedicate the Saterday with a
Masse. He ordeined that no person should come into Popish orders, vnles he were a virgin, that is to say vnmarried, whore∣monger, or buggerer, as their acts shewed. As for Priests they must needs be without wiues, althogh they passed not for whor∣domes. He forbad that Bishops should be ordeined without ti∣tles, & that faith shuld be kept vnto such as Popes had excom∣municated. He held himselfe close for the space of two yeares, in the house of one Peter Leon, for the feare he had of one Iohn Paien, a Romane Citizen, where also he died, the yeare of the Lord 1099. and his body was buried secretly beyond Tiber, for feare of enemies. The same yeare died also Guibert, which was called Clement the 3. after he had seene three Popes dead in his time. Theodorus Bibliander writeth in this sort of that Hildebrand aforesaid and this Ʋrbane, speaking to the Princes of al estates. Hildebrand (saith he) in inciting the Emperour of Greece against the Turks,The euill which comes of Croisadoes against the Turkes. sowed the seed of the war of Gog and Magog, against which crieth the bloud of the Church, shead with a miserable ruine and losse, by the sword of his tongue. O how much blood hath beene shead at the sollicitation of Vrbane the second! to the end that vnder the colour of making warre to amplifie the Christian religion, and recouer the sepulchre of the Lord, he might be put againe in the Romane seate, after hauing oppres∣sed such as were of the faction of Guibert. Fredericke Barbarossa did so the yeare of the Lord 1188. Frederic 1228. The King of France Lewis 9. who was a Saint after his death, did as much the yeare 1288. Sigismond did it twise. Anno. 1409. Ʋladislaus King of Hungarie, Anno. 1420. who dyed nigh Varne. And at this day what shall we iudge of such as bring the Turke into Christendome to auenge their particular iniuries? This Pope Vrbane by excommunications constrained Phi∣lip King of France to take againe Berthe his first wife, which he  caused to be detained prisoner in the Castle of Monstrell, vpon the sea: and to leaue his second Bertrande, who was wife of the Count de Angiou. Nice in Bithinie is taken, and after the Towne of Ierusalem, by the Christians, whereof Godfrey of Bulloine was constituted King. Naucler.
Antioche was taken by Boemondus a Norman, sonne of Ro∣bert Duke of Pouille. Supp. Chron. The reward that those noble Combatants and fighters for Christendome got, was the carrying away of Relickes. The Speare which pearced the side of Iesus Christ, was found in the said Towne, in the Church of Saint Andrewe. Supp. Chron. Robert Count of Flaunders, brought away the Arme of Saint George, which he sent into the Abbey of Anchin. Sigeb. God∣frey was the first King of Ierusalem. Baudwin his brother, is called the second. Naucler. Paschall second of that name, borne of Italie,Paschall. 2. called before Rainer a Monke, and lately created Cardinall, of the title of S. Clement, by Hildebrand his maister, succeeded Vrbane the se∣cond in the Papacie. When this proud Squire knew hee was chosen, he would not mount into the Papall seate, vntill first the people had cryed thrice, Saint Peter hath chosen Rai∣ner. After this, beeing apparrelled in a Scarlet Roabe, and a Theatre or Crowne vppon his head, mounted vpon a white steed, hee was ledde to the place of Laterane, where the Papall Scepter was giuen him: and he was girt with a Baudrier or large Girdle, at which hung seuen kayes, and as many seales,New blasphe∣mies of the 7. kayes. as En∣signes or tokens of the Papall power (so much did this great Antichrist and aduersary of God magnifie himselfe) by which things signified, that according to the graces of the holy Ghost, which they distinguished into seuen) he had the power to open and shut Churches. By this meanes this harlot mounted on horsbacke, being come vnto a perfect age, in such sort encreased, that she got vpō the Beast with ten hornes: which she had gouerned vntil our time in great pride & arrogancie, as had bin foretold. Apo. 13.17. This soueraigne Vicar of Sathan on earth, imployed all his time in warres and seditions, whilest Godfrey de Bulloine and other Christian Princes fought against the Sarrasins in Siria. And to the end he might not be esteemed lesse thē Hildebrand,
he sought all the meanes that might serue to the greatnes of his Romane seate. Hee furiously deposed from their dignities, all the Bishops and Abbots which had bene ordeined by the Em∣perour. He sent into exile one Albert Theodoricke, and Magi∣nulphe, who aspired vnto the Papacie. He assembled at Rome a Councell of the Bishops of Italie and France, Anno. 1101. be∣cause of an opinion of a Bishop of Fluence touching Antichrist alreadie borne, as Sabellicus rehearseth. For seeing so many mis∣chiefes committed in the Church, he said Antichrist was alrea∣die manifested but he was repressed by many iniuries done vn∣to him. Nicholaits af∣ter the Pope. See 10.6. q. 1. ca. Deci∣mus.He againe prohibited Ministers to marry, as all his Prelate predecessors had done, and called that marriage the heresie of the Nicholaits. He pronounced that they were great heresies, to make no account of yeelding obedience to the Roman church, and to despise censures, and also to receiue Inuesture of Bene∣fices at the hand of a prophane man. He renewed the statute of paying tenths to Priests that said Masse, and would needes it should be a sinne against the holy Ghost to sell tenths. In this Sinode he renewed the excommunication of Gre∣gorie the seuenth, and of Ʋrbane the second, against the Empe∣rour Henry the fourth, and published it againe. And which is more, the rage of this cruell tyrant was so inflamed against him, that he stirred the sonne of the said Emperour, called Henry the fift, to take armes against his Father: an horrible thing to speak. There was neuer inhumanitie nor cruell act, if this were not. The Sonne, yea that onely Sonne, not angred or stirred vp by any publike or particular iniurie, despised not onely his Parent,The disloyal∣tie of the Em∣perors sonne, Henry. 5. neither only abandoned and destituted him of his suc∣cours and helpe: but vnder colour of the Church and the pub∣like good, assaulted him by armes, besieged him, by circumven∣tion tooke him traiterously, despoyled him of his Imperiall dig∣nitie, and made him die a poore miserable man, in great captiui∣tie and heauinesse. And all this he did (saith Rodolphe Galterus)
not by the commaundement of any barbarous tyrant,Henry. 5. not at the instigation of some Phalaris, but by the Councell of the holy Father of Rome. Reioyce (saith he) you Caligula & Ne∣ro, and you all which haue bene renowned for crueltie, for you haue now found one that shall take away the memorie of your name so cruell, because he goes much before you: that is to say the Pope of Rome, who commaunds the sonne to drawe his sword against the Father. Henry then the fourth, was dispoyled of his Imperiall dig∣nitie: and finally his sonne Henry the fift by treason tooke him prisoner, the fiftie yeare of his Empire, as hee went vnto an as∣sembly held at Magunce he died, after he had bene miserably handled in the Citie of Liege, Anno. 1108. after the Chron. of Euseb. or 1116. after others. But the enmitie of this Papall Monster was not yet ap∣peased by this death, for in an inraged manner hee did exer∣cise his crueltie against him after his death, commaunding by Letters that his body shuld be vnburied, cast out of the church, and transported from Liege to Spire, and to be depriued by the space of fiue yeares of Sepulchre. Behold how this proud Antichrist obeyeth Magistrates or∣deined of God! But see what God did in the meane time. At Spire blood ranne out of Loaues of bread, as Ʋrspergensis faith in his Cro∣nographie. The yeare of the Lorde,1. Pet. 2. cha. Rom. 13.3. 1106. hee made an assembly of many Princes and Bishops at Guardascall in Lombardie, with whom he handled matters appertaining to the Faith (that is to say, cōcerning the Popes kitchin) as of homages, of fealties, & of oaths that Bishops had before made vnto Laie persons. He de∣spoiled also the Arch-bishop of Rauenna of his lands, applying them vnto his owne profit. And this Pope not content with such crueltie, caused the body of Guibert Archbishop of the said place of Rauenna to be taken vp, who had bin chosen Pope by the Emperour Henry the 4. in the time of Gregore 7. sixe yeares
after he was laide in the Sepulchre.Henry 4. Now as for Henry the 4. he was an excellent Emperor, meete for an Empire, of a noble race, and an incomparable spirit. O that other Princes had possessed such hearts, and had not attributed so much vnto that Romane harlot. He was affable and benigne towards all, liberall to wards the poore: It is said that during his life hee fought with En∣signe displaied, threescore and two times. After many Hi∣stories. Henry. 5.Henry the fift of that name, sonne of Henry the fourth, and  of Berthe, Marquesse of Italie; was chosen at Magunce, by the Gouernours and chiefe of the Empire, and raigned twen∣tie yeares. Chron. Palm. Lewis le Gros.Lewis le Gros, otherwise called the good Lewis, 39. King of Fraunce, raigned 28. yeares, and was crowned at Orleance,  and annointed by the Archbishop of Sens. It is said of him, that he often disguised himselfe in the habit of a poore man, or of a woman, or seruant, the better to knowe the truth of some se∣cret matters of his kingdome. He was founder of the Abbey of S. Victor in Paris. The yeare of Christ, one thousand, one hundreth, and ele∣uen, Henry the fift went to Rome, to appease seditions stirred since Gregorie the seuenth, and continued in Ʋictor, Vrbane and Paschal the second. The Emperour and other Princes would vse the authoritie, right & priuiledges of auncient Emperours. For Charlemaigne and others which had obteined the Empire since three hundreth yeares and more, vnder threescore and three Popes, bestowed Bishopprickes, Abbaies, and other Benefices. Against this authoritie and custome, the Pope fol∣lowing by Sinodall decrees, mainteined that Ecclesiasticall Benefices ought not to be giuen by Laie-persons, and excom∣municated as Simoniackes, as well such as receiued them, as them that gaue them. This Emperour then being at Rome, after he had kissed the feete of the holy Father, prayed him to confirme and to like of such as had ordeined Bishops: But as
he refused to confirme them,Henry 5. he was taken by the Emperour and imprisoned, and came not out vntill hee had confirmed them all, and yeelded him the right of Inuesture giuen vnto Charlemaigne, and therevpon making Letters and Seales, and also confirmed the said Emperour. Yet after the Pope had said Masse & was in his Chaire (saith Masseus) behold the soul∣diers came suddenly in, crying, Yeeld vnto Caesar that which is Caesars: and assailed as well him as all the Cleargie, carrying them all out from thence and spoyled them, without leauing them any thing, then put they them in prison in the Moun∣taine of Soracte. Finally, after debates and discentions were appeased,The Inue∣sture of be∣nefices yeel∣ded vnto the Emperour. and the Emperour Henry crowned, Paschal renewed the priui∣ledge of Inuesture of Bishops, and pronounced before all the assembly, that whosoeuer made of no force the saide priui∣ledge was excommunicated. There was also sung Gloria in exelsis, because the peace was made betwixt the Emperour and the Pope. But so soone as the Emperour was returned into Almaigne, this periured Trai∣tor reuoked all hee had promised with solemne oathes: affir∣ming that he accorded with the Emperour, not of his good wil, but by force and constraint. After this, hee condemned that priuiledge, and excom∣municated the Emperour, and stirred maruellous Tragedies, which incontinently were published throughout all the wide world. Hee assembled a Councell at Troyes in Champaigne in Fraunce,A Councell at Troyes in Campaigne. wherein againe hee forbadde marriage vnto the Priestes of Fraunce, as Hildebrand had before forbidden the Priests of Almaigne, euen to the chasing of some Prelates out of their Seates, because they were marryed. Desiring to encrease the Papall authoritie, hee renewed the quarrell of giuing Bishopprickes, which had caused great calamities throughout the Regions of Europe. Ancelme an Arch-bi∣shop of Englande, and a Monke, augmented the Impu∣dencies of this Pope, by such Sophisticke perswasions as he had
before done them of Vrbaine. For he was their Councellor at Rome, and their Vicar in England. The King of England de∣priued of his right by an Archbishop. Luk. 22.25. Marriage of Priests con∣demned in England.This Ancelme tirannously depriued Henry the first of that name, King of England, of the right that Kings haue to pro∣uide officers vsed by the Kings of Israel, Dauid, Salomon, Iosa∣phat, Ezechias, Iosias, & others; likewise against the saying of Ie∣sus Christ. The Kings of Nations haue rule ouer them, &c. But so it is not with you. He also perpetually condemned the law∣full marriage of Priests in England, as hath bene said: against the holy lawes, as well of the olde, as of the new Testament, and the manifest examples of the Primitiue Church: to the and by the suggestion of Sathan, the Cleargie might serue there in all Sodomie to the Dragon called the diuell, and to Antichrist his Vicar. Bertol Duke of Zeringuen and of Souabe, founded the Ci∣tie of Fribourg in Brisgoye. Naucler. Paschall assembled a Councell at Laterane, wherein hee reuoked the right of Inuestures, accorded vnto Henry the fift, whereby arose a new schisme. And the Popes Legates declared the said Henry to be excommunicated; whereof rose great e∣uils. For the Emperour returned to Rome the second time, and the Pope Paschall was constrained to flie. S. Barnard of the age of 22. yeares, accompanied with 30. persons, entred into the Religion of the Cisteaux, in the time Stephen liued, the third Abbot of that place. It rayned bloud in the field Emilian and Flaminian, in the moneth of Iune, nigh Rauenna and Parma, without and within. Chron. Sigeb. and Palin. The Monasterie of Cleruaux was founded, whereof S. Bar∣nard was the first Abbot, being of the age of 27. yeares, and was there, by the space of 36. yeares. Naucler. The fruites of the warre of Ierusalem. Foure orders came from Ierusalem. Naucler. Foure new orders of the crossed.1. The order of Chanons of the Sepulchre of the Lord, and they had double redde crosses.
2 The order of the knights of S. Ihon, otherwise called the knights of Rhodes, and they weare blacke apparell, with a white Crosse on their brests. 3 The order of Templers, which haue the white habit and the redde Crosse. 4 The order of Teutoniques or Almaignes, or otherwise the knights of the Virgin Mary, which had a white habit and a blacke Crosse. The Pope Paschal sent to the Bishop of Palerme in Sicilie, the Archiepiscopall Pall, yet with a condition, that by oath he should binde himselfe to the Pope of Rome. The said Bishop humbly sent him word, that hee maruelled, and with him the Princes and Councellours of Sicilie, how the Pope demaun∣ded an oath of a Bishop: seeing Iesus Christ in S. Mathew, cha. 5. had forbidden to sweare: and that it was not found by any Councell that it was lawfull to exact such an oath. The Pope sharpely answered in these tearmes.The proud answere of a Pope. Thinkest thou (saieth hee) that any Councell can prescribe a Lawe to the Ro∣mane Church? Knowest thou not that all Councels haue their perfection and vertue by the Romane Church? Martin Luther. In this time liued Hiltpert or Hildebert, Bishop of Mons, a fauourer of Transubstantiation as well as Ancelme. Matilde or Mehaut Countesse,Matilde giueth her goods to the Pope. of the age of 66. yeares died, and gaue her goods by Testament vnto the Romane Church. R. Barnes. The Emperour Henry was defrauded by the said Testa∣ment, for he was cousin of the said Countesse: which after gaue occasion of great stirres and murthers. R. Barnes & Naucl. Baudwin second King of Ierusalem, dyed: and Baudwin his Nephewe, surnamed Burgo, was created the third King of Ierusalem. Gelasius Pope, 2. of that name,Gelasius. 2. was a Monke of Mount∣cassin, Chauncellour of the Romane Church, named Iohn, borne at Gayotte a Citie of Campaigne in Italie. Soone after his election, he was apprehended by Cincius, a mightie man, & imprisoned: but incōtinently he was deliuered by the people.
The Emperour sent his Armie to Rome. Gelasius fearing his comming, fledde to Gayette. The Emperour created an other Pope a Spaniard, called Maurice, otherwise Burdin, Archbi∣shop of Bracare, which was called Gregorie the eight. This done the Emperour returned into Almaigne, and then beganne the eighteenth Schisme.Schisme. 18. Gelasius condemned the Emperour and the Antepope, and sent into Almaigne the Bishop Pre∣nestin, to publish the excommunication against the said Henry the fift. R. Barnes. Gelasius secretly came to Rome, but he was knowne of his enemies, and with much adoo escaping, went for refuge into Fraunce. Suppl. Chron. He ordeined a Councell at Rheimes, whither came bare-footed, Robert of Lorraine, founder of the order and place of Premonstre: and entreated of the Pope Gelasius, licence to preach the word of God, and also authoritie and confirmation of his order. Naucl. Chron. Sigeb. This Pope had alreadie dedicated the great Church of Saint Laurence at Florence, and had there placed the Ashes of S. Iohn Baptists bones, newly brought from Mirrhe, confirming them, and approuing them for the true Ashes of S. Iohn. Supp. Chron. This Pope Gelasius died of a pleurisie at Clugny, where hee was also buried, hauing ruled at Rome a yeare & sixe moneths. Calixt. 2.Calixt 2. of that name succeeded him, & was 5. yeares Pope:  before called Guy, (or Guido) of Burgongne, after Fasc. temp. and the Sea of Histories: or brother, after Supp. Chron. He was Doc∣tor in the Ciuil Lawe, and in Theologie. Without contradiction he was chosen of the Cardinalls, and honourably receiued at Rome. When the Antepope Burdin heard those newes, he met him, thinking to haue hindered him: but he profited nothing, for he was in full battell ouercome with the French helpe. And being taken by the Pope Calixt, and by the Cardinal of S. Gri∣sogon, chiefe of his armie, he was set vpon a Camell, his face to∣wards the taile: and in such sort hee made him goe at his entrie, & then imprisoned him. Iohn le Maire. Fasc. temp. Eghardus saith that the said Antepope was powled & made a Monke: because whē he resided at Sutry, he was a partie of many robberies com∣mitted vpon such as went and came to Rome. Chron. Sigeb.
Calixtus made continue the Councell at Rheimes in Cham∣paigne, which Gelasius had commenced, wherein he excommu∣nicated the Emperor Henry the fift, as an enemy of the church.Resignation of Inuestures. Anno. 1122. This excommunication was about the cause of the quarrell of the Inuestures of Bishops. Iohn le Maire. Henry the fift fea∣ring to be deposed from his Empire as his Father was, accorded the right of Inuestures in a full Councell it Rome, vnto Calix∣tus. Supp. Chron. Calixtus ordeined that the Bishop of Compostella should be made an Arch-bishop: for the reuerence of the bodie of Saint Iames who rested there: And hee made a booke full of Fables of the miracles of the said S. Abb. Trit. He appointed the foure times for taking orders (as they call them) for before they did take them only three times in the yeare.This decree is attributed vnto Calix∣tus the first. He excommunicated such as tooke siluer for Baptisme, and for burying. Chron. R. Franc. By this Decree Popish Priests should be excommunicated. He founded a Monasterie of the order of Cisteaux, called Boneuan. Fasc. temp. He ordeined it should not be lawful for any Bishop to turne from the Romane Church, neither to contrary it. For (said he) euen as the Sonne is come to do the will of his Father: So it be∣houeth all Christians to do the will of their Mother, (that is to say) the Romane Church. Dist. 12. ca. Non decet. See how this brazen faced harlot of Rome alleadgeth scrip∣ture: and is not ashamed to call her selfe a Mother. He excommunicated all such as molested Pilgrimes which went to Rome. 24 q. 3. chap. Si quis. William Duke of Pouille, preparing himselfe for the voiage of Constantinople, to take vnto wife the Emperor Alexis his daugh∣ter, recommēded his country to the Pope Calixt, doubting the ambitiō of Roger his cosin, who failed not incōtinently after the departure of the said William, to seize vpon Calabria & Pouille:
Insomuch as William was depriued both of his wife, and of his Principalitie, and dyed without children. Naucler. and Corno. Abb. Calixtus prepared an Armie against Roger, but the Popes death came betwixt, and Innocent the second pursued the en∣terprise. One called Iohn, a Patriarke of the Indians, came vnto Rome, and rehearsed to the Pope and Cardinalls in a Coun∣cell, that by a myracle S. Thomas the Apostle came euery yeare to giue the Eucharist vnto the good, and refused the wicked. Naucler. Miracles and apparitions are on all sides forged. The Emperour Henry the fift, bearing a long time an ha∣tred vnto the King of France, assembled a great Armie to runne vpon him, taking occasion that hee was at the Councell which the Pope Calixt held at Rheimes, wherein he was excommuni∣cated: and vaunted that he would destroy the Citie of Rheims, where the said Councell was held, but when he perceiued the Kings power which met him with the precious standard cal∣led the Auriflame, he desisted from his enterprise, and returned into his Country. Iohn le Maire. Pomerania receiued the Christian Faith. Nancler. Honorius. 2.Honorius Pope, second of that name, borne at Imola in Ita∣lie,  a man of base condition, yet learned, gouerned the Romane Church 5. yeares & 2. moneths. Before he was called Lambert, Bishop of Ostia, and was promoted rather by the ambition of some, then by the consent of the good. Supp. Chron. He inuested Roger of the Duchy of Pouille, after the said Ro∣ger had done vnto him homage: who also was King of Sicilie. The same. Robert author of the order of Premonstre, went to Rome vnto the Pope, & obteined what he desired cōcerning ye order. Nauc. Arnulphe slaine at Rome.Arnulphe Arch-bishop of Lion, had at this time a singular grace in preaching, who after he had preached in Fraunce and Italie, came vnto Rome. But because in his Sermons he rebu∣ked too sharply the vices, the delights and pompes of Church∣men, he was slaine.
Honorius feined to be grieued therat, yet he made no search for the murderers. Plat. and Sabel. Bonifa. Simo. say that hee did this in fauour both of the Nobilitie and of the common people. The yeare of Christ, 1125. Henry the 5. died in the Citie of Vtreict, without heire male. Lothaire, in the Almaine tongue Luder, the sonne of Count Gebhard (who was slaine in the warre by Henry the fourth,Lothaire. as  hath bene said) being created Duke of Saxonie, was chosen Em∣perour: a man of great industry and prudence, and persecuted the race of the Emperour Henry, whereof arose many troubles: For Frederic and Conrade, Dukes of Souanbie, were a long time Rebels vnto him. Finally, S. Barnard Abbot of Cleruax recon∣ciled these two brethren with Lothaire. Hugo a Saxon by Nation, and surnamed of Ʋictor, a Theo∣logian of Paris, was at this time in Paris. Amongst his writings are found many complaints against the disordinate life of Clarkes in this time. It is he whom some say, that at Masse as he lifted vp the body of our Lord, there appeared a litle childe, which said vnto him: Eate me. And he abhorring it, said hee could not eate him, vnlesse he hid himselfe againe vnder the bread: and straight it came so to passe, and he eate him. Who sees not that this is a fable inuented to proue the new doc∣trine of Pascasius and Lanfrancus? And yet this is against their doctrine, and especially against that of Thomas A∣quine, in the third part, question. 76. Charles Count of Flaunders, Nephew of Lewis King of  France, was traiterously murthered as hee was on his knees in the Church of S. Donatus in Brugis in Flaunders. The murthe∣rers were certaine villaines of the Countrey, which were grie∣uously punished in sundry maners. Sigeb. Baudwin the second, who was the third King of Ierusalem, died in a Monkes habit: whom Fulco succeeded. Naucl. Chron. Sigeb. Innocent Pope. 2. of that name, a Roman, gouerned 14. yeares.Innocent. 2.
Lothaire.After his coronation he attempted mortall warre against Roger the Norman. Who first named himselfe King of Naples: but in the end Innocent was ouerthrowne in battaile, and ledde away prisoner. Whilest he was in prison the Romanes elected Peter Leon, the sonne of a puissant Romane Citizen: But In∣nocent after he had agreed with the said Roger, was constrained to goe into France for succour towards King Lewis le Gros, of whom hee was honourably receiued. Being come into France, he held two Councells; one at Auerne, and an other at Rhemes in Campaigne. From France he retired towards the Countrey of Liege, where he found the Emperour Lothaire, who also promi∣sed all the assistance he could: by meanes of which, hee retur∣ned into Italie. Anacletus the Antepope stole away all the trea∣sures and Reliques of the Church to wage them which were of his band: he died with griefe, and his Cardinals craued pardon. In the Councell held at Rheimes, Subdeacons were com∣maunded to liue without marriage, vnder paine to loose theyr Benefices. There became a contention betwixt the Pope & the king of France, because that after the death of Alberic Archbishop of Bourges, the Pope sent one called Peter, by him consecrated Archbishop of the said place, to reside and rule there: but the King reiected him, neither was be receiued into the Towne, because he was created without his knowledge. Sigeb. Innocent agreed & set a peace betwixt the towne of Pise, and the towne of Genues, and raised them vp vnto Archbishops. A Sinode at Rome at this time ordained, that no Lay-man should presume to lay hand vpon a Clarke, vnder paine of ex∣communication, from which none could absolue him but the Pope, vnlesse he were at the poynt of death: for then his Bi∣shop might absolue him. 17. Quest. 4. Chap. Si quis suadente diabolo. In this time was Richardus de sancto victore, and Hugo a Monke of Corbie in Saxonie, who wrote the booke (de clanstro animae.) A new Pelagian.Peter de Balard, an hereticke of this time, said that the passion of our Lord Iesus Christ was onely giuen vs for an example
of patience, of vertue, and of loue, he shewed vnto vs. Where∣fore he was condemned with all his writings by the Pope In∣nocent. S. Barnard writ against him. Writers say, that one called Iohn of Time (if it be a thing  worthy the credite) liued 361. yeares: that is to say, from the time of Charlemaigne, whose Councellor he was, and died in this time. Naucler. and Suppl. Chron. The Emperour Lothaire went to Rome to restore Innocnt, according to his promise. The faction of the Guelphes for the Pope, and of the Gibellins for the Emperour, began in this time. Naucler. Lothaire returning from Italie, the second time after hee had deiected Roger of Pouille and Calabria, died of the pestilence nigh Trent amongst the Mountaines, in a poore lodging saith Naucler. But Palin, saith that he died at Ʋerona, the 13. yeare of his Kingdome, and the 7. of his Empire, leauing one daughter, called Gertrude. Conrade 3. of that name, Duke of Souabe,Conrade. 3. sonne of Frederike of Haulte Staufen, and of Agnes, daughter of Henry the fourth, obtained the Empire 15. yeares. Lewis the young, 7. of that name, 40. King of France, raig∣ned 43. yeares. He vpon superstition went into Spaine vpon pilgrimage vnto S. Iames. Ascalon was taken of the Christians beyond the sea. Suppl. Chron. Edessa a Citie of Mesopotamia was taken of Alaps, a Prince of  Turkie, the Christians put to death,Beginning of euils. and women violated vpon the Aultar of S. Iohn Baptist, saith Naucler. Fulco King of Ierusalem, fell from his horse as he ran at an  Hare, and died, Naucler. and Chron. Euseb. Baudwin 3. and 5. King of Ierusalem, succeeded him. Celestine Pope, 2. of that name, an Italian,Celestine. 2. before called Guido, a Priest, Cardinall of S. Mark, hauing ruled 5. monethes  and 8. dayes, died of the pestilence. Lucius Pope, 2. of that name, borne at Boulongne,Lucius. 2. before a Priest, Card. of S. Crosse, named Gerard, ruled about one yeare. This man willing by force to take away the dignitie of thePatrician.
Patrician from the Romanes,Conrad. 3. was on the body wounded with the blowes of stones by the common people. R. Barns. And be∣ing oppressed with the Romanes, hee sent vnto the Emperour, who beeing occupied otherwhere, could not succour him. He did all he could to incite Christians to warre beyond the sea, because he had receiued newes how the holy Land was in daunger to be lost for the Christians. Iohn le Maire. Some say he died in a sedition. Others, that he died of the Pestilence. Supp. Chron. and Fascic. temp. Eugenius. 3.Eugenius Pope, third of that name, borne at Pise, a Monke  of Cleruaux, Disciple of S. Bernard, Abbotte and Cardinall of S. Anastasius at Rome, ruled eight yeares and foure mo∣nethes. He was constrained by the Romanes (whom hee had ex∣communicated with Iordan the Patrice) to flie from Rome, and shaking the dust off his feete against his enemies, hee got him into France, not onely to shunne the feare of the said Romanes, who with force of Armes chased him away, but also to en∣courage and drawe on the French King Lewis to the succours of the holy Land. He celebrated then a Councell at Vezelay in Burgoigne: and there caused S. Barnard with his liuely voyce to vtter out all the mischiefe like to fall vnto the holy Land. After which speech of S. Barnard, the King vowed to giue suc∣cours to the Christian Princes beyond the Seas, and the Queen Helionor his wife promised to follow him: and with them, ma∣ny Princes, Barons, and Noble men of France. Also the Em∣perour Conrade the third, Alphonsus King of Spaine, Henry, King of England, and many other Princes and Prelates: yet in this voyage they did nothing worthy of memorie, and this was the second vniuersall voyage, as Iohn le Maire saith, but the third expedition to goe into Ierusalem. The first vnder Vrbain, and the second vnder Paschal. Anno. 1101. Eugenius also assembled a Councell at Rhemes, and called thither Cardinalls and other Prelates, of whom hee was conse∣crated, as appertained. And there S. Barnard confuted by dis∣putation, and vanquished Gilbert Poretaine, Bishoppe of Poi∣tiers, an excellent Clarke, who erred in touching the vnitie of the Trinitie.
There were made many decrees for Monkes: that they should not leaue their Monasteries, nor Baptise, nor carrie children vnto Baptisme: that they might not enioyne penance, nor giue absolution: that they might not visit the diseased, nor assist the funeralls of the dead. Briefly, that they might not apply themselues vnto secular businesses, but remaine sollitarie in theyr Monasteries. That the husband or wife ought not to enter into Religion, and the marriage should not be broken, if one of the parties contradicted it: nor without the consent of the Bishop, if both parties accorded. There was also ordained for the maintenance of schooles, and for prouisi∣on of Doctors and Masters. After those things done in France, Eugenius returned vnto Rome, where hee was honourably receiued of the people, but soone after died at Tiber, where he went to recreate himselfe. His body was brought to Rome, and buried in the Temple of S. Peter. Suppl. Chron. In this time raigned Gratian the Monke, who compiled the Decretall. Which Eugenius approoued and commanded to be read through all Vniuersities. Supp. Chron. Petrus Lumbardus Bishop of Paris, compiled the bookes of Sentences. Petrus Commestor wrote the Scholasticke Historie. Auicen and Auerrois liued in this time, excellent in Phisicke. By the writings of Saint Barnard wee may knowe how in this time beeing so miserably corrupted,Touching the doctrine of S. Barnard. he stroue against the impietie of Popes, and the Ecclesiasticall sort. See his 67. Ser∣mon, where he calleth them the Ministers of Antichrist. In the Sermon 57. In the booke vnto this Pope Eugenius, and in the 33. Sermon vpon the Cant. he often saith that Prelates are but pilates. He reprooueth Eugenius, that leauing the word of God, he aduanced humane traditions. Hugo Cardinall in his Postile vpon S. Iohn, alleadgeth that S. Barnard said in a certaine place. It seemeth ô good Iesu, that all the Vniuersitie of Christians haue conspired against thee, and they are the chiefe of the con∣iuration which obtaine the Primacie of the church. At the end
of his dayes hee shewed well that hee perfectly knew the true doctrine of the Iustification by Iesus Christ, on whom only was his refuge, reiecting all other sanctities and righteousnesse. His writings yeeld a certaine witnesse of him. The Emperour of Constantinople, Emanuel, sent victuals to the Christians beyond the Seas: but like a traitetous wicked man hee mingled chalke amongst their floure, whereof infinite people died. He gaue also guides vnto the Emperour Conrade, which conducted him through solitary places; Insomuch that he lost all his souldiers. As much also almost came vnto the king of France, yet they both got into Ierusalem. The Emperor Con∣rade, the King Lewis, and Baudwin King of Ierusalem, being in Ierusalem, determined to assaile Damas. Naucler. Aluisius Abbot of Auchen, and Bishop of Arras, died in this iourney of the holy Land, in a towne called Philopolis, & Simon Bishop of Noyon, at Selencia. Bishops, Abbots, and Monkes, trotted then in voyages be∣yond the Seas. Norway receiued then the faith which was then. S. Barnard died of the age of 36. yeares. Naucler. Conrade the third, Emperor, returning from his voyage of Ierusalem, died at Banberg. 1152. Frederic. 1.Frederic, first of that name, surnamed barbarous sonne of Frederic Duke of Souanbe, who was brother of the said Con∣rade, was chosen Emperour. This was a Prince of a good spirit, hardie, of great sta∣ture, and faire of face, his haire and beard, was redde, af∣fable, and gracious. After his election, hee ledde seuen times his Armie against the Italians which rebelled against him. Anastasius. 4.Anastasius Pope, 4. of that name, a Romane, Abbot, ruled the  Romane Church, one yeare or two, 4. monethes, and 24. daies. They qualifie him a great Almes-giuer of many priuiledges vnto religious people, of Challices very sumptuous, and of re∣pairing Churches. Adrian. 4.Adrian 4. of that name, borne in England, a man learned,  before called Nicholas-breakspeare, the sonne of one named Ro∣bert,  a Monke and Priest of the Temple of S. Albons, of a Re∣gular
Chanon he was made Bishop Cardinall, and after Pope, ruled at Rome fiue yeares and sixe monethes. He was sent vnto Norway by Eugenius the third, Pope, to preach the faith, and when he had instructed the people of the said Countrey, he was chosen Pope. Beeing receiued,Excommuni∣catiō for tem∣porall goods. the Romanes prayed him to leaue the administration of the towne free to Consuls and Magistrates, after their auncient maner, which be refused: wherat the Romanes grieued, did many euils vnto a Cardinall. In so much that Adrian set all the Citie of Rome vnder an Interdict or excommunication. After his election he would by no meanes go to the Church of Laterane to be consecrated,Arnold Bi∣shop. vntill first Arnold bishop of Brixe were cast out of the Towne: who opposed himselfe a∣gainst the Administration of ciuill things, and of the temporall sword which the Cleargie had vsurped. And therefore he cal∣led him an heretike, solliciting the Romane people to maintain their libertie, Magistracie, and other offices. R. Barns. Of this same time was Peter de Blois, who in his writings touched the wickednesse of the Cleargie-men. In a certaine Epistle which he writeth to a Bishops Officiall, he admonisheth him to come out of Babilon, detesting the tirannie of Bishops and their Officials, calling them infernall harpies which do but powle and sheere the Church of Iesus Christ. He often calleth the Cleargie, Siria, Edom, Calues of Bethel, Idols of Egipt, the fatte of Samaria, Priests of Baal, and Iudges which forge vn∣iust lawes, and many such like names he giueth them. This saith he of Rome. At Rome all is subuerted by gifts, Monkes may do all things by siluer, and redeeme by annuall pentions, all wic∣kednesse of the flesh.The Pope and his disciples. There filthinesse began to be sung in the Tabernacle of Geth, & in the streets of Ascalon. So was he made the Prince of Sodome, and his Disciples after him, are set in the chaire of pestilence. Such writing should be noted for their excellencie and raritie. The yeare of Christ, 1155. Frederic went into Italy, Adri∣an met him euen at Sutry, hoping by the Emperours meanes to reuenge himselfe vpon his enemies. And as hee arri∣ued at the Emperours lodging, the Emperour hasted to meete
him,Frederic. 1. and as he lighted he held the left stirrope of his horse, and taking him by the hand ledde him into his Castle. The Pope greatly disdaining, held as a mockery, that the Emperour at his lighting held his left stirrope, and not his right: Insomuch that he departed from his Castle much offended & discontent. The next morning the Emperour dissembling all, like a wise man, calling the Pope as hee met him againe, held his right stirrope at his lighting. For hee had not forgotten his lesson of the day before. After they went to Rome, and there Frederic was crow∣ned by Adrian at S. Peters, and returned into Almaigne. Ri. Barnes. Iohn of Salisbury, Bishop of Chartres, was in this time, who sharply opposed himselfe against the wickednes of Popes and Cleargie. He writ a booke, Intituled Obiurgatorium Cleri. In his booke Intituled Policraticus, he saith thus. In the Romane Church are set Scribes and Pharisies,Iohn de Sa∣lisburie a true Doctor. loading mens shoulders with insupportable burthens. The great Bishop is heauy vn∣to all, yea importable. His Legates cast themselues so into the fields, as if Sathan were come from the Lorde to torment the Church. Iudgement amongst them, is no other thing but a true marchandise. They esteeme of gaine as of pietie it selfe. They iustifie the wicked by gold and siluer, and reioyce in wic∣kednes. They eate the sinnes of the people. They are appa∣relled & nourished in all luxurie: whilest the true worshippers worship the Lord in spirit. He that sticketh not vnto their doc∣trine, either is he iudged an hereticke, or a schismaticke, &c. Often were there such Doctors in the Church, but they durst not speake nor write of all that was needfull. In a booke Intituled Speculum, that is to say, the Glasse. It is said that that good Bishop Iohn, amongst other complaints, hath bene some∣times heard say to the Pope Adrian the fourth (his very famili∣ar friend) these words. The Pope indeed is truly the seruant of seruants,A word of cō∣demnation commeth frō the Popes owne mouth. because he serueth the Romanes, seruants of couetous∣nesse. The same Pope Adrian was heard say to the said Bishop Iohn, That there were many Popes which rather succeeded Ro∣mulus in murders & paracides, then S. Peter in feeding of sheep.
Romulus, the first founder of the Citte of Rome, slewe his owne brother Remus, and so the walls were dedicated in that Parricide. Adrian excommunicated William the sonne of Rogier king of Sicily and Pouille, and absolued his subiects of their oathes towards him: but seeing he profited nothing by that meanes, he incited Emanuel Emperour of Constantinople: Emanuel pro∣mised the Pope to deposed the said William. Onely he deman∣ded three Maritime or Sea Townes if he came to his purpose. These conuentions made, in the meane while the Grecians oc∣cupied Pouille, and wasted it. William vnderstanding these prac∣tises, prayed the Pope to be reconciled vnto him, and that hee would onely graunt him the title of king of the two Sicilies, and he would restore him whatsoeuer he demanded; yea he would giue of his owne. The Pope was content, but the Cardinalls kept him from it. William then went into battaile against the Grecians and obtained the victorie, droue the Grecians out of Pouille, and recouered it. The Captaine prisoners were bound with chaines. Afterward he went against Beneuent and besieged it. The Pope and his Cardinalls which by chance were there, are prisoners, and constrained to demaund peace, and to agree wiih him. The Pope first absolueth him of his excommunica∣tion, and pronounceth and declareth him King, after hauing done him homage to hold his Land & Seignory of the holy Fa∣ther. Adrian returned to Rome, and straight fel vnto cōtention. For the Consuls would maintaine their franchise & ancient li∣bertie. Wherfore fearing (because the Interdict endured yet) he got himselfe Anagnia or Arignianum. R. Barns. Frederic was not content that the Pope without his know∣ledge had graunted the title and right of Sicilia, because he was thereby defrauded of the Inuestures: also for that the Popes Legates pilled so the Countries subiect vnto his Empire. Be∣cause the Pope began secretly through all the Empire to sowe reasons to retire his subiects from his subiection. Wherefore he demaunded homage of the Bishops of the Germaine Nation, and oath of fidelitie: hee forbad that any should appeale vnto
the Romane Sea. He commaunded the Popes Legates which appealed not to him, to get them out of his Countries. The Pope very much grieued at all those things, as also that the Emperour set his owne name before the Popes in his Letters missiues which he sent; writ Letters vnto him, rebuking him for those foresaid things,See the Tenor of the Popes Letters in the Popes liues, by R. Barns & Naucler. admonishing him to amēd. The Emperor answered them frō point to point. First, that iustly & by good right he set his name before his seeing the Pope oweth all hu∣militie to the Emperour as Christ hath taught. And if Popes haue any priuiledge, it comes of especiall grace, and by the li∣beralitie of Kings and Princes. Also that Iesus Christ hath taught vs to yeeld to euery one that which belongs vnto him, to Caesar that which belongeth vnto him. Wherefore he iustly redemaundeth the inuestures and homage of Bishops. Touching Cardinals and Legates, that iustly he reiected thē out of his Country. For said he, they come not to preach, but to pill and spoile: not to cōfirme peace, but to heape vp siluer. Wherefore he prayed the Pope and his, not to mooue so many schismes & scandalls, but that that they would studie for peace and humilitie. Naucler & R. Barns. The yeare 1158. Frederic tooke the Towne of Millaine, and made it subiect to the Empire. Sigeb. After this, the Pope ceased not to sollicite the Italians to withdraw their alleageance from the Emperor, and therfore he sent his Legates to Millaine, to perswade them to reuolt. But the Millanois sought no other thing but a quarell for that purpose; and that was, that the Emperour was excōmunicate. The Pope then wrought a cōspiracie against the Emperor with the aide of William king of Sicilie, of them of Millaine, and other Nobles of Italie, which gaue a great sum of siluer to the Pope to excom∣municate the Emperour. The coniuration was confirmed by oath, vpon condition that none of thē should euer returne into grace with the Emperour, vnlesse all were consenting therevn∣to. And if by fortune the Pope died, that they should then elect a Cardinall of their owne faction and band. After the former defence of the Emperor that none should appeale to Rome, the Bishop of Laude going to Rome by appel∣lation,
was encountred by certaine of the Emperours people; and after they had beate him, they put him in prison. The Pope Adrian sent towards the Emperour two Legates with ve∣ry sharpe Letters. In which amongst other words, there were these. Although thou hast not answered vs as thou oughtest, yet do we not repent if thou hadst receiued greater benefites at our hands then thou hast receiued. Which words so angred the Emperor and all the Princes, that with much adoo did they abstaine from violating the League. Of which one of them an∣swering for the Pope, said foolishly. If the Emperour (saith he) hold not his Empire of the Pope, of whom holdeth he it? By which words Otho Pallatin Wittilispach before the Emperour drew his sword, and ran against the said Legate, and hardly was retained from sleying him. Naucler. For store of siluer, then the Pope Adrian being at Anagnia, thundred forth the sentence of excōmunicatiō against Frederic: But God (Iohn de Cremona saith) who by the mouth of the Pro∣phet speaketh. (They shal curse you, and I will blesse you) ouer∣threw their enterprise. For it fell out that the Pope after hee had denounced the excommunication, came out of Anagnia to take ayre, nigh a Fountaine of which he dranke: but soone af∣ter a Flie entred into his mouth, and kept so in his throate, that he left his breath and so died. Naucler. Vrsperg. The yeare 1160. Frederic laid siege before the Towne of  Millaine, which was reuolted. Pauie, Plaisance, and as it were all Lombardie, yeelded themselues subiect vnto him. Chron. Sigeb. Crema is pilled and spoiled. Behold what they gaine to beleeue the Pope, and rebell a∣gainst their naturall Lord. The poore men of Lyons, otherwise called Ʋandrois,The poore men of Lyons. were in this time. After the death of Pope Adrian, yet ceased not the former conspiration against Frederic, for the coniurators sent a strong man of body, who was a good Musitian, but counterfeited a Ieaster, to the end to take occasion to sley the Emperour: but he was surprised and put to death.
Againe they sent him an Arrabian Ehchaunter, who carried Mearcery ware, and drugs impoisoned. But the Emperour fin∣ding out his treason, caused the Enchaunter to be strangled. The Duchie of Bohemia was erected to a Kingdome vn∣der Frederic. Naucler. The Prince of Austriche was made a Duke. The body of S. Bartholomew, and the body of Paulin Bi∣shop of Nole, were found in an old Church, saith Sigeb. The bodies of the three kings (as they call thē) were found nigh Millaine, and carried into the said Citie. Fasci. temp. Helinandus rehearseth that the Pope Adrian was wont to say; That there is nothing in the world more miserable, nor condition or estate more vnluckie, then the Popedome. And that hee found such tribulation in the Apostolike seate, that he wished he had neuer departed from England. And that he was neuer so much at ease, as when he was but a simple Cloyster-Monke. Adolphe Count of Nole d' Albigeois, was slaine by the Sla∣uons, Apostates of the faith: his death was reuenged by the Duke of Saxonie. Henry Leon. This Henry founded three Abbeyes, at Lubec, Racebourg, and Souerum. He visited the sepulchre, and builded the church of S. Bloise at Brunswic. Amongst many reliques, he gaue to the said Church of the bloud of Iesus Christ, which he brought from the holy Land, saith The Sea of Histories. Alexander. 3Alexander Pope, third of that name, of Sienne in Tuscane,  ruled 22. yeares or thereabouts. The Sea of Histories. He was before called Rowland, and was an enemie of the Empire, and therefore was he chosen by 22. Cardinalls. A schisme of 17. yeares.Some elected one called Octauian, a Romane Citizen, Priest, Cardinall of S. Clement, called after, Ʋictor the third: who came towards Frederic. So was there a great schisme which continued 17. yeares. Alexāder sent his Legates towards Frederic, who thē besieged Cremona, to the end by his authoritie to take away the schisme. The Emperor commanded that the two elected Popes should
come vnto him vnto Pauie, and there hee would assemble a Councel to take order for that schisme. Alexander sent him the olde answere: that the Pope might not be iudged of any liuing man, &c. and would not assist or appeare, but retired himselfe vnto Anagnia. Ʋictor appeared, and was approoued Pope, and the Empe∣rour sent him into Almaine, and commanded that euery one should obey him: whereat Alexander being greatly mooued, sent sentence of excommunication, against both the Emperour and the said Ʋictor, at Cleremont in France. We haue seene that after Charlemaigne many pettie Kings rose vp in Italie, whereof some were called Berengarij, which brought into subiection the kingdome of the Lombards. Otho the great got Lombardie out of their hands. But after Millaine as it encreased in riches, so the Citizens withdrew themselues from the obedience of the Romane Empire. Frederic hauing raised a great Armie, constrained them with others to yeelde to the yoake. But the common people bearing euill will vnto the Emperour minding againe to reuoult, discouered their wicked intent with a maruellous insolencie. The Empresse Frederic his wife, hauing a desire to see the Towne, entered into it with effeminate assurance, without feare to suffer iniurie of such as obeyed the Empire. But the common people for∣getting all honour, being exceedingly inraged,A mockerie offered vnto the Emperor. set the said Prin∣cesse vpon a she Asse, causing her to turne her face towards the taile: the which they gaue her for a bridle in her hand, and in a mockerie sent her out at one of their gates. The Emperour taking iust indignation against this iniury, besieged them seuen yeares before they could enter: but at the last constraining them to yeeld, hee ruinated and sacked the Towne with great effusion of bloud. He receiued some to mercie, but it was vpon this cōditiō, that if they would saue their liues, they shuld draw out with their teeth a Figge from behind of the she Asse. Ma∣ny chose rather to die then to suffer that ignominy. Others de∣siring to liue, did whatsoeuer was commanded them. Frō hence comes a iust mockerie amongst the Italians, to shewe the thumbe betwixt two fingers, and say; Ecco la fico,Ecco la Fico. beholde the
Figge: Crantes reciteth this Story in his 6. booke of Saxonia. Frederic sent Embassadors vnto the King of France, to take away that schisme from Rome, they agreed to meete in a cer∣taine place very conuenient for France and Almaine, and that was at Dijon. Thither came Henry king of England, the king of Scotland, the king of Bohemia: Alexander would not bee there, saying he was not ordained by his authoritie. The King of France was not there in fauour of Alexander. Frederic not well content that he and so many Princes had thus lost their paines, commaunded Victor to drawe into Italie: but Victor died in the way at Luques: and in his place Guido Bi∣shop of Cremone, was chosen, who afterward was called Paschall the third: vnto whom the Emperour Frederic, the Duke of Bauiere, the Count Palatin in Rhene, the Lantgraue of Turinge, the Bishops of Magdeburg, of Breme, of Treuers, of Colongne, and of Banberge, promised him obedience. R. Barns. The 6. king of Ierusalem.Amaricus the brother of Baudwin, was the sixt King of Ierusalem. Sigeb. Alexander in the meane while held a Councell at Tours. But at Rome the Vicegerent of the Pope Alexander, the Bi∣shop of Prenestine died, and in his place was substituted Iohn, Cardinall of the Church of S. Peter. He by siluer and other meanes drewe to Alexander the most part of the Romane Ci∣tizens: and did so much, as they created new Consuls, such as fauoured the said Alexander. They recalled Alexander out of France, and he was well receiued at Rome, the Bishop of Pauie was put out for that he held on the Emperours side. Frederic the third time went into Italie against certaine that rebelled, and came to Rome to knowe the cause of those Popes. Alexander would not appeare, but drewe backe as before. The Townes of Italie rebelled against the Emperor at the perswasion of Alexander, and they conspired together. The Millainois reedified their Towne in fauour of this A∣lexander,  and called it Alexandria. Frederic the fourth time returned into Italie with a great Armie against the rebells: but Henry Leon Duke of Saxonie,
corrupted by siluer (as is thought) left the Emperour, and re∣turned into Saxonie with his company. The Emperour required him not to faile him in that great need, but he lost time: therefore was hee constrained to with∣drawe from Italie, and returne into Almaine, in a seruants appa∣rell, and that with great difficultie. Behold how by Popes the world hath euer beene troubled. The yeare of Christ, 1173. Saladin slew his Lord the  Calyphe, and raigned in his place. Chron. Euseb. The yeare of Christ, 1175. Frederic the fift time retur∣ned  into Italie: but at the perswasion of his Confessor, he con∣uerted his Armes against the Turkes: and passing through Hun∣garie, came vnto Constantinople, & occupied many Townes and places of the Turkes, as Philomenia and Iconium, after he came into Armenia the lesse, finally euen to Ierusalem. Whilest Fre∣deric was thus busied with the Turke, the Pope Alexander with his confederates ceased not to thinke how they might de∣stroy him. To the end then that hee should not returne vic∣torious, the Pope sent to the Souldan the Image of the Empe∣rour, which he caused to be drawne very liuely by an excellent Painter, with Letters by which he gaue aduertisement vnto the Souldan, to sley or destroy the said Emperour by treason, if e∣uer hee pretended to liue in peace. The Souldan hauing receiued the said Popes Letters, with the Emperours figure, sought by all meanes to come to his pur∣pose; but occasion fell not out so soone. But finally as the Em∣perour returned from the conquest of Ierasalem being in Ar∣menia, one day as it was very hotte, hee withdrew into a wood with a fewe of his people, and with his Chaplaine, and not thin∣king of any daunger, there made his people goe aside, and hee and his Chaplaine lighted off their horses, vnapparelled them∣selues, and so refreshed them in a running streame of water. There was hee surprised by the ambushes which the Souldane had laid, and were carried through the wood vnto the Soul∣dan. His people knowing nothing of his taking, sought him all the next morning.
The brute came vnto the Campe, the Emperor was drow∣ned, and by the space of an whole moneth they sought him in the floud where he washed. The Emperour being brought be∣fore the Souldane, feigned himselfe to be the Emperors Chap∣laine, but the Souldan knowing him by the Image the Pope sent him, maintained that he was the Emperour of the Christi∣ans, and indeed commanded that straight some should bring him the said Image, and that the Popes Letters should be read. The Emperour astonished at this treason, confessed the truth and demaunded fauour. Certaine time after, the Souldan sent him away, vnder certain couenants agreed betwixt them. The Emperour returning, assigned a day at Noremberg, and as∣sembling his Court, declared the Pope Alexander his treason, shewing his Letters and the Image. Briefly, euery one pro∣mised him helpe to pay his ransome, and to doo iustice of the said Alexander. In this time of darknesse and horrible tempests, after the Grashoppers and vermine of begging Friers, which deuou∣red the title graine of the world: here gaue the Lord again a light, as it were the breake of day. The beginning of the Waldois. Peter Waldo a Citizen of Lions, beganne by litle and litle in this time to cleare the thicke darknesse therof: and this was as a first and litle beginning of the Instauration of the Christi∣an doctrine and religion. The Historie is this. In the Towne of Lions, as many of the chief of the Towne in Sommer time to recreate themselues and talke together, one amongst them suddenly fell downe dead in the presence of others; amongst which was this Waldo, a rich man, who more then all other men was mooued and sur∣prised with feare,Sudden death giueth occa∣sion to Waldo. and an apprehension of the humane frailtie, and began to think (the spirit of God drawing him) more near∣ly to repencance, and to meditate true pietie more then euer hee had done before. He began then to giue much more almes, to open his house to all, and to speake of penance and true pie∣tie to such as for any cause came vnto him.
This feare was of God,Note here the diuersitie of examples. the fruite and the ende sheweth it in this person. But the feare that moued Bruno to seeke reme∣die and comfort to his fancie without the word of the Lord, was of the diuel, and proceeded of his illusions. This liberalitie drew many poore and needfull people vn∣to him, that they came by troupes, and he alwaies expounded some place of holy scripture in the vulgar tongue: for hee was a man learned (as the writings of that time witnesse, and the Ca∣talogue of the witnesses of the truth) the Bishop of the place, and the Prelates which carried the keyes as they say, and would neither enter, nor let others enter, beganne to murmure that a Laie man, or secular man (as they call them) should handle or declare in the vulgar tongue the scripture, and make assemblies in his house: admonishing to cease to do so vnder the paine of excommunication. But for all this, the zeale that Waldo had to aduance the glory of God, and the desire the little ones had to learne, was nothing diminished: but contrary, the resistance and tyrannie of the Prelates gaue occasion to discouer the er∣rours and superstitions of the Romane seate, which then were as it were hid in darknesse. The like happened in our time: for whē the Pope & his Priests could not endure that Martin Luther should reprehend their Indulgences, they were the cause that a further search was made into their errours, and so discouered their abhominable blasphemies. Waldo now gathered in the vulgar tongue many places out of the auncient Fathers,Waldo strengtheneth himselfe with places of the Doctors. to cōfirme and strengthen such as were of his side, not only by the authoritie of holy scriptures, but also by witnesse of Doctors, against the aduersaries. It is likely to be true, by Historiographers, yea euen by the writings of the ad∣uersaries, that this assembly endured certaine time (it may be foure or fiue yeares) that Waldo taught in the Towne of Lyons, before he was driuen to exile & banishment. For because he was mightie and had friends, he was not so soone exposed to daun∣gers which afterward were laide for him. And thus came the
appellation of the Pope of Lions. Some called them Waldois, some Lyonists, and some Insabbatati: that is, such as obserued neither Sabboth nor Feast, and many other like names to make them odious and detestable, as shall be shewed in the discourse of this Historie. Alexander vnderstanding the Emperor marched to come to Rome, perceiuing himselfe culpable of the treason he had done him, the 7. yeare of his Popedome, fled from Rome in the habit of his Coole, & came vnto Venice, & remained in a Monasterie: where finally being knowne, he was led by the Duke & the Se∣nate with great solemnitie into S. Markes Church. The Empe∣ror vnderstanding yt Alexander was at Venice, sent Embassadors to demaund Alexander. The Venetians maintained the Pope, which the Emperor seeing, sent thither his son Otho with an Ar∣my, yet commanding him not to fight against the Venetians be∣fore his comming. But Otho led with youth gaue battell, lost the victory & was prisoner. Which the Pope seeing, wold not agree with the Emperor, vnlesse fist he came to Venice & receiued the meanes that he wold offer. Frederic to help his son came to Ve∣nice: the Pope would not absolue him of ye bond of excommu∣nicatiō, vntill he presented himselfe at the doore of S. Mark his Church. Whē he was come thither, the Pope cōmanded him in the presence of all the people, to cast himself vpon the ground, and to demand pardon of him. The Emperor prostrating him∣selfe vpon the earth at the Popes feete: hee set his foote vpon the Emperors neck, & pressing it downe said; It is written, Su∣per aspidem & basiliscum ambulabis & conculcabis Leonem & dra∣conem: that is to say; Thou shalt goe vpon the Aspe & Basilike, and tread vnder thy feet the Lyon & the Dragō. The Emperor taking in ill part the contumely, answered; This was not said vn∣to thee, but vnto Peter. But the Pope stepping againe vpon his neck, answered; Both to me, & to Peter. The Emperour fearing the peril or an hid danger, held his peace, & so was absolued: and an accord was made betwixt them, vpō condition that the Em∣perour should hold Alexander for the true & legitimate Pope,  & that he should restore to the Romane church all that he had vsurped & takē during the war. These things ended, the Empe∣ror & his son departed frō Venice, & so ceased ye schisme.
This Pope gaue many priuiledges to the order of Char∣treux, and Canonized S. Barnard. The bodies of three Kings (as they call them) were trans∣ported from Millaine to Colongne, by the Bishop of the said place. Sabell. Eun. 9. lib. 5. The order of the Carmalites began in this time,Carmalits. Willelmin. and the order of Willelmins Hermirs. Fasc. Temp. About this time Henry the second, King of England, see∣ing the power of Bishops & Cleargie too great in England, and that they by oathes made to the Pope, did alienate themselues, and the Forces of the Realme by such means weakned, renew∣ed the auncient rights, called the Dignities of the Kingdome. And aboue all that, which saith, That Bishops and Prelates shal sweare to be loyall and faithful vnto the king and the pub∣like vtilitie of the kingdome. Thomas Becket Archbishop of Cā∣terburie gaue that oath to the King; but after repented him∣selfe thereof, as of an vnlawfull oath, and demanded therfore the Popes absolution. The King grieued at such periurie, ba∣nished him; and about fiue yeares he was in France. The que∣stiō was long debated at Rome, & cost much mony vpō Embas∣sadors going betweene the one partie & the other. Gratian cō∣piler of the Decrees, was sent on the Popes side, & Petrus Lom∣bardus on Becket his side. The king fearing apparent daungers on the side of France, was glad to be quiet: but Becket being re∣stored, and stil remaining contrary to the king, and vnwilling to absolue such as before he had excommunicated, he was slain by certaine Nobles of the Realme. The 48. yeare after his death, there was a disputation in Paris amongst the Doctors, whether he were damned or saued. There was one Roger a Normane, who maintained that he deserued death, being a Rebell against the King, who is the Minister of God. Others contrary, main∣tained that by good right he ought to be held in the number of Martirs, because he died for the Clergie, and so the Pope Alex∣ander canonized him. This Historie sheweth vs what difference there is betwixt the Popes Martyrs and them of Iesus Christ. The punishment makes not the Martyr, but the cause. Many haue written against this Archbishop Becket, and
condemning him, haue maintained the Kings cause. Baleus re∣hearseth it. So doth Iohn Eliot, and Iohn Bishop of Poitiers. Monasteries founded.Our Ladies Church of Paris is now builded by the Bishop there called Maurice, who also founded besides three Mona∣steries, that is Negranx, Hermeries and Yeres. The Sea of Histo∣ries. About this time were there seene in the West Countries three Sunnes in September, & the yeare after three Moones. Chro. Euseb. Baudwin fourth of that name, the seuenth King of Ierusa∣lem, raigned sixe yeares. Chron. Euseb. Berthold, Duke Zeringen, sonne of Conrade the Emperour, founded two Freburgs, that is to say, free Bourgages or Franc∣borgs: the one in Brisgoy, and the other in little Bourgogne, com∣monly called Ʋchland, against Sauoye. And 12. yeares after he founded the Towne of Berne,Berne. which he surnamed because of a Beare which he encountred in the place where the said Towne was builded. For that word in their tongue signifieth Beare. Naucl. The scituation thereof is almost an Iland which the Riuer of Arre maketh. Phillip dieu done, 2. of that name, 41. king of France, sonne of Lewis le ienne, constituted the Escheuins of Paris, and enuiro∣ned with walles a great part of the towne, and walled the wood of Ʋincennes nigh Paris. Naucler. At this time was a great multitude of Iewes in France, of which there went a report that euerie yeare they stole a Chri∣stian childe, and ledde him vnto a place vnder the earth, and af∣ter they had tormented him, crucified him, and that day they call great or good Friday. King Phillip hearing this, caused the Iewes to be taken and tormented in diuers sorts.The Iewes chased from France. Hee burned 80. in one fire, and after the yeare 1186. he draue them all out of his kingdome, except such as were conuerted to the Faith. After the King being scarce of mony through warres, deman∣ded of the Iewes a great summe thereof, and hauing it graun∣ted, he was content they should again come into his kingdome: As also his successour Lewis opened them all the kingdome of France.
Lucius Pope, third of that name, of Luke,Lucius. 3. ruled at Rome foure yeares, two moneths, and 18. dayes. He was before called Hinebaldus, or Vbaldus, Cardinall of Ostia. This Pope would needs banish the Consuls & Patricij at Rome: wherefore he was cast out of Rome, and withdrew him∣selfe to Verona. Such as tooke his part, some had their eyes put out, others were set vpon Asses, their faces towards the hinder part, and were ignominiously handled. After some. In this time was the fourth expedition made beyond the Sea, and there were crossed vnto it the King of France Phi∣lip Augustus, and Henry King of England.Saladins tenth. And there was a tenth laide vpon all Benefices and reuenews of Church goods, to help the charges of the warre. And this Subsidie was called Saladins tenth. Iohn le Maire. Ʋrbane Pope, third of that name, borne at Millane,Vrbane. 3. of the people of Cribelles, ruled a yeare and sixe moneths, or as it were  eleuen. Suppl. Chron. Before he was called Imbert. Suppl. Chron. Sigeb. Baudwin King of Ierusalem, left the kingdome Guyon of Lusignan, his sisters husband, and the saide Guyon was the last King of Ierusalem. Saladin, by auarice, ambition, and discord of Christians, occupied Ierusalem, which the Christians had held from God∣frey de Bouillion, 88. yeares. He tooke also Aca, Beritus, Biblon, and all the rest euen to Ascalon, inclusiuely. Naucler. Gregorie Pope, 8. of that name, borne in Beneuent,Gregorie. 8. ruled at Rome 57. dayes. Hee sent messages vnto the Christian Princes and their people, to goe against the enemies of the Faith, promising In∣dulgences and pardons vnto all; but he dyed vpon that enter∣prise, as he went vnto Pise to sollicite, that they of that Towne with the Geneuois together, might send into Asia for the de∣fence of Religion. Cor. Abb. Lynonia, or Lyfland, a Northerne Land, was conuerted to the Faith. Clement Pope, third of that name,Clement. 3. the sonne of a Romane Citizen, ruled at Rome 3. yeares and 6. moneths, and made a
Decretall against such Priests as celebrated Masse in wodden vessels,Frederic 1. and with common bread. The Emperour Frederic, Philip King of France, Richard King of England, and the Pope Clement, agreed together to send mony vnto the Christians: they sent also many ships, and after went themselues in person, with many Princes and Pre∣lates of Ierusalem, but they could not accord: therefore soone after they returned. Supp. Chron. The yeare of Christ 1190. Frederic being at Nice, a Citie of Bithinia, it being also very hotte, he descended into a floud to wash: but the force of the water carried him away, so that he was drowned, in the presence of his people, the 37. yeare of his Empire, leauing fiue children which hee had of his wife Bea∣trix, daughter of Regnand, Count of Besanson. The King of England was taken by a Duke of Austriche, called Leopold, as he returned passing through Almaigne, and was deliuered vnto the Emperour Henry the sixt. For his raun∣some, were solde the treasures of the Church, the Chalices of Gold and Siluer, &c. and so returned into England. During this time, the King of France but a litle before also returned in∣to France, and occupied certaine Townes appertaining vnto the King of England. The treasures of England solde for the Kings raunsome, came 200000 markes of siluer. Celestine. 3.Celestine 3. of that name, a Romane, before called Iacin∣thus, very aged, (his Father was called Bubonis) was chosen Pope by the Cardinalls vpon Easter day. Henry. 6.The next morning he Crowned Henry Emperour, 6. of that name, sonne of Fredericke, and at the exhortation of this Pope, he made an expedition to goe vnto Ierusalem. William king of Sicile dying without heires, it was thought that therefore the kingdome should devolue vnto the Romane seate: but the greatest of the kingdome elected Tancredus, the bastard sonne of the said William.A Nunne dis∣pensed with to marry. The Pope stirred heereat, drew Constance the daughter of Roger, and sister of William king of Sicilie, out of an Abbey of Nunnes in the Towne of Palerme, and dispensed with her marriage. Wherefore Henry sonne of
the Emperour Fredericke, espoused her,Henry. 6.For the di∣uersitie tou∣ching this hi∣storie, see Naucler. and so came vnto the kingdome of Sicilie and occupied it. And Tancredus was slaine in battaile, so Henry abode in place. The said Constance of the age of 55. yeares, conceaued and brought forth a sonne called Fredericke the second, who after was Emperour. Supp. Chron. The order of the Friars of the Hospitall of the Almaines, beganne at this time. Also the order of the Trinitie. The yeare 1191. the Towne of Aca was taken by the  Christians. Naucler. saith here, that Saladine seeing the force of the Christians, determined to haue yeelded them the towne of Ierusalem: but the discord happening betwixt the King of Fraunce and the King of England, was cause of verie great troubles. In matter of diuorce, Celestine permitted the Catholike partie to remarry, if the other partie fell into heresie. But con∣trary, the Pope Innocent forbad it. Poll. Ʋer. de diuor. cap. 5. Arthois was erected into an Earledome, the yeare 1195. and  the first Count or Earle therof was Lewis, sonne of king Philip. The kingdome of Cyprus came into the hands of the Chri∣stians, and remained there 275. yeares. The Archbishop of Magunce with a multitude of Almains, the King of Hungarie & the Queene, went into Palestine against the Sarasins. Sigeb. They tooke Berinthus and Ioppe. Naucl. Innocent Pope, third of that name, borne in Campania,Innocent. 3. his father was Trasimondus, of Anagnia, a man of base estate, Suppl. Chron. ruled at Rome 18. yeares. This Pope, a very daungerous pestilence,Transubstan∣tiatiō is made the 13. article of the Faith. added vnto the Articles of the Faith Transubstantiation, as a 13. Article. See the Decretalls, Tit. 1. De summa Trin. & side Catholica, ca. Fir∣miter credimus. This Decretall was made the yeare of Christ, 1215. & pro∣mulged in the Councell of Lateran. Where were the Patriarkes of Constantinople & Ierusalem, 70. Archbishops, 400. Bishops, 12. Abbots, 800. conuentuall Priors, and many Embassadors of kings & princes to stop the Sarasins.A Croisado. For there was a Croisado published, therfore was there demanded the 4. peny of all rents.
Innocent. 3Confession instituted.He commaunded that the Canon of the Masse should be receiued as if it came from and were ordeined of the Apostles. See the Decretals, Dit. 46. De celebratione Missarū, ca. 6. cū. He commanded confession in the Priests eare, that is, that he which came to be capable of deceit, should confesse himselfe at the least once in the yeare to his owne Pastor. See the Decretals Tit. 38. chap. Omnis vtrius{que} sexus. Canonizing of Saints, re∣serued to the Pope.In the said Councell of Lateran, it was ordeined, that the Canonization of Saints might not be done but by the Pope. There also was condemned the booke of Ioachim Abbat, against Peter Lombard. Now was the error of Almaric Bishop of Chartres, (of whom we shall hereafter speake) and of the Albigeois: against which Innocent made preach the Croisado. There was also ordeined, that if Princes had offended one an other, the correctiō therof shuld appertain vnto ye Pope. Nauc. The yeare of Christ 1199. the Emperour Henry dyed at Pa∣lerme. Being sore heated in the pursuit of an Hart, he drunke so much of a Fountaine that he rankeled his bodie. Philip brother of the said Emperour Henry, Duke of Souabe, obtained the Empire, and raigned 8. yeares. He was crowned at Magunce. Innocent hated Philip, and was against his election: The Bishop of Colongne and other Princes, as well seculars, as of the Cleargie, seeing themselues despised that they had not bene called to the electiō of the said Philip, vpon an assembly at Aix, they chose for Emperour Otho, the sonne of Henry, surnamed Lyon, Duke of Saxonie and Bauiere, and was crowned by the Archbishop of Boulongne:Diuision of the Empire by the Pope. so was there a diuision in the Empire whereof great mischiefes came in Almaine, by Rapines, pillings, fires, warres, Robberies. Benefices Ecclesiasticall became liti∣gious, and much siluer did runne to Rome. Naucler. and Vr∣sperg. Otho. 4.Otho then 4. of that name, Duke of Bauiere and Saxonie, a man proud and hardie, raigned three yeares, being a fauourite of Pope Innocent: who had said that he would either take away Phillips Crowne, or he should take away his. Ʋrsperg.
There happened then great discord in Almaine by the Popes treason, who procured Phillips death.Frederic. 2. Otho of Wittilispach, Count Pallatin, entered into the Em∣peror  Phillips chamber at Bamberge,The death of the Emperour Phillip. and slew him traiterously with a dagger, the ninth yeare of his raigne. His Esquire see∣ing this, being greatly troubled, began to crie, and being woun∣ded in the cheeke, fell downe. The traytor fled to the Bishop of Bamberge, a companion of the conspiration in the Popes fauour: who notwithstanding was afterward slaine by the Em∣perours Marshall nigh Ratisbone, being hid in a poore cottage. See Naucler. After the death of the said Phillip, the Pope sent vnto Otho, to come to Rome to be crowned, and so he was, the yeare 1209. Adolphe Bishop of Colongne, who sometimes was on Phil∣lips side, was deposed by the Pope, and died in exile. Naucler. and likewise the Bishop of Sutry, before the said Phillip was Em∣peror, because he had absolued him frō an excommunication. The yeare of Christ, 1210. Otho whom the Pope so much  loued, in despite of Phillip the Emperour, is now become the Popes mortall enemie, yea euen to be excommunicated, and in full Councell declared to be deposed from his Empire: with commaundement from the said Innocent, that none should hold him for Emperor, nor obey him, acquitting his subiects of the oath they ought him. Naucler. This done, he sent Letters to the Archbishop of Magunce, that he should declare the said Otho through all his Cities to be excommunicated and deposed frō his Empire, in full Coun∣cell held at Rome: which he did. Wherevpon the Princes of Almaine inuaded his Bishoppricke, and put all to fire. The cause wherefore the Pope published the said excommunicati∣on, was because Otho occupied Romandiole, the patrimonie of the Romane Church. Otho then fearing a new chaunge, left Italie and returned into Almaine: which hee found all troubled for the said ex∣communication. The Abbey of S. Antoigne by Paris, a religion of women was founded about this time. The Sea of Hist.
The king Phillip gaue to the Church of S. Denis diuers pre∣cious reliques which the Emperour Baudwin had sent him frō Constantinople: that is to say, the true Crosse of a foote long; al∣so the haires which Iesus Christ had in his Infancie; one of the thornes of the Crowne; one side and foure teeth of S. Phillip; the cloathes wherein Iesus Christ was wrapped in the maunger; and the purple garment which he had on at his passion. See the Sea of Hist. Such as were great in this world, submitted their greatnesse vnto those toyes and trifles, more then childish. The yeare of Christ, 1212. Otho hauing assembled the Princes at Noremberg, shewed the Popes subtil deus against him, and that vniustly he persecuted him. From thence hee led his Armie into Turinge against his enemies which tooke the Popes part: After he came into Saxonie, where his marriage was celebrated with the daughter of king Phillip, who died foure daies after. Iohn King of England, King Richard his brother, made his kingdome subiect to the Romane Pope. For a signe whereof, he promised to pay yearely fiue markes of gold. Suppl. Chron. or 1000. markes of sliuer. See the Annales of France. Frederic. 2.After Otho had bene Emperour 4. yeares, Frederic 2. of  that name, sonne of Henry 6. king of both Sicilies and of Ieru∣salem succeeded: and after his election made in Almaine, hee was annointed and crowned at Aix: and Otho depriued of his Empire, died the yeare following of a fluxe of bloud. Naucler. and the said Frederic raigned 44. yeares, or 33. after Suppl. Chron. Innocent edified the Hospitall of the holy Ghost, and gaue vnto it great reuenewes. He repaired the Church of S. Sixtus. He gaue vnto all the Churches of Rome, the waight of a pound of siluer to make their Challices on, vpon condition that none should sell or alien them. The foure Sects of begging Friars. Friars.S. Francis an Italian, of a Towne called Assisium, was in this time.
S. Dominike a Spaniard of Caliroga,Iacobins. in the Diocesse of Lexonia, in this time also. The said Dominike went to Rome, and prayed the Pope Innocent in the said Councell of Lateran, to confirme his order of Iacobins: but hee would not consent therevnto. Albert Patriarke of Ierusalem, made the rule of Carmes,Carmalits. the first Author of the said order in Siria. The Pope approued the order of the Hermits of S. Augustin.Augustins. The Emperour vsed all diligence to get fauour of the Pope, thinking to liue at rest: yet was he excommunicated, because he had not accomplished the vow he made to goe vnto Ierusa∣lem: then had he great troubles all ouer. But the Emperor ha∣sted his voyage beyond the Seas to mittigate the Popes furie:The wicked disloyaltie of the Pope. but whilest he was absent, the Pope got Pouille vnder his power. The Emperour Frederic vnderstanding this fraud of that subtil Foxe, returned with a great Armie into Pouille, droue the Popes people away, and recouered that which was taken from him. Then the Pope againe excommunicated the Emperor because hee had allied himselfe with the Souldane, and writ Letters vnto the Souldane, by which hee prayed him, that he would not yeeld the holy Land vnto the Emperor, as he vnderstood by a certaine vncertaine bruite that he would do. Also he sent and commaunded the Princes of Almaine, that they should elect none of the children of Frederic for King, nor any of his house. The Historiographers of France make heere mention of one called Almaricus of Chartres, a learned man, but an heretike,Almaricus of Chartres. who approued (say they) all whoredomes, vnder the vaile of charitie. Many of them both men and women, as well Ecclesia∣stical as Lay-people were taken, found guiltie, and condemned at Paris, and burnt without S. Vistors gate. They say further, that Almaric maintained that euery one was bound to beleeue that he is a member of Iesus Christ, and that when Iesus Christ suffered death and passion, we suffered with him. The said Almaric after his death, was condemned and ex∣communicated at a Councell at Rome, and his bones cast out of the Church-yard, and after burnt to ashes.
Eating of flesh in Lent.Nauclerus also reciteth, that there was in his time in the Countrey of Alsatee, many heretickes which maintained it to be lawfull to eate flesh in Lent, and vpon Fridayes. And that they themselues said that it was no sinne to haue the company of women: but a naturall thing. There was at Strasbourg about 80. burnt. Such as are against the Popes doctrine, haue bene euer flaun∣dered, and Histories haue often followed their affections when there hath bene a question of truth. The Albigeois or Albiois, a people which had receiued a beginning of the light of truth, opposed themselues against the Idolatrie of Transubstantiation: which first gaue them occasi∣on to withdrawe thmselues from the Romane Church. They inhabited the Countrey about Tholouse and d' Albi. S. Domi∣nike Author of that new Sect of such as named themselues prea∣chers,S. Dominike persecuteth them. came from Spaine, and persecuted them greatly both in deed and word. The Pope sent also towards them his Legate Nicholas Bi∣shop of Tusculan, who being there with 4. horses & 2. Mules, returned in a litle time with 50. and with great pillage, hauing exercised great tirannie against these poore people, vppon whom they laid enormious crimes, to make them odious to all the world. This Pope caused to be published a Croisado against them, and gaue full indulgences and remission of sinnes to such as would make war vpon them. Simon Count of Mountfort, went against them, & ouercame a great number nigh vnto Tholouse: 140. were burnt in the Diocesse of Narbone, and 400. in the Diocesse of Tholouse, at diuers times. In this ouerthrowe of the Albigeois, Peter king of Tarracon, who had drawne them back, and bore them fauour and amitie, was slaine at the combats. Si∣mon de Mountfort pursued his victorie. See Mathew de Paris, an English Historiographer, who was in this time. In the time of Innocent was held a Councell in France, against king Phillip of France, after he was returned from beyond the Sea. The Popes Legate had laid an interdict vpon all the Kingdome of France, because the King had put away
his wife Ingeberge, sister of the King of Dalmatia (or Morauia, after some Chronicles) vnder the colour that she was his kins∣woman, and had espowsed newly the daughter of the Duke of Boheme, called Mary. Against the sentence of the said Legate, the King armed himselfe, with appellation to a future Councel, and in the meane while reuenged him of the Bishops which had consented vnto the said sentence. For he cast them out of their Diocesses and Benefices, and caused to be held in straight guard the said Ingeberge, in the Castle of Estampes. The King tooke againe his first wife Ingeberge, wherevp∣on his second dyed of griefe. The Children the King had by her were declared legitimate. The yeare 1216. Innocent dyed at Pise, and there was bu∣ried: Hee came thither to appease controuersies betwixt the Townes of Pise and Genes. Honorius Pope, 3. of that name, ruled at Rome ten yeares,Honorius. 3. 7. or 8. moneths, & certaine daies, and was chosen at Peruse. The first yeare of his Popedome hee confirmed the order of the Iacobins, which his predecessors had refused to do. Hono∣rius being admonished by a dreame confirmed it:A dreame the foundation of Iacobins. For in a Vi∣sion he thought that the Church fell, & that S. Dominike sustai∣ned it with his shoulders: by reason hereof he sent for him, and so was confirmed the third older of Mendicants or beggers. Yea Honorius would needs haue him to obtaine the first place. He commaunded that the Host should be kept in a place by it selfe, and well enclosed.The Host shut vp. That when the Priest lifteth vp the Host, the people shall  with all reuerence bowe, as also when it is carried vnto the sicke. Ierusalem was rased euen to the foundations, by Gordirius the sonne of Saladin, whilest the Christians were before Dimiere. Supp. Chron. Honorius went into Fraunce fearing Frederic, and held a Councel at Lyons, where he declared Frederic an enemy of the Church, and deposed him of his Empire: deliuering all Princes from their oath of fidelitie that they had promised him. Naucl. All the cause was, because he conferred Benefices.
Honorius, then did so much with the Princes of Almaigne, that Iohn King of Cactle (or Henry Lantgraue of Turinge) was elected Emperour: and after Rodolpe, or William Count of Hol∣land, who raigned two yeares: which obteined not the Impe∣riall blessing, being preuented by death. Histories in this place are confused. The yeare 1220. or 1223. Dominike the Emperour died. The yeare 1223. Honorius confirmed the Religion of S. Francis, which was the fourth order of Mendicant Friars. All the foure orders of the said Mendicants, were confirmed by Ho∣norius Fascic. Templ. The fulnesse of all Infection is come into the Church by these foure plagues of begging Monkes. Frederic was reconciled with Honorius, by the meanes of Iohn King of Ierusalem, who gaue his daughter in marriage to the said Frederic. Lewis. 8.Lewis 8. of that name, Father of S. Lewis, the 12. King of France, raigned three yeares. He made warre vpon the English men, when his Father Phillip did the like vpon Otho. He spake with the Emperour Frederic, and renewed the fraternitie be∣twixt the French and Almaignes. See Gaguin. li. 3. All Lombardie at the perswasion of Pope Honorius rebel∣led against the Emperour Frederic. Naucler. Honorius dyed, and was buried in the Church of S. Mary the greater. Stigmates of S. Frances.The said yeare (or as others say 1224.) was inuented the Fable of the Stigmates, and wounds of S. Francis. S. Claire was in this time, a Disciple of S. Frances, Suppl. Chron. Gregorie. 9.Gregorie Pope, 9. of that name, before Bishop of Ostia,  called Hugolin, or Anagnia, of the parentage of Innocent: and as Platina saith, Honorius his Nephewe, ruled at Rome 14. yeares and three moneths. Decretals ga∣thered toge∣ther.This Pope heaped vp Decretalls by one of his Chaplaines called Raymond, and commaunded all Doctors and Maisters to hold the said Decretalls, and to vse them through all Christen∣dome in Schooles and Iudgements.
The Pope Canonized S. Dominicke and S. Francis, also S. Elizabeth, daughter of the King of Hungarie. Hee ordeined that the Salue Regina should be sung at the tolling of a bell. Paralip. Vrsperge. Gregorie took this boldnesse to admonish Frederic, vnder  paine of excōmunication, to goe into Asia to recouer the Citie of Ierusalem. At the second time he denounced him excommu∣nicated: In so much that Frederic was constrained to goe into Syria, by the aduice of his friends, but after sending to Rome to be absolued, the Pope refused it: & withal sent vnto ye knights, Templars, & Hospitaliers which were there, in any wise not to fauour the Emperor, but as a publike enemy: & moreouer pro∣cured that his subiects of Pouille reuolted. To bring this to passe he sent Iohn king of Ierusalem with a great band. Which thing being vnderstood, Frederic withdrew hastily from Syria, lea∣uing his Marshall with his Armie. S. Lewis 43. King of France, raigned 44. yeares. Blanch his mother, who was ordeined Regent by Testa∣ment, gained the hearts of the Princes & Lords, part by force, part by loue, which practised euil against her sonne. The yeare 1237. the Genenois elected a Duke, after the maner of the Venetians. About the yeare 1238. a solemne disputation was held at  Paris by the Doctors in Theologie, against the pluralitie of Be∣nefices. See Chron. Reg. Fran. Peter de Vigne, or Vinea,Petrus de Vinea. Chauncellour vnto the Emperour Fredericke 2. writ at this time many Letters in the Emperours name, whereof there are yet some extant imprinted, whereby he complained that all the world cannot fil the insatiabilitie of the Pope. That the Turpitudes of the Cleargie are so great and enormious, as shame forbiddeth to speake thereof. He also manifestly maintained, that the Pope neither by diuine or humane right, hath any power of the sword. He was also excommunicated of the Pope.William the Gold∣smith. William the Goldsmith was also at this time, who sheweth that he Pope is Antichrist, Rome Babilon, and the Prelates, members of Antichrist. Caesarius 10. dist. 3. of his Dialogues.
The fruite of the doctrine which the Waldois at that time dispearsed abroad, was seene in the persons of many which op∣posed themselues against the fraudes and errours of Popes seates. Frederic went into Italie against Millain and other Citties which rebelled. The Pope ioyned with the Venetians against the Emperor: and the third time excommunicated him. There contentions were published by Letters, wherein are conteined the reproches that one offer vnto an an other. Gregorie in great impudencie calleth the Emperor the forerunner of Antichrist, and an heretike, because he said the Pope had no power to ex∣communicate. Gregorie published in a Sermon the Croisado a∣gainst the Emperour, and shewed S. Pauls head, the rather to moue the Romanes against the Emperour, promising reward of glory and of eternal life, to all such as crossed & armed them∣selues against Gods & the Churches enemie. Great mischiefes happened at Rome and thereabouts. Such as Emperor caught were cauterized and marked in the forehead with an hot Iron. The faction of Guelphes & Gibellins, shewed it selfe in this time. Cōtentions were sharp all ouer, and diuided into two Fac∣tions, that is,Guelphes. Gibellines. into Guelphes and Gibellins. Some say that this Em∣perour when he was thus tormented of the Pope, called in the Almane tongue such as fauored him, Gibellins, because he leaned himself vpon thē, as an house vpō 2. strong walles. And he cal∣led such as were contrary & followed the Popes part, Guelphes: that is to say Wolues. But the pronuntiatiō hath bin corrupted. From this diuision proceeded infinit mischiefes, and destructi∣on of Townes and people: so that the miserable calamitie of these Factions cannot be expressed. There was no towne but it was diuided. But at Millain were those Factions, the Vicounts held on one side, & the Turrians the other, which were two great and noble Families in the Towne: about the dissention where∣of, all the Towne was turned into sedition. Gregorie willing to assemble a Councel at Rome to depose the Emperor (the king of France consenting thervnto at the Popes request). The Emperour caused watch to bee laide both by land and sea. Fortie Gallies which the Cardinalls, Bishops and Abbots had made, were taken by them of Pise.
Gregorie vnderstanding those newes, excommunicated them. Finally, the yeare of Christ, 1241. Gregorie afflicted with so many mischiefs fell sicke, and dyed with sorrow and griefe. Accursius Florentine, an expounder of the Pandects, was in  this time. Margarite daughter of S. Lewis Duches of Brabant,Celestine 4. foun∣ded the Monasterie of S. Marcel nigh Paris, for religious wo∣men, in which place the said Margarite liued the residue of her dayes after her Fathers decease. Celestine Pope, 4. of that name, borne at Millaine, ruled at Rome 18. dayes onely: before called Ieffrey, Bishop of Saint Sabin, a very auncient man. He often vsed this sentence. It is harder to be moderate in prosperitie then in aduersitie. Suppl. Chron. After his death the seate was vacant about two yeares, for the horrible dissentions that then were amongst the Cleargie. Bolloigne taken by Frederic, the Vniuersitie and studie was remoued from thence to Padua. Naucler. S. Lewis founded in the Bishoppricke of Benuais, the Ab∣bey of Loy anmont, where are Monkes of the order of Sisteaux: the Couent of the order of Sisters Minors, nigh Paris, other∣wise called the humilitie of our Lady. The Hostel Dieu of Pa∣ris, of Pontoise, of Compienne, of Vernon: the Abbey of Beaulieu: the Abbey of S. Mathew at Roan. He founded also in the towne of Paris the Quinze Vingts, the Church of S. Crosse, the Char∣treux, the Fillis Dieu, the house of Saint Augustine, and the white Mantels. Innocent Pope, 4. of that name, before called Senebaldus,Innocent. 4. borne at Senes, ruled Rome 11. yeares, 6. moneths, and sixe  dayes. He Canonized many Saints, and loued much the foure orders of begging Friars, (as it were supporters of his seate) and gaue them many priuiledges. He added vnto the Feasts ordeined.Multiplicati∣on of Feasts. See the Decret. De consec. dist. 3. cap. pronuntiandum. He came for refuge into Fraunce, fearing the Emperour, and held a Councell at Lyons, whereat the degree and estate of Cardinals was exalted against heretickes, and commaunded by
Edict,Frederic. 1. that from thenceforth they should goe on horsback, and a redde attire on their head, and a scarlet gowne, for a signe and witnesse that they ought to be alwaies ready to suffer & to pre∣sent themselues vnto all perils and dangers, for the defence of Christian Religion, euen to shead their bloud. C. Masseus. O craft and childish mockerie. He cited the Emperor personally to appeare. And because he appeared not, he excommunicated him, and depriued him of his Empire, although he sent thither his Embassadors. Immunities of Monkes. He gaue great Immunities and priuiledges to Monkes, not onely to Mendicants, but to all others, and made likewise the rule of the sisters of S. Claire. After this Councell, he sent to the Electors, to proceed to a new election. Frederic on his side writ Letters to the King of France, by which he shewed the wrong that the Pope did him. See Naucler. The Electors at the Popes commandement elected Henry Lantgraue of Turinge, who hauing laid siege before Ʋlme, was strooken with an Arrowe, and soone after died of a Flux of the belley. Naucler. O deiection of Christian Princes, that will suffer themselues to be so fondly carried away by a foolish feare of excommu∣nication. The fruites of the faction of Guelphes & Gibellins.This Pope hauing not onely absolued from the oath of fidelitie the Emperors subiects, but also excommunicated all Lords and Princes which fauoured and obeyed him: so moo∣ued and angred the Emperour, that he depriued 40. Bishops of their dignities, sacked the houses which appertained vnto the Popes parents, and caused to be put to death vpon a Gibbet many notable persons which had consented to the Popes con∣spiration. Note how many troubles and mischiefes comes in the world by Popes. After the death of Henry, Guilliam Count of Holland was chosen, but soone after was slaine of the Frisons. In the said Councell of Lyon, was the Croisado published;
whereof S. Lewis was made chiefe.Frederic. 2. But yet the holy Land was not recouered: For things went alwaies from euill to worse. S. Lewis in that voyage beyond the Sea was prisoner. Frederic gaue to Manfroy his bastard sonne, the King∣dome  of Sicilie: but the Pope Vrbaine tooke it from him by reason he was contrary vnto him, and gaue it to the brother of S. Lewis, Charles Count of Aniou. In this time raigned Odo Chauncelor of Paris, Hugo Car∣dinalis Iacopin, Ʋincent the Historiographer, Alexander de Hales an English man, Alexander de Villa dei, a Frier, who made the doctrine. The yeare of Christ, 1250. Frederic founded a Towne in  Italie, and called it Ʋictoria. It was after taken by the Popes souldiers and by his Legate, and raced vnto the foundations. Then Frederic returned into Pouille,The death of Frederic the second. where soone after he died of sicknesse, of the age of 57. yeares. Some say he was traiterous∣ly slaine by his sonne Manfroy. Conrade King of Germanie, was crowned in his father Fre∣deric his time: vnderstanding then of his death, he went into Italie, and from thence into Pouille, where hee became sicke. His bastard brother Manfroy to raigne peaceably, gaue the Phi∣sitian a summe of siluer to poyson his medicines, where∣of he died but first he made his Testament, and instituted Cor∣radin his sonne, heire of his kingdomes and countries, and was honourably buried. The Pope assembled souldiers to goe against Manfroy, and thinking shortly to obtaine his kingdome, died at Naples sooner then he thought, and was buried in the Church of Saint Laurence. Naucler. S. Lewis returned from beyond the Sea. The Colledge of Sarbone was now instituted and founded at Paris, by Robert brother of S. Lewis.Sarbone instituted. Alexander Pope, 4. of that name, of Campaigne,Alexand. 4. ruled at Rome 7. yeares. The Pope canonized S. Claire. The Hermittes of the order of Saint Augustine,Augustine Hermits. were by this Pope drawne from their Hermitages in woods, vnto
good Townes,The Em∣pire vacant commaunding them to preach and heare Con∣fessions, and gaue vnto the said order, priuiledges, exemptions, and indulgences. He excommunicated Manfroy the bastard, and after made warre vpon him; but the Pope was ouercome, and his Legate imprisoned at Naples. The Archbishop of Rauenna was created Legate Aposto∣like: hee preached the Croisado against Ecclinus, promising eternall life to such as would goe to warre against the Popes enemies. So did Gregorie the 9. against Frederic the 2. The yeare of Christ, 1256. William Count of Holland, fell into a poole, and his horse not being able to get vp, was slaine by the Frisons. After the death of Henry Lantgraue of Hesse, and of Willi∣am Count of Holland, the Electors disagreed. Some elected Al∣phonsus King of Castile. Others, Richard Count of Cornwall, the King of England his brother, and that by the Popes Insti∣gation. Naucler. There was a schisme in the Empire 23. yeares, after Nau∣cler. or 28. after others: and all by the occasion of Popes; and this schisme endured from the yeare, 1245. vntill the yeare 1273. which was the first yeare of the Empire of Rodolphe. The first League of the Switzes. The alliance of Leagues and Cantons in the Countrey of Switze, beganne now. They droue out of their Country many Noble men which were tirants, and committed vniust actions vpon them. So did they defend the poore, the Orphanes and widowes, whereby they became renowmed through all the world, saith Fasci. temp. Ordinances of King Lewis.In this time, S. Lewis king of France as soone as he was re∣turned, made many goodly Lawes and ordinances to hold his people in iustice: Bayliffes, Prouosts, and Sargeants, in theyr duties, that they might not be raueners or eaters of the people, vnder the paine to be put from their offices. He droue from his Court Morrisdauncers and Ieasters, for∣bidding Officers to take gaine, or to take Benefices for theyr
children. Hee ordained that the blasphemers should haue the hotte Iron set in their browes. He went into Affrike, tooke Carthage, and besieged Tunes. The plague fell in his Campe, where he died of a Fluxe of the belley, hauing raigned 44. yeares. His body was carried to bee buried at S. Denis. See E∣mil. Lib. 7. An opposition against the Sects of Mendicants or begging Friars. Guilliam de S. Amour, Doctor of Paris, Chanon of Benuais, flourished in this time. In his Sermons (as himselfe witnesseth) he especially enuied against the hipocrisie of Prelates: saying that that vice was of all most dangerous, wherewith all the Church was infected. He opposed himselfe against Monkes, and aboue all against Mendicants, accusing them that they troubled Churches, and brought out the witnesses of the scrip∣tures, which make mention of Antichrist and his supporters. And applying them to the time present, proued by 39. signes, that begging Friars were false Prophets. He expounded that place of the Gospell: If thou wilt be perfect, goe and sell all that thou possessest, &c. Vpon which place the Mendicants founded their order: And he gaue to know in full disputation, that the place was not meant of actuall pollicie (as Sophisters speake) but of habituall pouertie: that is to say, that Iesus Christ de∣maundeth of vs, not that we should forsake and cast off that which we haue, but that we be readie (when the confession of the name of God, and the glory of Iesus Christ requireth it) to abandon and forsake, not onely that which we possesse, but euen our owne soules: and not onely (as is said in an other place) to leaue their father and mother, but also to hate them,Luk. 14.16. yea our owne liues. Briefly, Iesus Christ would that we should be rea∣die to forsake all, when the confession of his truth requireth it. There are learned people of our age, which say they haue seene foure bookes which he writ, Intituled, a Collection of the Catholike and Canonicke scripture. He writ also a booke Intituled the fiftie markes and signes of false Prophes. Hee writ against Bonauenture, who then was the chiefe Buckler of the begging Friars.
Matheus Paris an English Historiographer, writes that in this same time there was in the schoole of Paris great disputati∣ons against Monkes, which by multitude would needs oppresse and oppugne all the schoole, hauing forged a new booke full of errors and blasphemies, which they then reiected and intitu∣led (Euangelium eternum) that is, the euerlasting Gospell; which they would needs bring into light. But to appease this tumult, there were sixe delegates of all the schoole, which were of the greatest estimation in all the Vniuersitie, amongst which was Guilliam de S. Amour, to send them to Rome vnto the Pope, and shewe the insolencies and blasphemies of those Monkes. The Monkes also sent thither on their part: and af∣ter great contention, their errors were condemned touching their eternall Gospell. But the Pope with certaine Cardinals, Monkes, repressed nothing the tirannie of the begging Friars, thinking it was needfull that such his black gard should be∣come mightie ouer all. These be the words of Matheus Paris, who was in this time. Wee also finde a booke written in this time, intriuled (de periculis mundi) of the daungers of the world, which the Pa∣pists attributed vnto Guilliam de S. Amour, making him alone of that opinion: but it seemeth to haue bin written by many, and conteineth complaines against those new rising Monkes, with an aduertisement vnto the Church, that by them great mischiefes would follow. This S. Amour was condemned an heretike, wherevpon great stirres fell out amongst the schooles at Paris: but to o∣bey the Popes commaundement, Guilliam S. Amour was bani∣shed from France. We heare that some of his bookes are yet at this day in the librarie at Sorbone: and many other Doctors haue since writ∣ten the like, as in our discourse shalbe said. Truth is alwaies banished, yet still getteth the vpper hand of all. Alexander being come to Viterbe, to make peace betwixt the Ʋenetians and Geneuois, died there, and the seate was vacant foure moneths.
Albert the great, and other studious people were at this time at Paris. An Aduertisement. From Siluester the 2. that diuellish Magician, vntil this time 1260. Popes haue raigned as Incarnate diuels in all trumpe∣ries, deceites, oppressions of the good, and manifest tirannies. Their Cardinalls, Legates and Bishops, haue come out from them as Sathans to trouble the world. The greatest Monarkes haue bene tormented by their infernall furies. Examples for all, are the two Emperours, Henry the fourth and fift, the two Fredericks, first and second, and other Princes of the earth. From henceforward, from Innocent the fourth, and Alexander the fourth, the Popes by a new forged Armie,The Popes new souldiers. established and priuiledged by them, they wasted and destroyed all: that is to say, by foure Sects of Mendicant Monkes, (which like true Locusts) deuoured and consumed by their Sophistike doctrine, whatsoeuer was greene of the word of God. From which (like theeues which enter into the sheepfolde by brea∣ches and mines) nothing can bee looked for henceforth, but thefts, robberies, persecutions, and murthers of the true faith∣full, which God gaue and raised vp to maintaine the eternall veritie. Ʋrbain Pope, 4. of that name,Vrbain. 4. French borne at Troy in Campagne, a Monke, of the order of Cysteaux, Patriarke of Ieru∣salem, ruled at Rome three yeares, one moneth, and foure dayes. The Greekes recouered Constantinople, which the French had held 55. yeares. Chron. of the Kings of France, and the Sea of Hist. Vrbain instituted the Feast of the Sacrament,The Feast of Transub∣stantiation. and the Oc∣taues, with Indulgences (whereof he was free) to such as obser∣ued the said Feast. Martin fift, Pope, doubled them, and added yet others to such as fasted the eue, and as went to the Precessi∣on and Communion that day. S. Thomas d' Aquin Iacopin, made the office of the said feast, with the Prose and the Hymne, and sent it to the Pope; who for a recompence of such an inuention, sent him a Doue of sil∣uer, &c. Naucler.
The yeare of Christ, 1263. Vrbaine sent to S. Lewis King of France, that he would send him his brother Charles Count Angiou, and Count de Prouence, with a good Armie, then hee would crowne him King of Sicilie, and giue him Pouille & Ca∣labria. Hee said that the said Kingdome was held of the Ro∣mane Church, and that the king of Sicilie was the Popes man. Ʋrbain caused the Croisado to be preached in France against Manfroy, who occupied the said Sicilia. The said Charles came and marched in battaile against Manfroy, and after against Con∣radin, and ouercame them both, and so obtained the Lands: but the end was miserable. For the Sicilians after, in the yeare 1282. rebelled against him, maintaining the quarell of the king of Arragon, whom they would needs haue for their king. And they marked the doores and gates of whatsoeuer houses the French men lay in, in the Countrey, then at an euening slew them all indifferently, and opened which they knew to be great with childe with the French men, and cast away their fruite, that there might remaine none of that generatiō in that Coun∣trey.The Euensong of Sicilie. This occasion was afterward ordinarily called, The Euen∣song of Sicilie. In this time, Bonauenture Generall of the Friers, wrote two bookes against M. Guilliam de S. Amour. The one of the pouertie of Christ, and the other an Apo∣logie of the poore. The Bishoppricke of Ratisbone was offered vnto him: but he refused it, louing better to follow his studies: and died of the age of 80. yeares. Chron. Abb. Chaplet in∣uented.Vnder this Pope, the Idolatrie of Chaplets was inuented at Amiens in Picardie, called Peter the Hermit. See Peter Viret of the spring of Chapelets. The Souldane made a great Armie in Siria. A Comet seene 3. monethes together. This Pope died at Peruse, and for troubles the seate was vacant 10. monethes. Clement. 4.Clement Pope, fourth of that name, borne at Narbone, rul∣ed  at Rome 3. yeares, 9. monethes, and 21. dayes: before hee was called Hugo Falcodius, hee had bene an aduocate, and was after the king of France his Councellor. After the death of
his wife, he was Bishop of Puy, and after, Archbishop of Nar∣bone; lastly. Cardinall and Bishop of Sabine. Finally,A Legate. by the Pope Ʋrbane hee was sent into England for the reformati∣on of peace, and being in that Legation, was chosen Pope at Peruse, after the death of Ʋrbain. He caused to come info Italie, Charles brother of the king of France, and made him Senator of Rome, and sent two Car∣dinalls into the Church of Laterane, and there crowned him King of Ierusalem and Sicilie: vpon condition notwithstan∣ding, to sweare to pay vnto the Romane Church yearely 40000, peeces of gold, and that he should not receiue the Em∣pire at the hands of the Almaines, no not though they would thrust it vpon him. The Sarrasins came into Spaine and committed a great  massacre there. The yeare of Christ, 1267. Conradin,This was the last Duke of Sanabe. the true and Legiti∣mate King of Sicilie, sonne of Conrade who was sonne of Fre∣deric the second, vanquised in warre by Charles Count d'An∣giou, and was finally taken and disclosed by a Marriner, vnto whom he gaue his Ring in pawne for his passage to Pise, but hee was brought vnto the Count d' Angiou and put in pri∣son: afterward by the Popes Councell he was beheaded, the yeare 1268. Naples with Frederic Duke of Austriche and ma∣ny others. There is great diuersitie in Histories touching the taking of the said Conradin. See the Chro. of the Emperors in the 2. Tome. Iohn Naucler. in the Generation 34. in the 2. volu. See heerevpon Martin Luther, in the booke against the Romane Popedome, inuented by the diuell. This Pope Clement demaunded a certaine Tenth in Al∣maine, Iohn surnamed Teutonicus, Glossator of the Decree,Almaine. and Prouost of S. Stephen d'Alberstat, opposed himselfe against it, and appealed to the next Councell, for which appellation, the said Prouost was excommunicated by the Pope, and depriued of his office. The Sea of Hist. Clement hauing a Nephew which held 3. Benefices Eccle∣siasticall, constrained him to forsake two of them. Naucler.
The said Clement died at Viterbe: and the seate was vacant two yeares. Gregorie. 10.Gregorie Pope, tenth of that name, borne at Plaisance in Lombardie, ruled at Rome foure yeares. Before hee was called Thiband, Archdeacon of Lande, and was then in the parts be∣yond the Sea in the Citie of Acre, when hee was chosen at Ʋi∣terbe. The Cardinalls being in the Conclaue for the election, Iohn Bishop of Port mocking him, said. Come let vs vncouer this house; for the holy Ghost cannot discend & passe through so many couerings. After his election he sought to pacifie the Venetians and the Geneuois. Phillip 3. of that name, surnamed le Hardie, sonne of S. Lewis 44. King of France, raigned 15. yeares. The yeare of Christ 1272. Gregorie made assemble a Councell at Lyons, of all the Barons and Prelates of France, wherein he ruled: and king Phillip met him & gaue him a guard of souldiers, and three strong places about Lions for the suretie of his person. Iohn le Maire. In the said Councell was ordained, that the Pope should be chosen of the Cardinalls incontinent after the others death: and that they should put the Cardinalls in sure prison, wherein they should giue them neither to eate nor drinke vntill they were agreed. This ordinance was then made because the seate had bene vacant almost three yeares before they could agree vpon the election. In the said Councell was also accorded the tenth part of the Church goods to be giuen for sixe yeares to maintaine the warre for the conquest of the Land beyond the sea. Certaine Monkeries defaced.At the said Councell some sorts of Monkeries which li∣ued of Almes were defaced, namely the bretheren des Sacs, the bretheren des pres, the bretheren des blancs manteaux, and many others. Michael Paleologus then the Emperour of Constantinople, came thither for the vnion of the Greeke and Latine Church, which was ratified by the said Emperour. And this was the third time that the Greeke Church was revnited with the La∣tin:
but it was alwaie broken, as yet this third vnion was. During the time of the said Councell, certaine Princes of Tartaria, which had followed the said Emperour Paleologus, re∣ceiued baptisme. Moreouer there was great disputation about the voyage vnto the holy Land (which was the old practise of Popes) but nothing was concluded therein. S. Thomas d' Aquin going to the said Councell of Lions, whervnto he was called, died in the way, of the age of 50. yeares. Bonauenture was created Cardinall by the Pope, but soone after he died. Gregorie 10. returning from France to Rome, and passing by Florence, was required to take away the Interdict (hee had forbidden them all right of warring) but he did nothing therin: And from thence came to Aretinum, where he died. After the Empire had bene long vacant, and that many Ciuill warres had therevpon followed. Rodolphe Count of Habspurge in Suesia,Rodolphe Emperor. was chosen king of the Romanes by the Electors, a man of mean age, and who had valiantly carried himself in the charge he had vnder Frederic 2. He had also bene great Maister in the Court of Ottocarus king of Bohemia, who sought to hinder the election, because he also aspired vnto the Empire. Whilest they were chusing Rodolphe, he held the seate be∣fore Baste. For there were then two factions in the towne. Such as fauoured the Bishop bore a Perroquet. Such as fauoured the Count Rodolphe, carried the Starre. Rodolphe sought to place in the Towne them of the faction of the Starre, which were cha∣sed out. Munster. After he was crowned at Aix, he held certaine assemblies or Imperiall Iourneyes, where the king of Bohemia was declared a Rebell, who (during the vacancie of the Empire) vsurped Austrich, Siria, Carinthia, and Carniota. Rodolphe then with the power of the Princes occupied Austrich, and droue out Ottocaire King of Bohemia, and after constrained him to yeeld himselfe a vassall, and to do homage. Ottocairus according therevnto, required that one thing might bee graunted him, namely that he might not do his homage publikely. For hee
was very proud,Rodolphe. and shamed to bow the knees before him that before had serued him as his great Maister. The Emperour agreed that it should be vnder a Pauillion.Pride mocked. But this Pauillion was made with such industrie, that in drawing it would di∣uide in foure parts. Beeing then vpon his knees and recei∣uing the standerd at the Emperours hand according to the cu∣stome, one broke the coard of the Pauillion, so that it opened on all parts, in such sort that Ottocairus was seene of all dooing homage on his knees. This being come vnto the knowledge of Kunegunde his wife (which he had espowsed during the life of his other wife Margaret) as soone as her husband retur∣ned, mocked him that he had bowed his necke being adorned so pompeously, before him that once had bene his seruant, and so incited him to reuenge himselfe of that despight. The king being thus pricked forward, made warre vpon the Emperour a∣gainst the oath he had taken, & against the aduise of the Prin∣ces of his Countrey. The Emperor met him, put him to flight, and finally a Gentleman of Styria wounded him, and being dis∣poiled of all that hee had, was carried dead to the Towne of Austriche, Anno 1279. and 14. thousand of his people were slaine besides prisoners. After this, Rodolphe entred into the Countrey of Bohemia and wasted it. Pride intermedled with shame and disloyaltie, falleth into confusion and ruine. The Bishop of Olmunce made the peace, and brought things to this passe that Wencelaus son of Ottocaire should take to wife Gertrude the Emperors daughter: & on the other side, Rodolphe the Emperour his sonne, should espowse Agnes the daughter of Ottocaire, Austrich also came vnto the Emperours sonne Albert. The Tartarians. Till this time the Tartarians were vnknowne in Europe. Now they shewed themselues, and finally entred into Hunga∣rie with fiue hundreth thousand men, from thence into Polonia Schlesia, Morauia. See Monstre. lib. 4. Caliphe of Babilon.Some recite that in this time, Haalon King of the Tartari∣ans ouercame the Countries of Persia, and tooke Babilon, then called Baldaca, with the great Caliphe: who in the Mahumetist
lawe is to bee compared vnto the Pope of Rome, in authoritie and treasure. This Haalon hauing the Caalipho prisoner (as is said) in∣uented and ordained in a great mockerie his death in this sort. It is conuenient (saith hee) that that man (speake of the Caliphe) which loued so much gaine,Insatiable cu∣piditie puni∣shed. should be nourished with precious viands, go then and place him in the middest of heaps of gold and precious stones, and let him vse such meates. As then he had certaine time bene kept in great affluence of gold and siluer, and in the middest of these riches, he died with hun∣ger. See Paralip. Ʋrsp. Innocent Pope, fift of that name, borne at Burgongne,Innocent. 5. after Supp. Chron. and Cor. Abb. Or in Lombardie, after Fasci Temp. before called Peter de Tarentaise, Prior Prouinciall of the Ia∣cobins in France, Maister and Doctor in Theologie, Archbi∣shop of Lyons, Cardinall d' Ostia, and great Penitenciary of the Pope. See how these Grashoppers Mendicants, enter alreadie in∣to power to appoint ouer them the King Abadon, as is spo∣ken, Apocalips. 19. Whilest this man was Bishop of Ostia and Cardinall (whose office it is to consecrate the Pope) Bonauenture Friar was also Cardinall and Bishop of Albe. This Peter or Innocent,Disorders that were in Italie. beeing chosen Pope, came soone after to Rome. Where hauing bene crowned in the Church of S. Peter, that hee might rest at his pleasure, he sent Embassadors, men of great authoritie which commaund them of Tuscane, (which had conspired to destroy the Pisans) and the Geneuois and Ʋenetians, beeing at dead∣ly foode to lay downe their Armes vpon paine of excom∣munication. The Embassadors of Charles King of Sicilie were also there present; by meanes of whose authoritie, hee hoped things should more easily haue such issue as they desi∣red▪ The Tuscanes straight did what was commaunded them. And aboue all, the Florentines: which also for that cause he de∣clared and absolued of the Interdict which Gregorie his prede∣cessor had published against them. But the Geneuois & Ʋene∣tian (whose hearts had of long time beene inueterated) consu∣med
one an other by losses and mutuall victories: which not∣withstanding Innocent would haue made consent vnto that he pretended, if he had longer liued, he tooke the matter so much to heart. But he dyed sixe moneths and two daies after he was chosen Pope, the same yeare of his predecessour Gregorie, and was buried in the Church of Laterane. This saith Carsulanus, al∣though he had determined to do many things, yet did nothing worthie of memorie, because he was preuented by death. This Pope (as Platina saith) displeased much the secular Priests:Law for the buriall of Clement the fourth. be∣cause that being at Viterbe after he had heard the processe that was betwixt them and the Iacobins touching the sepulcure of Clement the fourth, hee ordeined by sentence that his bodie should be buried by the said Iacobins, Rodolphe. Adrian Pope, fift of that name, borne at Genes, of the house of Tolisques, before called Othobonus, was created Pope at Rome, in the Pallace of Lateran, after the death of Innocent his vncle, hauing bene ordeined by him Cardinall, Deacon of Saint Adrian, and sent into England with large power to le∣uie a great summe of money. But as hee sought to appease certaine discordes betwixt the King and his Barons, that hee might dispatche his businesse the more easilie, hee was clapt vp in prison by the Londiners, but finally deliuered againe. The yeare of our Lorde, 1266. hee helde a Sinode in Northumberland, and an other at London, whether resorted a great number of Bishoppes and Priests. There after they had brought to such estate as he thought good the things appertai∣ning to the Popedome, hee published certaine lawes, which in time to come England should vse in such things as concerned Popery. He declared wicked all such Bishops as had rashly fol∣lowed the Princes part against King Henry the third: which yet were absolued by him, partly by gifts & presents, and part∣ly because he was constrained vnto a quicke transportation to the Pope of Rome. Being then created Pope of Rome, he tooke incontinently his way towardes Ʋiterbe, and sought to bring into Italie the Emperor Rodolphe, to diminish the power of Charles King
of Sicilie, (this was hee which a little before they had lifted vp into that roome against all iustice and equitie) who at that time did his pleasure and as he would at Rome. But Rodolphe being wrapped in warre against the Bohemians, could not satisfie A∣drians request. As for Charles meaning to flie the enuie against him, transported into Achaia all his forces which he had prepa∣pared to make warre: to the end by that meane to make a way to be Emperour of Constantinople. Adrian had a will (saith Platina) to cause that all Seignories belonging vnto the Church should come into great assurance against such as oppressed them: and to reduce into an other forme the constitution of his predecessour Gregorie,The ordi∣nance tou∣ching the shutting vp of Cardinalls. touching the shutting vp of Cardinalls at the Popes election: But death hindered his enterprises, and opposed it selfe against the great∣nes of his courage. What could he do (saith Wicelius Apostate of the truth) that was a Pope but of fortie dayes? For be de∣ceased at Viterbe, the yeare 1276. before he could be consecra∣ted, and was enterred in the Couent of Friars the fourth day of his Popedome, and the seat was vacant about 28. dayes. Many debates and contentions happened amongst the Bishops and Pastors against the Mendicant Monkes which troubled Churches; because whether Bishops & Priests would or no, they would ascend into Pulpits to preach. Amongst such as complained of them besides Guilliam d'Amour (of whom we spake before) there was Bernard the Glossator of the Decre∣talls, Godfrey des Fountaines, Henry de Gaud, and many o∣thers. Laurent an English man, Doctour of Paris, in this time maintained the opinion of Guilliam de Saint Amour, and writ against the Monkes a Booke conteining an admoniti∣on against false Prophets, and an other by which he defendeth the said de Saint Amour. The Booke that the bogging Friars set out Of the eternall and spirituall Gospell, to ect the true Gospell of our Lord, was publikely burnt: and to couer their filthinesse and impudencie, they saide that a certaine Monke (which long time before was dead) had made it.
Iohn. 22.Iohn, 22. of that name of Portugal, borne in the Towne of Lisbone, making profession of Phisicke, called before Peter of Portugall,He was called Petrus His∣panus. of a Cardinall and Bishop of Tusoule, was created Pope. This Pope although he was accounted a very learned man, yet because he had not such knowledge of things that hee had to gouerne, as was requisite: and also because he was of incon∣stant and mutable maners, as Platina saith, hee brought much more domage vnto the Popedome, then honour or profit. For he did many things, wherein he shewed himselfe astonished and light. There was one onely point wherein he was worthy praise; that is, that willingly hee helped many young people which had desire to profit in good Letters, in giuing them sil∣uer and Ecclesiastical Benifices, and aboue all, such as were pres∣sed with pouertie. The Vene∣tians molest thē of the Mar∣quesdome of Ancone.The Venetians then did greatly molest them of the Mar∣quesdome of Ancone, because they made traffique of Mar∣chandise into Dalmatia, without paying any portage to the Ve∣netian: the Pope defended them not as he ought, they beeing the Churches subiects: for hee was readie inough in words, but when it came to lay hand to worke, he had neither courage nor hardinesse. They of Ancone seeing themselues destitute of the Popes succours, taking courage, made a sallie vpon the Venetians which had besieged their Towne, and droue them away after hauing greatly indomaged them. In all things this Pope accustomed not to vse any other Councell but of Iohn de Gauiette, by the will and direction of whom all things were gouerned: for that by his meanes hee was chosen Pope. He sent Embassadors as well towards Mi∣chael Paleologne, as to Westerne Kings, exhorting them in his name that they would make Peace one with another, and take Armes against the Sarrasins and other enemies of Christian re∣ligion: which thing if Paleologne would not do, and if he kept not the vnion that he had accorded vnto, Iohn would giue his Empire vnto Charles king of Sicilie. This Pope promised himselfe long life, yea he foretold it
by the Starres, and affirmed before euerie one that he should liue long. But as he affirmed such a folly, in the presence of his people, a new Vault (Valerius calls it a playing Hall: Stella, a rich and precious Chamber) which he had builded in his Pal∣lace at Viterbe, fell suddenly the fourth day following, the yeare 1277. And the seuenth day after the said ruine, being found miserably slaine betwixt the stone and the wood, was enterred in the great Church, the 8. moneth of his Popedome. He knew by experience how great was the vanitie of his Di∣uination. The Sea was vacant by the space of sixe monethes by the meanes of debate amongst the Cardinalls. Hee writ certaine Problems, following therein Aristotle, the Canons and rules of Phisicke. The treasure of the poore, and certaine Epistles. The doctrine of the Waldois. After that Waldo and his company were driuen from Lyons, one company drew towards Lombardie, where they multiplied greatly: In so much that their doctrine began to be dispearced through Italie, and came euen to Sicilie: As the Patents of Frederic the second giuen against them when he raigned, wit∣nesseth. By the recitall of such as writ against them, and likewise by one Reinerius, who liued and and writ a litle after this time, it may be gathered that this was their doctrine. That we must beleeue the scriptures onely in that which concerneth saluation: and that no other thing ought to bee receiued but that which God commaundeth vs. That there is but one onely Media∣tor, and therefore we must not inuocate Saints. That there is no purgatorie; but that all men iustified by Christ, goe to eternall life; and such as do not beleeue, goe to eternall death. And that there is neither third nor fourth place. They receiue and allowe two Sacraments. Baptisme, and Communion. They said that all Masses, and chiefly such as were inuented for the dead, were abhominable and damned, and therefore ought to be abolished. All humane traditions ought to be reiected without hol∣ding.
them for necessarie to saluation. That singing, and reci∣tall of the officiall, and fastings tyed to certaine dayes, super∣fluous feasts, the difference of meates, as well of degrees and or∣ders of Priests, Monkes, and Nuns; as blessings and consecrati∣ons of creatures, vowes, pilgrimages, and all the confusion and great heap of ceremonies before inuēted ought to be abolshed. They denied the Popes supremacie, & aboue all the power he had vsurped vpon pollicies. And they admitted no degrees but Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. That the Romane seate is very Babilon, and that the Pope is the fountaine of all euils at this day. That the marriage of Priests is good and necessarie in the Church. That such as heare the word of God and haue a right know∣ledge thereof, are the true Church: to which Iesus Christ hath giuen the keyes to cause Sheepe to enter, and driue away Wolues. See briefly the doctrine of the Waldois, which the enemies haue impugned, and for which (by their owne witnesse) they were persecuted in this time. Mathias Illiricus in the Catalogue which he gathered of the witnesses of the truth, saith that he hath by him the consul∣tations of certaine Aduocates of Auignon. Also of three Arch∣bishops, of Narbone, of Arles, and of Aix, and likewise of the Bi∣shop of Alban to roote out the Waldois, written past 300. yeares: by which it appeareth that then and before there were a great number of the faithfull heere and there dispearced through∣out all France. It may also be collected by the consultations of the said Archbishops, that as the number was very great, the persecution was very cruell. For in the end of them, there is thus found written. Who is so new in France that is ignorant of the condemnation of these Heretikes Waldois made of long time so iustly? A thing so famous, so publike as hath cost so great expences, sweats, and trauells for the Catholique, and hath bene sealed with so many condemnations and deathes of those wicked Infidells, can it be called into doubt?
It appeareth then what a butcherie in this time was made of the faithfull, and what crueltie the supporters of the Ro∣mane Antechrist exercise against the good. Nicholas 3. borne at Rome, of the house of Vrsins,Nicholas. 3. called be∣fore Iohn de Gauette, (the election being deferred vntill the sixt moneth, not wthout great debate and contentions amongst the Cardinalls) occupied the papall seate. Charles king of Sicilie, as Senator of Rome,The charge of the Con∣claue. had the charge of the Conclaue, who insisted much that some of the French Nation might be chosen. After then that Nicholas had taken possession of the Popedome, meaning to diminish the credit and power of Charles, tooke from him the Vicariatship of Tus∣cane, and filled all Italie with vprores and tumults of warre: and to the end he might prouide well for his businesses,The kingdom of Sicilie redemanded by the Pope. he perswa∣ded Peter King of Arragon (these be old Popish trickes) to re∣demaund the Kingdome of Sicilie, shewing him that by right of heritage it belonged vnto him, because of Constance his wife. Which counsell pleased Peter well. But what fruite wrought the counsell of this S. Peter? Peter hauing gotten into his power a puissant Armie for the sea, came vnto Sardeigne, and there attended till there was some stirre in Sicilie.The treason of the Siciliās. For the Sicilians hauing coniured against Charles, and the French had assigned a day to sley them all, yea without hauing respect vn∣to Sexe, or condition of any person, so soone as the sound of Bell should bee heard at euening, as shall bee said heere∣after. But this cruell and horrible acte was not executed in the time of Nicholas, but vnder Martin the fourth of that name, his successor. Nicholas transported to himselfe the dignitie of the Senator of Rome, which Clement the fourth had giuen vnto e foresaid King Charles,The Exarchat of Rauenna brought vnder the Pope. and ordained for a perpetuall Edict that from thence forth no King or Prince should dare to demaund such an estate, or to take such a charge vpon him. By the disloyaltie of this Pope it came to passe that all Flammina with the towne, of Bolongne it selfe, and the Exarchate of Rauenna, (which things had long time bene in the Seignorie and domination of the Emperors) were reduced vnder the puissance of the Ro∣mish Sinagogue.
And besides, hee alone tooke vpon him the charge (as Stella saith) of the office of Senator: which the Church had accusto∣med to giue vnto Kings and Princes. The Popes pleasures.He inriched the Towne of Rome with new edifice; and amongst others, he builded an house very commodious for S. Peter: and a Parke for Hares or Conneys, which hee enuiro∣ned with high walles. Wherein he himselfe often hunted. He reedified the Churches of S. Peter and S. Paul, which fell with age. Hee atchieued and ended a certaine house in Laterane, which had long time before bene commenced. Hee builded from the bottome to the top the Church called Sancta Sancto∣rum, and set there the Apostles keyes in siluer chaines. When this Hypocrite sung Masse, the teares fell from his eyes. Hee carried such fauour vnto the Friars, that hee declared certaine doubtes which were in the rule of the Sect, by a Decretall Epi∣stle. He made many ordinances for the profit and vtilitie of the Cleargie, (not of Christian people) and made many Cardi∣nalls of the order of begging Friars. He droue from him cer∣taine Notaires, commaunding vnder paine of Excommunica∣tion, that in what place souer, Magistrates should bee but An∣nalls for a yeare. Many reprooued him for that hee had made his Nephew called Berthand,The Pope in∣riched his Nephew. Count or Earle of Romagnole, and had sent Latin Cardinall Iacobin his other Nephew, or rather Bastard, Legate into Tuscane. For Platina, Stella, & others say, that he loued his owne too much. In so much that whatsoeuer hee got from others, hee gaue it without reason or measure. For he tooke by force from certaine Romane Gentlemen, their Castles, and gaue them to his friends, and amongst others, one called Surien. Papal subtilty.After he had euery where set vp the Gibellins, (a sort of mu∣tinous and rebellious people) into their first estate, to the end they might maintaine his tirannies, he placed in Florence as in other places, Magistrates at his pleasure, and many other do∣mages he did vnto them. This Pope had also determined to haue made two Kings of the house of Ʋrsini, and to haue placed one in Tuscane, and an other in Lombardie. But as he purposed to put all these
things in effect being in the Towne called Sutry,The Popes death the cause of great good. he was taken with an Apoplexie of which he died suddenly and without speaking, the yeare of our Lord, 1291. And after some, the 4. of his Popedome, although by his good complection it see∣med he would haue liued much longer. Some say his death was foretold by one which sawe a great Invndation or ouerflowing of the Riuer of Tiber. Som say also he engendred vpon a Concubine of his a bastard,A monstrous Popes bastard whose haire and nailes were like a Beares. See what Iohn de Noyan saith in his Illustrations of Beda. William Durand a subtill man, made at this time his booke Intituled Rationale diuinorum officiorum. Albert the great, Bishop of Ratisbone, died in this time. Martin the 4. of that name,Martin. 4. borne in France in the Towne of Tours, named before Simon, and Cardinal Priest of S. Cecile, ruled 2. yeares and 8 monethes. Being chosen by the French Cardinalls which then were in greatest number, would not be crowned at Viterbe, because he tooke that Towne to be interdicted for a rowte they made against the Cardinalls. For they of Ʋiterbe following one cal∣led Richard Hanniball, Captaine of all such as tooke part with the Italians, entered into the Conclaue, tooke the Cardinalls and put them in prison, after hauing not onely dispised, but also giuen the chase to all them of the house of Vrsins. This Pope Martin then being come into the old towne, which commonly is called Oruieto, vsed all the solemnities and created 8. Cardinalls that same day,Charles S. Lewis his brother who was made Ki. of Sicilie by Clement. 4. that he might be strongest when he came vnto combat. But hee not onely receiued very courteously the King Charles comming towards him, but also yeelded him the dignitie of Senator, whereof he was depriued by Nicholas. This euery man found not good, for that it seemed it should stirre vp great seditions in the Towne, seeing the Vr∣sins were alreadie returned, and such as were of Hanniballs facti∣on chased away. For Charles was a great aduersarie of the Ʋr∣sins, for the hatred he conceiued against Nicholas. Yet Martin subtillly casting his affaires, had in great estimation Mathew d'Aquasporta, of the order of his bretheren Friars, Cardinall
and Bishop of Port, of the house of Vrsins. This Pope Martin published sentence of excommunica∣tion against Peter King of Arragon, who ordeined an Army by Sea to come into Sicilie against Charles, and exposed his Kingdome for a pray to the first that could get it, declaring his subiects absolued of the oath of fidelitie which they had pro∣mised him, naming him an vsurper of Ecclesiasticall goods, and leuied an armie against him, of such as had taken the Croi∣sado. All the pastime of Popes and their supporters, is to stirre vp warre and dissention amongst the Princes of this world. Peter de Ar∣ragon ex∣cōmunicated.Yet Peter making no account of all this, obtained the king∣dome of Sicilie with the helpe of Paleologus Emperour of Con∣stantinople: who was also excommunicated, as making no ac∣count of that he had promised at the Councell of Lions aboue. The French slaine all in an houre in Sicilie.Moreouer, the Sicilians not being able longer to beare the pride and whoredomes of the French: at the perswasion of Iohn Prochita, coniured against Charles, and slew them all at the sound of a Bell, without hauing any regard to Sexe, and from thence came the Prouerbe, when one wisheth the death of many, that they may say, The Euensong of Sicilie, as hath beene touched a litle before. Besides, this Martin amongst other acts worthy of a Pope, graunted to the Romanes that they might chuse two Sena∣tors of the Nobilitie, and excommunicated Paleologus Empe∣rour of Greece. He made warre against them of Forley, and graunted many priuiledges vnto Begging Friars, which hee knew to be like horses prepared vnto the battle, and all this was still to munite and fortifie the more his tirannie. But as once he  was taking his ordinarie refection with his Captaines, (as Casu∣lanus reciteth it) the yeare of our Lord, 1285. he was taken with a secret malladie of which hee died, after hauing said hee endured much griefe: although the Phisitians founde not in him any signe of death, and was buried at Peruse. Some Authors, which Thomas Cooper one very learned followeth in his abridgement of Chronicles, haue left in wri∣ting, that the first yeare of his Popedome, hee tooke as the
Prouerbe is, to bread and to potte,Martin succeeded in the concubine of his prede∣cossor. the concubine of his Prede∣cessor Nicholas. But for feare such an accident should happen vnto him as did vnto the other, namely, that if he had a childe, it should be like vnto a Beare, he commanded that all the Beares which had bene painted in the Pallace by a Pope of the house of Vrsins, should be defaced and cleane taken away: because he knew well that the figure of things vpon which women think when they conceiue their children, oftentimes is certaine im∣printed in them. It appeares well that this Pope was herein very expert, but he tooke no heed that such a monster shewed to the world, what sanctetie there is in Popes singlenesse. Giles of Rome, Bishop of Bourges,Egidius de Roma. disciple of S. Thomas d'A∣quin, liued in this time. Phillip le Bell 45. King of France, and of Nauarre,The Pallace of Paris. raigned after his father Phillip the third, the yeare 1225. The Pallace was sumptuously builded in the Ile which Sene maketh. Eu∣guerrant de Marigni, the Kings Councellor, and President des Finances, had the charge thereof. In this Pallace the Court of Parliament had his seate distributed into chambers. The king dwelt there. The Colledge of Nauarre was builded by the Queene Ioane, at the entry of the raigne of this king. Honorius, 4. of that name, borne at Rome,Honorius. 4. of the house of Sabellius, which is a noble race, called before Iames, and beeing Cardinall Deacon, after he had bene chosen by the Cardinals, tooke possession of the Popedome, and ruled 2. yeares. Naucl. He had a brother called Pandulphe,Pandulphe Senator of Rome. which was then Senator of Rome, who greatly punished theeues, homicides, and other such like. This Pope dwelt in Mount Auentine, where he builded a new house, and incited many others to do the like. He excommunicated Peter King of Arragon,Peter of Ar∣ragon ex∣cōmunicated. who then occupied the Kingdome of Sicilie against Charles, and confir∣med the Interdict published against him by his predecessor Martin, because hee would not permit that the Popes seate should enioy that Region.
The Florentines and they of Luke obtained by siluer of Rodolphe the Emperour, libertie for their Common-wealthes. The Florentines gaue 6000. skutes, and the Luquets 12000. skutes. Venice Du∣cats.The Venetians also obtained licence to forge Ducats of Gold at Venice. The Geneuois got themselues franchis and libertie. Chro. of the Emp. Tom. 2. This Emperor was noted of couetousnesse. A childe called Rodolphe, was martired at Berne by the Iewes, whereby they of Berne put the Iewes to death. And therefore the Emperour Rodolphe assembled thirtie thousand souldiers and besieged Berne, but profited nothing, as is aboue said. The Colledge of Collets at Paris, was founded by Iohn Col∣let Priest, Cardinall of S. Cecilie, Legate in France, borne in Beauoisin, saith the Sea of Histories. He mooued a maruellous warre against Guy Feltron, who occupied the Townes of Flaminia, and ouercomming him, hee annexed vnto the seignorie of Rome all that Countrey. This Pope confirmed the Sect of the Augustines, which was not yet receiued at Paris, but was by many impugned, be∣cause it was not well allowed by the Councell of Lateran, and graunted them many priuiledges. And besides hee would that the Carmes leauing their coloured apparell with barres, should take the white habit,The Carmes called the bretheren of the Virgin Marie. and ordained they should be na∣med the bretheren of the Virgin Marie. After which good∣ly deeds, he liued not long: but being dead, the yeare 1288. hee was carried from the Church of S. Sabine in the Mount A∣uentine, into the Church of S. Peter, where hee was buried with great pompe. After the death of Honorius, the seate was vacant tenne moneths. For the Cardinalls beeing in the Conclaue, died vp∣on sudden malladies, euen when great earthquakes terrified them, and so the election was deferred vntill an other time. Nicholas. 4.Nicholas Pope, 4. of that name, Minister generall of the Friars, called Ierome, borne at Marke d'Ancone, ruled at Rome
foure yeares and one moneth, Naucler. or 6. yeares, 8. moneths, and 16. dayes, after some. He succeeded the foresaid Honorius 10. moneths after his death: yet the Cardinalls were not all of one opinion. This Pope superstitiously deuout dwelt nigh vnto the Church called S. Marie the greater,Apoc. 8.9.10. or ad praesepe because they forged that lie, that the Crib where the Virgin Marie laid Iesus Christ after hee was borne into the world is there, and adorned it with edifices and rich paintings. Hee created Cardinalls of all sorts of Monkes, for the profit of the King∣dome of Abaddon: to the end they might be light-horses, pre∣pared to the battaile, and might haue teeth like Lyons, & tailes like Scorpions, wherewith they might hurt men. For as Pla∣tina sayeth, he loued all alike, and thought not himselfe any thing more bound to his parents and kinsfolke, then vnto o∣thers. Hee caused the Croisado to be preached, and sent at his owne charges many souldiers into Asia to keepe the Towne of Ptolemais. Supp. Chron. There hapned in his time many ciuill warres, murders, dissentions, and brawles at Rome, vppon his occasion, giuing more countenance to the one part then to the other. And this contention endured the space of two yeares and an halfe. Fasci. temp. Many Hauens of the sea were lost, the Christians were rooted out of Ierusalem and Siria,The occasion of the discord betwixt the Venetians, Geneuois and Pisans. by a long and great dissenti∣on of the Venetians, Geneuois, & Pisans, which then were (for Communalties) the mightiest by Sea. It is said their contenti∣on was for an Abbey, which each of them said to be theirs: and this quarrell endured thirtie yeares. In so much that the Popes, Alexander the fourth, Ʋrbain the fourth, Clement the fourth, and the Kings of Fraunce and Sicilie, were greatly bu∣sied to agree them, and yet did no good. In the meane while the Empire of Constantinople was vsurped by others, and the French and Italians cast out of Greece. The Ports of Tyre and Ptolemais were also taken from the aforesaid Conten∣dants.
The last yeare of the Empire of Rodolphe, Charles Prince of Salerne, and sonne of Charles King of Sililie, was deliuered from the prisons of the King of Arragon: and after came to Rome, and on the day of Pentecost was crowned King of Si∣cilie  by the Pope Nicholas, and absolued from the oathe hee had made to the King of Arragon. See the Historie of France. The yeare of Christ 1291. three thousande Christians were slaine by the Sarrazens in the Countrey of Syria: the rest for feare retired. Chron. Euseb. Acha, according to Naucl. was taken by the Souldan, with fifteene other Townes, twelue Castles, and a great number of Christians slaine: and this happened by the dissention of the Christians, and rashnesse of such as were Crossed saith Fascic. tempo. There was mortall warre betwixt the Geneuois and they of Pise, for the Ile of Corsike: but finally the Pisans were vanquished vpon the sea, and more then twelue or sixteene thousand men slaine, with a losse of fortie eight Gallies. Fasci. Temp. And other ships besides them were sunke and drowned. Suppl. Chron. The Tartarians got hold of the kingdome of Constantinople and a great part of that Empire. The same. Nicholas Pope, dyed of griefe that all things happened not after his wish, seeing so manifold calamities all ouer, and espe∣cially at Rome. The Cardinals after his death retired to Peruse, that their election might be more sure: but in two yeares and three moneths they could not accord. Suppl. Chron. Rodolphe the Emperour dyed also the yeare of his age 73. of our saluation 1291. & of his Empire 18. He had for his wife Anne Countesse of Hohemberg: which was buried at Basle, with her sonne Herman, who was drowned in Rhene. Adolphe Emperor. Adolphe Count of Nassau, was chosen Emperour by cer∣taine of the Electors, and Albert Duke of Astrishe by other: yet Adolphe was crowned at Aix the Chappell. His brother who was Archbishop of Magunce helped him much. He raigned sixe yeares, and after was deposed by the Electors; For besides that
he was not puissaunt enough in domestical faculties to sustaine that Imperiall dignitie,Adolphe. he also despised the Princes of the Em∣pire, and dignified diuer without merite. He committed adul∣terers, violated Virgines, Nunnes and Widowes: he enterpri∣sed warre against Fraunce, because of the kingdome of Arles: but he executed no memorable thing, sauing that he ledde an Armie into Thuringe and Misne, to pacifie contentions be∣twixt Albert Lantgraue of Thuringe, and his sonne Dietere and others. Celestine fift of that name,Celestine. 5. an Esermen by Nation (which is a place nigh the Towne of Sulme) by profession an Heremite, and before called Peter Moron: after that briberies of the Car∣dinalls which had endured the space of two yeares, had taken ende, by the fauour of Charles the second of that name King of Naples, and of the Cardinall Latin, was declared Pope. Incontinently after his election he went to Aigle, and cau∣sed to come before him all the Cardinalls, and created new, to the number of twelue, amongst which there were two Her∣mites. Ptolomie and Laques haue written, that at his installing were two hundreth thousand men. In the first Consistory he held (saith Christian Masseus) as he went about to reforme the Romane church,Rome can a∣bide no refor∣mation. to the ende the Cleargy therof might serue for an example to others, he incur∣red so the maleuolence & indignation of many, that grinding their teeth against him, they called him sot, and dotard. One of these companions called Benet, suborned an other, who making a crany or hole in his Chamber, many nights cried as it had bin an Angel from heauen. Celestine, Celestine, renounce thy Papa∣cie: For that charge exceedeth thy Forces. Some also in the day time counselled him to giue ouer his Popedome, and prouide for his saluation. The king Charles was aduertised of these things,He was too simple for a Pope. & getting their Pope to come to him, he praied him as much as was possi∣ble, that he would not reiect such a dignity which was giue him from heauen: wherevnto he answered: I wil do what God will. As hee returned from Naples, it may bee hauing no rest in his conscience, on the Vigile of Saint Luce, he dismissed
himselfe of that charge,Adolphus. and hasted to returne into his Hermi∣tage.An ordinance to giue ouer the Pope∣dome. All this rehearseth Masseus: yet first he made a constituti∣on by the consent of all▪ that it should be lawfull for a Pope to giue ouer such a charge. Which constitution Boniface 8. his suc∣cessor, a man subtill and malicious, confirmed and placed if in the 6, booke of his Decretalls. Moreouer the said Boniface his successor fearing that the people despising him would cleaue vnto Celestine, he caused him to be put in close prison, where he kept him euen till his death. He died then in prison, the yeare of our Lord, 1295. the 10. day of May, two yeares and fiue mo∣neths after he had bene chosen Pope. The order of Celestines.The Sect of Monkes called Celestines, had their name and originall of him. Arlot general of the order of Friars, who made the Concor∣dances vpon the Bible, liued in this time. Abb. Trit. Boniface. 8.Boniface, 8. of that name, borne in Campania in the Towne of Anagnia, called before Benet de Gauete, one of the chiefe Councellors of Celestine his predecessor, beeing at Naples, was thrust into his place by a maruellous treason. Being Cardinall, Priest of S. Martin in the Mountaines, he desired so to come vnto the Papall dignitie, that he left nothing behind, either of ambition or fraud, that he thought might bring his purpose to passe. Againe, hee was so arrogant, that he despised almost all men in respect of himselfe. Intrauit vt vulpes reg∣nauit vt Leo mortuus est vt Canis.This is he of whom it is commonly spoken; That he entred as a Foxe, raigned as a Lyon, and died as a dogge. For it was he that sollicited Celestine to depose himselfe, and so hee entered like a Foxe; he gouerned like a Lyon, in so much that hee was so arrogant and cruell to the end: so that he called himselfe Lord of all the world: but he died like a dogge. For his end was miserable, and all his deeds were reprooued, as may be seene by his Historie. He said (as Marius witnesseth) that he shut Celestine in prison not for any enmitie towards him, but for feare the au∣thors of sedition by his conduction should do him and the Ro∣mane Church any domage.
But who will not say that this Boniface was an horrible monster, and an ignorant person, hauing circumuented,Albert. de∣spoiled, and finally murdred in prison a simple man, which was his father? After that the Princes of Almaine had chosen Albert Duke of Austrich, Adolphe hauing on his side Otho Duke of Baui∣ers Raoul Count Palatin, and certaine Imperiall Cities, gaue battaile against Albert nigh Spire, which was sharpe and cruell, wherein Adolphus was slaine, the yeare of his Empire, 6. or 8. after some. Albert Duke of Austrich, sonne of Rodolphe the Emperor,Albert. was againe chosen by the Electors, and crowned at Aix the  Chapple, the yeare, 1298. Hee gaue the gouernment of the Duchie of Austrich to his sonne Rodolphe, and gaue him in mar∣riage Blanch the sister of Phillip king of France. He made many warres. That against the Bishop of Salisbu∣rie, was for certaine Salt-wells. For this Bishop being prouo∣ked by Albert, caused to be destroyed the place where the Salt was made. The Emperor who could not be ouercome, was im∣poysoned: but the Phisitians gaue him such remedies, that the venome came out at his mouth and nosthrills. The force thereof was so great that it wasted one of his eyes, and hee was called Borgne. Hee was a magnanimous and valiant Prince. He demaunded of Boniface to be crowned, but he refused him, saying hee was vnworthy of the Empire, because hee had slaine his naturall Lord in battaile. And the said Boniface hol∣ding a Crowne vpon his head, and a Sworde at his side, answe∣red: I am Caesar. The yeare 1298. Boniface published the sixt booke of Decretalls, and sent them to the Students of Bolongne, and to other Vniuersities, commanding them to vse them in all iudge∣ments and schooles. This proud and arrogant Pope,The sixt of Decretalls. ordained that all king of the earth which would not hold their Kingdomes of his sanc∣tetie or rather tirannie, should bee excommunicated and de∣posed.
He excommunicated Phillip king of France,Phillip king of France, excommuni∣cated. because he would not suffer his money to be carried out of his kingdome, and cursed both him and all his, euen to the fourth generation, yea with his reliques and crosses. He would not confirme the Emperour Albert, whom hee had alreadie reiected twise or thrise, but vpon this condition, that he would occupie the kingdome of France, and depose Phillip. Alphonsus of Arragon. The Friars Vado in pace.He declared Alphonsus king of Arragon absolued, and gaue him the kingdome of Sardeigne, vnder certaine conditions. Iohn Duns, surnamed the Scot, a Frier, called the subtil Doc∣tor, was in this time. He died of an Apoplexie. Some say hee was buried aliue. Supp. Chron. Dinus the Legist, Petrus de bella pertica, Iacobus de arena, Io∣hannes de sancto, Geminiano Iacobin, Ihones Andrea, and Dantes Aliger Florentin, were in this time. The first Iubile.The yeare of Christ, 1300. this Pope instituted a Iubile: giuing full remission of all sinnes to such as from an hundreth to an hundreth yeares would visit by vow of Pilgrimage, the Churches of S. Peter and S. Paul in the Citie of Rome. He then celebrated the first Iubile, and opened the Faire for indulgen∣ces, and made them serue euen for such as were in purgatorie. Agrip. de vanita. scien. Fratricelli.Such as they called in Italie Fratricelli, are condemned and persecuted. Historiographers say, that they vsed carnall pleasure, contrarie to the honestie of marriage: and this they did in the night time after they had celebrated their misteries. Supp. Chron. One called Aerman, chiefe amongst them, was vnburied 20. yeares after his death at Ferrare, (although before hee was ac∣counted as a Saint) and his bones were burnt. A woman cal∣led Guillaume. which was very renowned, and her husband An∣dre, were also vnburied, and their bones burnt. The Chroniclers rehearse how those of this Sect were dis∣closed, namely, by a Marchant of Millain called Conrad, whose wife in the night time haunted these assemblies, and that the candles being put out, they abused one an other brutally, and
such or like, which haue rather an appearance of affable then of a true narration. This Pope nourished discords & the dissentions which were amongst the factions of Italie, and sought alwaies to maintaine them. He prohibited that the Cleargie should pay no tribute to Princes, without his leaue & licence. He gloried in his pride to be the key-keeper of heauen; and published that hee ought not to be iudged of any person, no not though he led an infinit number of soules into hell with him: because it is lawfull for him to do all things. O Infernall Decree, and execrable blasphemie. He eleuated his parents into dignities: two of his Ne∣phewes very young he made Cardinalls: also his Vncle, Hee made some, Counts or Earles, and left them great treasures, by meanes of which, after they would auenge his death. Naucler. He depriued two Cardinalls Colonnois, Peter and Iames,He raigned as a Lyon. of their Benefices, yea and of their fathers goods: because that du∣ring Celestins life they had written that he was no lawful Pope, but that Celestine was he. He imputed also vnto them, that they had pilled the treasure of the former Popes. In a full Councell he excommunicated Sarra the said Car∣dinalls Vncle, and honourable Prince, with all the Collonois. Supp. Chron. He exercised such enmitie against the Gibellins, that vn∣derstanding that some of them were retired to Genes, he himself went thither also; to the end to ouerthrowe them altogether. And as one day vpon an Ashwednesday hee gaue Ashes vnto the people, according to the custome, Porchat Archbishop of the town, presented himselfe before him (but he vnderstood of many that he was of the faction of the Gibellins) falling on his knees, with his head vncouered: which when Boniface marked, without hauing any regard to the day, or to the place, or to the people present, or to religion, became angry against the Arch∣bishop, & casting a great sort of Ashes in his eies, said, Remem∣ber that thou art a Gibellin, and that with the Gibellins thou shalt bee brought to ashes; and straight depriued the Archbi∣shop of his dignitie: although afterwards he remitted him into his former estate. Plat. & Cor. Abb.
But being ingratefull for the good (saith Iohn Marie) that his predecessors had receiued of France,Note a deuel∣lish arrogancy he rose vp in such pride against the King Phillip, that it were an hard thing to beleeue. He sent to signifie vnto the king, in maner of a commaunde∣ment by the Bishop of Appaine his Legate, that incontinent∣ly and without delay he should prepare himselfe to go beyond the sea. Vnto which thing then the King could not well har∣ken, for the great warres hee had against the Flemmings. The Legate seeing that he could not obtaine an answere accor∣ding to his appetite, he began to vse great menaces, saying that if he did not obey the Pope, he would depriue him of his king∣dome: by which two rigorous words, the King beeing much grieued, caused the said Legate to be detained a prisoner. But when these things came to the notice of the proud Pope, hee dispatched the Archdeacon of Narbone, with Letters of com∣maund, forbidding the King, that in no case he should enter∣meddle to take any subsidie vpon the lands and reuenewes of the Church, (which thing King Phillip le bel had bene constrai∣ned to doo, because of great warres that he sustained for the good and defence of the Kingdome) and moreouer that for the Kings contumacie, and for that he had detained prisoner his Embassador against the common right of all Nations, the king∣dome of France was deuolued & fallen to the Romane church: And if he did not obey the commaundements and defences of the Pope, he should bee held in the number of heretikes, with all his fauourers and adherents. This Archdeacon cyted many Bishops, Abbots, Theologians, and Decretists, at a certaine day named to be before the Pope at Rome, and annihilated all the indulgences and priuiledges giuen to the French men by the Pope of Rome his predecessors. This rigour perceiued, the king in the presence of his Barons and of all his Councell, com∣maunded vpon good deliberation of the Assembly, that the first Legate who had outraged the King, should bee de∣liuered, and that they both without delay should voyd his kingdome. Soone after he caused to assemble a Councell of all the Prelates and Barrons of France in the Citie of Paris. In the saide Councell, the King did sit, and reciting the out∣rages
and iniuries which he had receiued of the Pope Boniface, he vttered how ambitiously and wickedly he came to be Pope. He demaunded of the Ecclesiasticall Lords vpon whom they had the foundations and reuenewes of their Churches and Be∣nefices. After he turned him towards the Princes, Barons, and Knights, and said vnto them. And you Nobles and Vassalls, what hold you for your King? All they which were there an∣swered with one voyce, that they held their lands and their goods vnder the kings hand. Then the king replied and said: Yet you see what force and tirannie Boniface practiseth, as if you and all the Realme of France were subiect vnto the Ro∣mane Church; as now he vsurpeth the title of the Emperour of Almaine: and hauing three times the said Duke Albert of Austrich, saith himselfe is Emperour and Lord of all the world, and in token thereof, hee hath newly giuen the Empire to the Duke Albert, yea euen the title of the Crowne of France. These things thus proposed and brought to deliberation, the king interiected an appellation from the Pope to the gene∣rall Councell, and ordained by publike Edict vpon great pains that none should bee so hardie to drawe or transport any gold or siluer out of his kingdome for the affaires of the Romane Court: and caused to guard all the Bridges, Portes, and passa∣ges. On the other side, Boniface the eight sought by Ecclesia∣sticall censors, enmitie betwixt the Emperour and the King. Yet notwithstanding they accorded, meeting together in the plaines of Ʋuancoulers. But the end was this, that to tame the arrogancie and malice of this Pope, the king secretly dispatched two hundreth men of Armes vnder the conduction of one na∣med Sarra Colonnois, a Romane, and of an other Captain called Nogaret: which secretly passed from Marceille, and by night tooke the Pope in his house, which was in Anagnia, in the king∣dome of Naples,He died as a dogge. and carried him prisoner with the aide of the Gibelins to Rome, where he died 24. dayes after, or 35. dayes, after Chron. Abb. of griefe and age: and all his goods and trea∣sures went to pillage, Iohn le Maire. Iohn the Monke Cardinall, the founder of the Colledge  of Picars at Paris, came into France at the Popes commande∣ment. The Sea of Histories.
The memorable battaile of Courtray in Flaunders which the French lost, and wherin a great part of the Nobilitie of France perished. The Sea of Histories. Benet 11. of that name, a Lombard by Nation, borne at Tre∣uis,Benet. 11. called before Nicholas, of the order of Iacobius, borne of parents of base condition, his father was a sheepheard: after he was made Cardinall of Ostia, he was chosen Pope: a man of a cautellous and subtill spirit, and therefore pleased Boniface ex∣ceedingly. Incontinently after he was come vnto the Papaltie, hee sought to pacifie Italie, and therefore went to Peruse, but hee fell sicke there and deceased, and was buried in the Iacobins. A certaine Abbesse presented vnto him poysoned figges where∣of he died. This was after prooued. And Leander affirmeth that he died of poyson. The seate was emptie about a yeare. The yeare of Christ, 1304. Phillip le bel King of France, founded in the honour of S. Lewis, the Abbey of Poisy, where hee placed Nunnes of the order of the Friars preachers, and after his death his heart was carried thither and buried. The Sea of Histories. The first Emperor of the Turkes. The wickednesse of men being come to the fulnesse of all impietie, Ottomanus a Turk began to raigne about this time, and raigned 28. yeares. He began by litle and litle to vsurpe vp∣on Europe. The occasion was, for that the Emperours of Greece demanded helpe of the said Turkes against the Bulgarians. But they seeing the Countrey fit for them, vsurped vpon the Em∣perour, first in Thrace, and after in Misia, superiour and infe∣riour, Macedonia, Achaia, Peloponesus, Epirus, Dalmacia, and a great part of Illyria and Pannonia; and finally into Hun∣garia. The yeare of Christ, 1306. the first League of Swissers was made of three Cantons, namely Suits, Vry, and Ʋnderuald. Naucler. Peter Casiodore an Italian, a Noble man, and well instruc∣ted in pietie, was in this time. Hee writ vnto the Enghsh men
not to carrie the importable yoake of the Romane Antechrist, shewing the extortions and extreame seruitude of England which the Popes of that time had multiplied. The Epistle be∣ginneth Cui comparabo te, &c. which I haue here inserted, tran∣scribed, and translated out of an old booke found in the church of S. Albans in England. To the noble Church of England, which serueth in bon∣dage, Peter the sonne of Cassiodore, a Catholique souldier and deuout Champion of Iesus Christ, desireth saluation and deliuerance from the yoake of captiuitie, and to receiue the price and reward of libertie. The Scribes and Pharisies placed themselues in Moyses Chaire, &c. It followeth after: To whom shal I compare thee?Mat. 23. a. 2. or to whom shal I say thou art like thou daughter of Ierusalem? to whom shall I equall thee thou virgin daughter of Sion? For thy ruine is great as the Sea: thou art become sollitarie, and without any sollace, being all the day ouerwhelmed wilh hea∣uinesse. Thou art deliuered into the hands of him from whence thou canst not relieue thy selfe, without the aide of some one which will lift theee vp. For the Scribes and Pharisies beeing set vpon Moyses Chaire, that is to say,The Chaire of Moyses. the Romane Princes be∣ing thy enemies, are vpon thy head, and enlarging their Phi∣lacteries, and desiring to inrich themselues with the marrowe of thy bones, impose heauie and insupportable burthens vpon the shoulders of thee and thy Ministers, and bring thee vnmeasu∣rably vnder the charge of paying tribure, thou which euer hast bene free. Let all occasion and matter of maruelling cease: For thy mother which had rule ouer the people, hauing espowsed her subiect, hath appointed thee for a Father, and before all others hath eleuated thee Bishop of Rome, who in no paternall act sheweth himselfe to be such an one. Very true is is that hee spreadeth out his skirtes, and sheweth by experience that he is thy mothers husband. For often he bringeth to memorie in his heart this sentence of the Prophet. Take thee a great volume and write therein as with a touchstone, after the maner of men. Hast thee to the spoile, dispatch thee of pilling and spoiling.
When the Apostle said, Euery high Priest beeing taken of men, is constituted for men in things which are concerning God. Doth not this shewe that men must not occupie themselues with spoiles and rapines, to impose censors, and annuall rents, nor to destroy men; but to the end he might offer gifts and sacrifices for sinnes? and that he might haue compassion of the ignorant and sinners? And also we read of Peter who was a Fi∣sher (whose successor he saith he is) that after the resurrection of Iesus Christ,Iohn. 21.2. he returned to his fishing againe with the other Apostles: who when he could take nothing on the left side of the ship, by the commaundement of Iesus Christ he turned himselfe towards the right hand, and drew the Nets to ground full of fish. Profitable then it is to exercise the Ministerie of the Church in the right part, by which misterie the diuell is vanquished, and a great number of soules is brought to Iesus Christ:The right side and left of his kingdome. but surely it is not so of the labour which is taken on the left hand of the ship: for therein faith staggereth, and he∣uinesse ruleth when men finde not that which they seeke. For who will beleeue that one man can serue God and Mam∣mon both together and please his will, sticke to reuelations of the flesh and of bloud, and offer to Christ gifts and presents, such as appertaine vnto him?Good sheep∣heards taken form the sheepfold. Psal. 81.7. And without doubt the sheep∣heard which watcheth not for the edifying of the Flocke, prepareth an other way a roaring Lyon, which seeketh euery way whom he may deuour. Behold say I, the straunge and before vnheard deedes of him which is called thy father;The office of Priests ouer∣throwne. who taketh from the sheep∣foldes the good sheepheards, and in their places setteth his Ne∣phewes and parents, and others ignorant of Letters, dumbe and deafe, which vnderstand not the bleating of the sheepe, nei∣ther care for the byting of the wolues, which like hirelings car∣rie away the fleeces, reape others haruests, the hands of whom also serue to the pottes, and their backes turne away from bur∣thens. Hereby it plainely appeareth the Priests office was left, the seruice due vnto God was subtracted, and the custome to giue Almes abolished: by which things the holy deuotion of Kings,
Princes, & Christans are abolished. This then is a thing which ought to be found very strange in the iudgement of euery one,The Pope op∣posed against Iesus Christ. that whereas Iesus Christ commaunded to pay tribute vnto Kings for himselfe & for Peter this man against his will (whose Vicar he saith he is) who hath cast backe from himsselfe the kingdomes and iudgements of the world, seekes to subiect vn∣der his domination, Kings and Princes, vnder the title of his stile: because all that he hath set downe in writing to be his, he attributeth vnto himselfe. Nay what doth he more with thee ô daughter? Behold he draweth from thee whatsoeuer he thinketh good: and yet hee holdeth not himselfe contented to take of thee the tenth part of thy grounds, but euen the first fruites of the Benefices of thy Ministers: to the end that as well for himselfe, as for such as are of his bloud, he might constitute a new patrimonie of good and holy wills of the founders. Moreouer,The wages of the Popes Curriers.A comparison of the Pope to Nabuchodo∣nozer. he alreadie imposeth other execrable things for the wages of his Curriers which he sendeth into England, which carrie away not onely the victualls of thee and thine, but also rent of their skinnes and their flesh like dogges. Meriteth he not to be compared to Nabuchodonozor, who destroyed the Temple, and spoiled it of the vessells of Gold? For that which he did, this doth he also. He spoiled the Ministers of the house of God, and depriued them of that which was necessarie for his seruice. And this here doth as much. And surely the con∣dition of them which are slaine by the sword, is better then the condition of such, as be any thing bitten with hunger. For the first are straight dead, but the other is consumed by the stirrili∣tie of the earth. Let all such as passe by thy way (ô daughter) haue compas∣sion on thee: for no sorrowe is like to thine.Ier. Chap. 1. of the same, 12. For alreadie be∣cause of thy great dolour and teares which thou hast shead, thy face is blacker then coales: in so much as thou art no more knowne in the streetes. Thy father hath set thee in clowdie and darke places, he hath made thee drunke with wormewood and gall. Lord see the affliction of thy people,A true descrip¦tion of the Pope. harken vnto their sobbings and come downe. For the heart of this man is
harder then the heart of Phaua, who would not suffer that thy people should goe a libertie, but onely in the force of thy hand. But this afflicted and plagueth not onely vpon earth, but also after death. For after death he deuoureth the goods of all Christians, vnder colour that they died without making testa∣ments. The Church of England doth sufficienly know, that the French men casting the eyes of their concupiscence vpon that kingdome, sought in time past to haue reduced it vnder theyr power▪ but it is to be feared that, that which they could not hitherto bring to passe, is now supplied by the coniuration of that man, as of a new enemie. For if the treasures of the King∣dome faile, and that the Priesthood be ouerthrowne, verily it shall he made lesse puissant against the enemies. Exhortation to the King∣dome of England.To the end that thou ô daughter, and thy Priest, should not fall into a miserie of any longer endurance, it is expedient for the saluation and safetie of thee and thine, that thou ô Christi∣an King, and the great Lords of thy kingdome, (which haue a∣dorned thee with great and excellent Benefices, and which in such a case ought to maintaine and defend both thee and those Benefices) should resist the coniurations and conspirations of that man: who not hauing regard to God, but for the aforesaid things, and to enrich his parents, and for his owne nest, lifting himselfe vp as an Eagle, by the aforesaid things, and other Im∣postes by him imposed, he hath collected all the siluer of Eng∣land by a new domination. The simplici∣tie of the world.Let not then thy dissembling simplicitie in this case cause the ruine of thy kingdome and thy selfe, and take heed thy re∣medie come not too late. The Lord God take the vaile frō off the heart of this man, and giue him a contrite and humble hart, and make him knowe the traces of the true God, whereby hee may be drawne frō darknesse, and constrained to forsake those wicked labours wherof we haue spoken, & that the vine which the right hand of God hath planted, may be filled with good grapes. For take heed vnto the Lords words, & to the Prophe∣sie of Ieremie, to put back such enterprises: who saith thus. Thou sheepheard which hast dispersed my people,Ier. 22.30. & put thē out of their ha∣bitations,
behold I will visit vpon thee the malice of thy into prises, and no man of thy seed shall sit vpon the seat of Dauid, nor haue more power in Iuda. Let thy neast be made barran, and ruinated as So-Some and Gomorrhe. But if it so fall out that being nothing feared by these words he cease not his enterprises, nor make restitution of that which he hath taken: then let thē sing for him that shall be so wicked∣ly hardned, the 108. Psalme. As for vs, we will each day openly sing praises through Iesus Christ, to him vnto whom all things serue. Thus the light by litle and litle came forward, and ouer∣came the mightie darknesse. Clement, 5. ruled in Auignon 8. yeares and 10. monethes.Clement. 5. This Pope was a Gascoin, sonne of Bernand, a warrior and a Gentleman, borne in Burdeaux, before called Bextrand Goth, Bishop of Coseran, and Archbishop of Burdeaux, he being ab∣sent in France, was chosen at Peruse, by the Cardinalls there resident. Iohn le Maire saith it was at the instance of Phillip le Bell. After he was aduertised of his election, he departed from Burdeaux and came to Lyons, and sent word that all the Cardi∣nalls then in Italie, should appeare there, wherevnto they all o∣beyed without delay or contradiction, and the coronation of the said Pope was made publike and solemne in the Church of S. Iust. But this ioy and pompe was troubled.The Popes corronation hanselled with dead men. For as an innu∣merable people were mounted vpon an old wall of S. Iust to see this great pompe and noblenes, the said wall fell, and flew duke Iohn of Britaine: the King was there wounded, and the Pope throwne ouer his horse and rudely troden vnder feete, in so much that he lost a rich Carbuncle out of his triple crowne, esteemed at 6000. Florents of Gold: and more then 12. other notable persons were there wounded and died. After the Pope Clement was crowned the king tooke leaue of him, and went to marrie his sonne Lays Hutin to the daugh∣ter of the Duke of Burgongne, called Margarite. The Pope on the other side left Lion, and made his residencie in Auignon. This was the first of the Popes, that kept there his Romane
Court, where it abode the space of 73. yeares before it retur∣ned to Rome. Iohn le Maire. After the end of this solemne pompe, and that all things were appeased, he created many French Cardinalls. But hee made not one Italian: onely he restored that dignitie of a Car∣dinall to Iohn and Iames of the house of Colomnois. Moreouer he sent to Rome three Cardinalls, with the power of Senators, by whose direction the Towne and all Italie was gouerned. He gaue to Frederic king of Sicilie the Ile of Sardeigne, which was occupied by the Sarrasins, vpon this condition, that in cha∣sing them away he might incontinently recouer it. The yeare 1306. the Iewes were pilled and reiected Fraunce. Albert the Emperour, riding in the fieldes about noone, was slaine by his Nephewe and other Princes of Austrich, his companions. Munster. An example of Gods pu∣nishment.This iudgement might bee, because in warre he had per∣secuted the Emperour Adolphe, who although he was his infe∣riour vnto him in power, yet was he ordained of God and ought him obedience. But such murthers remaine not vnpu∣nished. Hiero. Marius adding to the words of Platina, sayth thus. Clement the fift because he desired not to serue others as Iesus Christ commaunded his disciples, but rather to be serued e∣uen of Emperors, ordained that Emperours chosen in Almaine, although they tooke the name of King of the Romanes, yet they should receiue of the Pope the rights and name of the Emperour, Moreouer that when the Emperour should bee dead, whilest the Empire was vacant, the gouernment of the townes of Italie subiect to the Emperor, should be in the Popes power. The Romane Court transported into France, where it re∣mained 74. yeares. Auignon the Papall seate.This Clemens who was a publike whoremonger, and a great maintainer of harlots, Chron. Herm. and Paralip. Vrsp. placed the papall seate in Auignon, to the end the better to en∣ioy his delights and pleasures.
He celebrated the generall Councell of Ʋienne,Generall Councell of Vienne. the yeare of our Lord. 1311. wherein he cruelly abolished the order of the Templers, to the end to confiscate their goods, & with their spoiles raised vp the Hospitaliers into dignities, called the knights of S. Iohn of Ierusalem, which had conquered the Ile of Rhodes vpon the Sarrasins. The Knights of the Rhodes succeeded in the goods of the Templers. The Pope excommunicated the Venetians because they had vsurped Ferrare, which was of the Churches patrimonie,Ferrare. and caused the Croisado to be published against them in Italie, till they were constrained to yeeld the said seignorie of Fer∣rare, which they had vsurped of a Lord called Frisius Estensis, who had slaine his father to gouerne at Ferrare, being notwith∣standing aided by the Venetians to doo that wicked act. Item he excommunicated the Florentines and them of Luques. Henry the 7. would needes make himselfe to be crowned at Rome, but it was not without great contradiction and effu∣sion of bloud. Robert King of Sicilie, sonne of Charles the se∣cond, King of Pouille, was condemned of the said Henry to bee beheaded. Clement graunted to all such as coiced themselues against the Turke, that at their pleasures and will, foure soules should be deliuered from purgatorie: But the Theologians of Paris detested this, and reprooued it, saith Agrip. de vanit. This Pope persecuted such as they named Fratricelli, and one called Dulcinus of Navarre; and published against thē the Croisado, for that purpose seruing themselues with the Iacobins. The Dulcins were named of that Dulcinus, who was exe∣cuted with his wife Margarite. Naucler. He had bene taught of one called Gerard. They which detested them and haue written their maner of doings, say that they wore white Man∣tles, & long haires: sometimes walking barefooted, sometimes shod. Item, that they named themselues the order of the Apo∣stles, and they preached saying. Repent, for the kingdome of heauē is at hand. Moreouer, they said that the authoritie which Christ gaue vnto his Church was expired for the malice of the
Prelates.Henry. 7. And that the Romane Church was reprooued be∣cause it was an whore. Also that they were the Church & fol∣lowed the rule of the Apostles. That all the Popes since Silue∣ster were Preuaricators and vsurpers because they liued not in true humilitie, and that therefore men ought not to giue them Tythes. Many of Dulcius adherents were taken, to the number of 114. persons, dwelling in the Mountains of Verseil in Piemont. Rhodes in this time wes reconquered of the knights of the Rhodes, which before were driuen away. Henry. 7.Henry 7. of that name, sonne of Henry Count of Luxem∣bourg, and of Beatrix his wife, was chosen Emperour. He was not rich of goods that his father had left him, but he was the ex∣cellentest Prince of his time, as well in prudence as in the glory of praise-worthy deeds. From the death of Frederic the 2. vntill the yeare 1308. wherein this man was elected, the Kings of the Romanes had not entred into Italie, namely Rodolphe, Adolphe, and Albert, and therefore almost all the townes of Italie subiect to the Em∣pire, were reuolted. After Henry was crowned at Aix, he determined to enter Italie to be sacred of the Pope, but it was not without great dan∣ger, for great Ambushes which were laid for a him at Millaine by Guido Turrian. See the Chronicles of the Emperours. Templers burnt.Many Templers of the kingdome of France, by the com∣maundement of the Pope and King, for certaine accusations were condemned and burnt without Paris. Twelue or nine Articles contrary to the faith, were imposed vpon them: which notwithstanding Iohn Bocace a Florentine excuseth in his 21. Chapter of his 2. booke, of the cases of vnfortunate Nobles. Their order endured 184. yeares: all their goods were confis∣cated and giuen to the knights of the Rhodes. Others say that the best part of their goods was giuen to the king by the Popes consent. Chron. of the French Kings. Hermanus saith, that the Pope Clement in fauour of the king, noted them of heresie and infamie, wrongfully and vpon enuie. Paral. Vrsper.
Some thinke that the kings of France, of England and of Spaine, conspired against them for the possessions and Castles which they had in their kingdomes. The yeare 1309. the Sarabits (Monkes which came out of Egipt) began in England. Their garments were of Oxe and Swines skinnes, and they were tyed with cordes. Iohn Clyn Hy∣bernus. The order of Paulins entred into England, and placed thē∣selues at Glocester, the yeare 1310. Chron. Caletense. This Pope Clement in a well leaded Bull (which is yet at this day kept by Copie at Vienna, at Limoge, and at Poiters,The Pope cō∣mandeth the Angels. in the Coffers of priuiledges) commanded the Angels of Heauen to carrie into the Ioyes of Paradice, and draw out of Purgato∣rie the soule of him, whosoeuer should die in the way, going in Pilgrimage to Rome. Moreouer (saith he) we will that the paines of hell shal no way be inflicted vpon them. Agrip. de vanit. sciēt. Iean wife of Lewis king of Fraunce, after the death of her husband, went to Rome, and resigned the kingdome of Naples, deliuering it into Pope Clements hand, who after made a gift of it to Lewis duke of Angiou, brother of Charles the fift king of France, sauing the profits to the vse of the said Iean for her life. But he enioyed it not: for he died with fiue thousand men in conquering it against Charles Nephew of the said Lewis King of Hungaria, who occupied the kingdome, and held it foure yeares, and left a sonne called Ladislaus, who raigned 29. yeares at Naples by the helpe of Pope Vrbain the 6. This Pope condemned the Beghards or Begnins,Beghards or Begnins. which would not worship the Bread of the Eucharist. He commaunded that the great Maister of the Templers should be burned at Paris, with one of his cōpanions, in the pre∣sence of Cardinals, & made certain ordinances against the inso∣lencies of the Iewes, after hauing confiscated their goods. He ordained that oathes deliuered by Princes,Oathes of Princes. were not oathes of subiection, but of fidelitie: and commanded that the goods of the Church should not be alienated. Hee ordained that Clarkes which occupied temporall traffiques, and wore precious garments, should be punished; and
forbad Monkes all kinde of huntings, as well of beastes as birdes. He confirmed the Feast instituted in the honour of the bread of the Eucharist, which the Papists commonly called, La feste dieu. God his Feast. Clementius.He gathered in his volume the Constitutions called Cle∣mentius, and pronounced that the reliques of Saints ought to be greatly honoured. He gouerned the affaires of Italie by Neapolion and Pela∣gura Cardinalls, his Legates: and added Celestine the fift to the number of Popish Confessors. He set in order the constituti∣ons of Monkes, and againe declared the rule of Friars. Finally this Clement being tormented one while with a flux of the belley, and an other with a paine of the stomack & sides, deceased in a Castle called Rocquemaure, vpon Rosue, the yeare of the Lord, 1314. his body was carried into Gascoin, and the Papall seate was emptie euen till the third yeare. This yeare it selfe that he died, as Henry of Lucembourg Em∣peror determined to draw to him by force of Armes the king∣dome of Sicilie, vnto which he was called, hee was traiterously brought to death by a wicked Monke, called Bernard du Mont, Polician of Domcastre: who was of the conspiration of the Guelphes, and yet made a countenance that he was the Empe∣rours friend. He gaue a poysoned host to this good Prince: who as soone as he felt the mischiefe,The kindnesse of the Empe∣rour. aduertised this traitor Monke to flie away, saying vnto him; Away, away, for if the Almanes perceiue any thing, and such as doo affect mee, you shall die. So this wicked Iudas withdrawing himselfe to Sienes, recei∣ued the siluer that had bene promised him, for the reward of his treason; but hereby hee deliuered not his bretheren Ia∣cobins. For many of them perished by fire and sword with their houses, as wel in Tuscane as in Lombardie, and many other places. Vniuersitie of Orleance.The Vniuersitie of Orleance was instituted in this time. Chron. of the Kings of France. The yeare at Crist, 1313. the King of Fraunce Phillip le bel became a Leper, and therefore he caused all the Leapers
of France and Flaunders, as well men as women, to bee burnt. For he vnderstood that they had infected the waters. And the Chroniclers of Almaine say that the said king became a Leper, because he made the Templers die. Arnold de Villa Noua, an excellent Phisitian,Arnold de Villa Noua a true & faith∣full man. and Mathe∣matician, (some say of Chalon, others of Narbone) was iudged an heretike, because he said that Sathan had made all Christi∣an people stray from the truth. Item, that the faith of Christi∣ans of his time, was no other then such as diuels haue. Item, that such as are in Cloisters are out of Charitie, and condemne themselues in falsifying the doctrine of Iesus Christ, & leading Christians into hell. Item, that the Theologians haue malici∣ously mingled the Dreames of Philosophers with the holy scripture. Item, that in the sacrifice of the Aultar the Priest offereth nothing to God, and that Masses profiteth neither quick nor dead. He prooued by Daniel and by Sibilla Erithra, that Antichrist in a full tirannie should persecute the faithfull after the yeare, 1300. Besides his Phisicke bookes, he writ against the Iacobins,The bookes of Doctor Arnold. that it was lawfull to eate flesh: The cutting sword against the Thomistes: The admonition of Iesus Christ to Christians: Of the subtilties of false Prophets: Of the misterie of the Chur∣ches Cymballs: Of the consummation of the world, and other bookes. He was iudged an heretike by the Iacobins at Tarra∣eon. Finally being sent to the Pope by Frederic king of Sicilie, he died in the way, and was buried at Genés, a true champion of the Lord. Margarite Queene of Nauarre,The Sea of Histories. daughter of the Duke of Burbon, Iean daughter of the Count of Bourgongne, and wife of the Count of Poiters, Blanche second daughter of the said Count of Bourgongne, wife of the Count de la Marshe, were ta∣ken by the kings commaundement and condemned to conti∣nuall prison, for their fornications and adulteries against them manifestly prooued. Yet afterward Iean Countesse of Poiters, returned with her husband. For it was knowne that she was not culpable of all that which was imposed on her.Adulterie punished. The Adul∣terers, that is, Phillip d'Annoy which kept the Queene, and his
brother.Schisme in the Empire. Gualter de Annoy which kept the said Blanch knights, were scorched, there genitories cut off, and they drawne and hanged. Schisme in the Empire. There was a diuision amongst the Electors: some did chuse Lois the fourth of that name, Duke of Bauiere: others, Frederic Duke of Austrich, and the one had warre against the other eight yeares. In the end Lewis obtained alone the Em∣pire, and raigned 24 yeares, after the Chron. of Euseb. which make 32. yeares, The Sea of Hist. Loys Hutin, sonne of Phillip le bel, succeeded in the King∣dome: and is the 46. He had before succeeded Iean his mo∣ther in the kingdome of Nauarre. Enguerrand de Marigni, Count de Longueuille, great Gene∣rall of the Kings reuenewes, being accused to haue robbed the King, was hanged: and his Image throwne downe the Pallace stayres. This king raigned almost two yeares, and died in the wood of Vincennes, and was buried at S. Denis. Iohn. 23.Iohn Pope, 23. of that name, French by Nation, sonne of Arnold d'Ossa, before called Iames de Cahors, Cardinall, Bishop du Port, after the space of two yeares (during which time as hath bene touched, the seate was emptie for the difference happe∣ning amongst the 23. Cardinalls) was declared Pope at Lions: departing therfore frō thence with his Court, and comming to Auignon, he created 8. Cardinals, of the number of which, were Cahors the younger, his Nephew and sisters sonne, and Iohn de Gayete, of the house of Ʋrsins. He deliuered into the hands of the Iudge, Hugh Gerard Bi∣shop of Cahors, after hauing taken from him his Pontificall ornaments, hee was disgraced and giuen to the tormentors, who put him to death most cruelly. Iohn le Maire. Phillip le Long, 47. King of France and of Nauarre, bro∣ther of Lewis Hutin the former King, succeeded in the King∣dome, the yeare 1316. This was by meanes of the lawe Salike. He was called Long, because he was tall & slender. During his raigne, he could neuer get either of the Church or of the peo∣ple, tributes, Impostes, or borrowe that which he damaunded.
Some say, that during his raigne the Leapers poysoned the water pits, at the suggestion and perswasion of the Iewes,Poysoning of pits. whereof followed a great pestilence: but the Iewes and Lea∣pers were greatly punished. The King determined to make that in all his kingdome there should be but one maner of waight, measure, and money: but he could not bring to effect that which was his will, for he died soone after. He raigned fiue yeares without hauing any warre, and was buried at S. Denis. See Emil. lib. 8. and Gogin. lib. 7. This Pope Iohn caused to be published the constitutions of the Councell of Vienne, called Clementius, and sent them into the Vniuersitie of Boulogne, vnder a faire leaded Bull, comman∣ding they should bee vsed in all Schooles, Vniuersities, and iudgements, from thence forward. The Sea of Hist. Birger king of Denmarke hauing inuited his two brethe∣ren to dinner with him, tooke them, and with Irons laid them in prison, where they died. The same. A Prouost of Paris called Henry Carpenel,The Prouost of Paris. for a false iudge∣ment that he had giuen, was hanged on a gibet. This Pope Iohn condemned the constitution of Pope Ni∣cholas, which was of the order of the Friars Minors, and began Exijt qui seminat, and forbad vpon paine of excommunication, that none should glosse or dispute vpon it. See the Decree 6. in the title 12. de verborum signifi. Charles le Bel, brother of Phillip le Long, and sonne of Phil∣le Bel king of France and Nauarre, 48. raigned 7. yeares. Iohn 23. made a Constitution which beginneth, Ad condi∣torem Canonum, against the Friars Minors. See the Extrauagants of this Iohn, 23. in the title. 4. de verborum signifi This Pope Iohn canonized S. Thomas Bishop of Erford, and S. Thomas d' Acquine. Chron. Euseb. Loys Duke of Bauiere, and Frederic Duke of Austrich, with  his brother, gaue battaile the one against the other; where were slain as wel on the one part as of the other; foure thousand horse men. Lewis obtained the victorie, & Frederic was prisoner with
his brother Henry. Naucler. Leopold his other brother came late to the succours.Lewis See the Chron. of the Emperorus. This Pope receiued into the safegard and protection of S. Peter the Carmes, exempting them from all subiection of or∣dinary Iudges to the end they might be subiect onely to S. Pe∣ter as his well beloued children, and mooued many of them to Episcopall dignitie. As Guy de Parpinan, Iohn Claran. both of Catalogue, and some other Nations. A diuellish illusion.For before he was Pope he had a maruellous vision, or ra∣ther diuellish illusion, as he witnesseth in his Bull: namely, that as the Cardinalls were in a great debate, the Virgin Marie de∣liuered them and made him Pope, yet vpon this condition, that he should exempt from the paines of purgatorie his good bre∣theren. An heresie held by the Pope.This Iohn here taught certaine errors, and amongst others, that soules so soone as they were dispoiled of the body, should not see God before the last iudgement. For as Masseus witnes∣seth, his father had so taught him, being seduced and abused by the visions of a certaine Irish man, called Tundalus. He sent to Paris two Monkes, the one a Iacobin, and the other a Friar, who preached the same heresie: but Thomas Wal∣leis a Iacobin, an English man, resisted the Pope; but he thrust him into prison. Thus also did Durand de S. Porcin, William Ca∣leth, and others. Colledges of Scribes.He corrected at his pleasure the orders of Churches, and changed them, and distributed into a certain number the Col∣ledges of the Scribes: which for certaine prices writ such Let∣ters as by him would be dispatched. He made many constituti∣ons which were called Ioanninies, & condemned Iohn de Pouilly a Theologian, because he taught that men must not cōfesse thē∣selues to begging Friars: yet he constrained the Monkesses or Nuns called Beguines, to marry, and to detest painting. He held also for certain articles of the faith, that Iesus Christ gaue not to his Apostles any other rule to liue wel, but that he gaue to other Christians. That the Apostles neuer vowed the vow of pouer∣tie, and that vowes serue for nothing to perfection. This Pope writ to the Grecians at large, that there was
but one Church alone, whereof he was chiefe, and the Vicar of Iesus Christ. The Grecians answered him in fewe words.An answere of the Greeks to the Pope. We beleeue surely that thy power is very great ouer thy sub∣iects. We cannot endure thy extreame pride, nor satisfie thy couetousnesse. The diuell be with thee, for God is with vs. By which breuitie of words, they shewed what was the Popes ma∣ner of life and estate. Iohn de Mandeuile rehearseth it in his 6. booke. This Pope declared Lewis de Bauiere to the Church a rebell, schismatike, and heretike: because that after he was chosen by the Princes, he tooke the gouernment of the Empire without any oath to the Pope of subiection. Hiero. Marius saith thus. Iohn pursued with a sharpe hatred Lewis de Bauiere: partly be∣cause being chosen king of the Romanes by the Princes, hee disdained the name and title of Emperour at the Popes hands, as Clement the 5. had ordained it: partly also because he main∣tained and defended against him certaine Monkes, which hee had condemned as heretikes, and therefore Iohn held the said Lewis for an heretike. Lewis comming into Italie,Vicegerents of the Empire placed in all the Imperiall Townes Vicegerents, (as reason required) and after came to Millaine, and because he desired to appease the Popes rage, hee sent Embassadors vnto him euen to Auignon, where he resided; who demaunded that according to the custome of his prede∣cessors he would graunt him kindely and with a good and free will the ornaments of the Empire. The Pope not onely refused to doo it,The Emperor demandeth the Imperiall ornaments. but pushed backe his Embassadors with great shame and ignominie, & cyted the said Emperour peremptorily (as they speake) that he should come vnto Auignon and submit himselfe to the ordinances of the Church. The Emperour knowing the tirannie that raigned in the Church, knowing also that he had receiued of God the Impe∣riall maiestie, sought on his side nothing wherein he might vio∣late it. And therefore to Popes hee would not subiect him∣selfe, as if he were their seruant; by meanes whereof he refused to come into Auignon: yet because still hee greatly desired
to nourish peace, he sent againe messengers to make the same request. The Pope persisted in his opinion, and in token of the ha∣tred he bore to the Emperour, he excommunicated the Vi∣countes, vnto whome then the Emperour had giuen the go∣uernment of the seignorie of Millane. The Emperour seeing the Popes heart obdurate, calling to him many Princes and Lords of Italie, came to Rome, where he was honorably receiued of all the people, and required that according to custome some would deliuer him the ornaments of the Empire. The Romains beseech the Pope for the Emperour.The greatest Lords of Rome, together with all the people, sent Embassadors into Fraunce to the Pope, beseeching him that he would visit the Towne, and graunt to the King of Ro∣manes the Imperiall ornaments, which if he refused to do, they protested to obserue the auncient lawe, and to vse the rights of the Romane people. Iohn after he had heard the Embassadors, draue them back from him shamelesly with rude words and threats, which the Romane people seeing, determined to graunt to Lewis that which he demaunded; and so by the commaundement of all the Cleargie and people, he was crowned with his wife, by Ste∣phen and Nicholas Senators, in the presence of all the Nobles, which cryed Lewis Augustus, Emperour of the Romanes. But what did Lewis hitherto, wich was not the part of a good Emperour? yet Iohn vnderstanding this, accused him as one guiltie of diuine treason and an heretike, and published a∣gainst him certaine very rigorous proces, and deiected him out of the dignitie of the Empire, and put him out of his kingdome as an heretike & rebel against the Romane Church, thundring out against him a very cruell pronunciation. Theologians and Lawiers of this time.In this time were certaine Theologians and Lawyers which said that Christ and the Apostles had nothing proper, and that the Emperour was no way subiect to the Pope in that which concerneth the temporaltie. Of this number were Michael Oe∣cenus and William; Ockam Friars; Marcille of Padoue, and Iohn de Landum, Lawyers, with certaine others. The Emperour
Lewis was so fortified by this,Lewis forti∣fied. that he hardly opposed himselfe against all the Popes enterprises, publishing in all parts of the Empire an appellation, such as followeth. We Lewis King of the Romaines,The Empe∣rours appel∣lation against the Pope. propose against Iohn which saith he is Pope, that he dooth ill execute the testament of Iesus Christ touching peace, which he disturbeth in all Chri∣stendome, and remembers not that all the honor he now hath, was graunted by S. Constantine to Siluester when hee was yet hid. He is vnthankfull towards the Romane Empire,Donation of Constantine. whereof he hath receiued all that great magnificence, which he now a∣buseth, &c. As then Lewis & the greatest Lords of Rome knew well the vniust deeds of Iohn, as also the people, frō the least to the grea∣test, who tooke in ill part that their Embassadors which they sent was so ill handled, and all with one accord agreed to bring into the Church the auncient custome obserued in electing the Pope: namely, that being chosen by the people hee should be confirmed of the Emperour. And therefore one called Peter Carbaria or Corberia a Friar, was created Pope,Nicholas 5. and named Ni∣cholas the fift, and as for Iohn he was declared an hereticke and a tyrant of the Church, and not a Pastor but a perturber of the peace of Christians. All which things the Emperour and the Princes Assistant at the Councell held at Rome, submitted to the iudgement of the Catholicke Church. This saith Ma∣rius. This done the Emperour returned into Almaigne, and the  Pope Nicholas remained in Italie: but finally Boniface Counte of Pise deliuered him into Pope Iohns hands, and hee dyed be∣ing straightly detained and in great miserie. See the Suppl. Chron. Iohn de Lisle (some Iordain) a renowmed man in Fraunce, was hanged at Montfaucon at Paris, for pilleries & rauishments. Emilius denieth that hee was Father in lawe vnto Iohn Pope as some say. King Charles le Bel was the first that permitted the Pope to leuie Tenths in France,Tenthes leuied in Fraunce. and he did it to haue part with him. But the Pope did it to warre vppon the Emperour Lewis,
whom he had declared an enemie of the Church. Chron. Reg. Fran. Ambition of the VenetiansThe Venetians by their Captaine and Duke called Fran∣ciscus Dandalus, tooke from the Patriarke of Aquilia their neighbour, two Cities, that is, Polle and Ʋalentia, which are in Gorice. Benet. 12.Benet Pope, 12. of that name, ruled in Auignon 7. yeares, three moneths, after Naucler. Iames de Furnerio borne at Tho∣louse, of poore parents, a Monke of the order of Cisteaux, Priest, Cardinall, and Doctor in Theologie. This Pope saith Marius, was no more modest or louing to the Emperour Lewis, then Iohn his predecessor had beene. For he renewed the excommunications, and dispoyled him of all royall honor, and of the Duchie of Baniere by his sentence. This good Prince Lewis assembled at Francford all the E∣lectors, Dukes, Bishops, Counts, and all such as were thought cunning, as well in humane sciences as diuine, and in the pre∣sence of all, by publike and solemne proclamation, hee gaue new authoritie to the auncient Lawes,King of Ro∣manes, and Emperor. Names diuers, but of the same sub∣stance. and confirmed them: and freely shewed that it onely appertained to the Electors of the Empire, and not vnto others, to chuse the King of the Ro∣manes. So that he which hath the greatest number of Princes voyces, he is truly reputed chosen, be hee King or Emperour. (For in substance they be one same thing, although their names be diuers) which Emperour may exercise and administer the affaires of the Empire without any confirmation of the Ro∣mane seate. Who also ought to be sacred by the Pope, after it shall bee signified by the Princes that hee is Legitimately chosen. But if the Pope refuse, hee may he proclaimed Emperour Augustus by any Catholicke Bishop whatsoeuer,Vnctions are ceremonies inuented by the Pope. as hath bene long time vsed; seeing especially all such vnctions are onely certaine ceremonies inuented by Popes, which giue onely the name and not the thing, in token of the vnion which ought to be betwixt the Church and the Romane Empire. For the Em∣perour makes not an oath of fidelitie to Popes, but for the de∣fence of the faith. And seeing it is so, how can such an oath
giue him any superioritie in things which concerne the Tem∣poraltie. Moreouer, the Emperor also shewed that it is a false thing to say, that whilest the Empire is vacant the right of the Em∣perour is deuolued vnto the Pope, and that this is against the libertie of the holy Empire, against the dignitie, rights,The admini∣stration of the Empire being vacant, belon∣geth to the Count Palatin. and ma∣iestie thereof: but that by a custome approoued and vsed of long time, and obserued by his auncestors, without that euer was done to the contrarie, during the vacation of the Empire; it appertaineth vnto the Count Palatin of Rhene, to haue the managing of the affaires of the Empire, to conferre Feastes and Imposts, and ordering of other businesses. After all this to excuse himselfe,The Emperor yeeldeth a confession of his faith. he yeelded in the presence of all, clearely and holily a reason of his faith▪ and confessed openly he was a Christian, beleeuing wholy the Articles of the Faith, as they were taught by the Catholique Church: and pur∣ged himselfe very well of all things that were obiected against him by Iohn the 23. and Benet. 12. Who would not admire the pietie of Lewis thus vexed and tormented by Popes? what would this haue come vnto if he had tried it by Armes against them? The integritie of this Lewis,Benet ouer∣come with the integritie of the Emperor. finally was acknowledged by Pope Benet. And the peace was soone after made betweene the Emperour and the Pope. Who straight bore the Emperor such an amitie, that he defended and maintained him hardily in his innocencie against the Embassadors of the king of France, which vsed alwaies rude & defamitorie words against the said Emperour: in so much that the Pope was called by the said Embassadors, the Protector of an heretike. And although Benet for a certaine time was not without great feare, because of their words,The Emperor Lewis absol∣ued. (for they threatned him with great warres if hee absolued the Emperour) yet hee com∣maunded by a publike decree (which was proclaimed through all Almaine) that all processes which had bene attempted by Iohn against the Emperor should be nothing and of no valew: and that it appertained not to Iohn to attempt such things a∣gainst him, seeing the Emperors and the Popes iurisdiction are distinct and seperate.
Hee further declared openly that Lewis in all things had borne himselfe like a good & valiant Emperour. Yet you must vnderstand that the Pope did nothing herein, freely & of good courage: but cautelously to acquire the fauour of Lewis. For because he sawe the king of France (in the kingdome & seigno∣ry of whom hee remained) had taken some ill conceit against him, hee feared that if also hee had the Emperour his enemie, there were no person where he might haue succours, if the king of France practised any mischiefe against him.The Pope doth all for his profit. Therefore Benet iudged that it should be for his profit if he got the beneuolence of the Emperour: hoping by that meanes that the other durst attempt nothing against him. These be the practises and meanes wherewith Popes haue nourished and do yet nourish their tyrannie in the Church of the Lord. Benet being menaced by the king of France chaunged his opiniō, and left the sentences giuen by his predecessors against Lewis. He placed Vicars in the Imperiall Townes of Italie, and drew vnto the Romane seate the charge and office of a Sena∣tor,The Peneten∣tiers. withdrawing it frō the Emperour. He inuented all that was needful for the Apostolike penetētiary, declaring in order the taxes of Letters, and so assembled great riches frō all nations. Collations of benefices.This Pope first vsurped collations of all Prelatures, Bishop∣prikes, & other benefices, as wel for himselfe as for his succes∣sours: and depriued such as were vnlearned and ignorant from their benefices: And ordained that all his Chaplaines should sing by note their Canonicall houres. That thay should lie in one Dortoire,Canonicall houres sung by note.The sister of Francis Petrarke, bought by Benet. and that they should haue no other reuenewes, but that was necessary for their life and apparell. He builded in Auignon a very faire house, with Towers and goodly Orchards: And this olde Adulterer bought deare the sister of Francis Petrarke which was very faire, of her brother called Gerard, to abuse her. He ordeined 6. Cardinals being absent frō Rome, & repaired with great charge & cost the roofe of S. Peters church, & publi∣shed certaine acts against the Iacobins,Ockam. Dantes. as Leander witnesseth. Ockam & Dantes held for heretikes, bicause they maintained
by liuely reasons out of the scriptures that the Romane Empire depended not vpon the Pope, but of God onely. Naucler. Such as speake against the Pope are heretikes. Benet made many Extrauagants and Benedictines for the Monkes of the order of S. Benet, wherein is made mention in the sixt and seuenth Chapter, how Abbots ought to send their young Monkes, such as are fittest to their studie vnto the Vni∣uersities, and offer them pentions to do it. He made a Decretall which beginneth Benedictus Deus in donis suis: to the ende benefices should not be giuen to such as were vnworthy of them. Wherein is confuted and condemned as hereticall, the doctrine which his predecessor Iohn had pub∣likely preached touching the happie soules: and it was deter∣mined & declared yt the soules which had nothing to purge, in∣cōtinent as they are departed frō the body do see ye face of God. He was said to haue bene so rigorous that hee would scant know such as were of his blood: and said that the Pope had no parents. Fascic. temp. The yeare of Christ 1339. the Castle of Loppen was be∣sieged by certaine Gentlemen, with 30000. footemen, and fif∣teene thousand horsemen: but they were valiantly driuen back and chased away by the Swisses, which with the number of two or three thousand slew 4000. of the said combatants & three  Counts. Fasc. temp. and others. The Sarrasins in Spaine were discomfited, where there were  1000. slaine, & as many prisoners. Chro. Euseb. The sea of Histo. Benet dyed in Auignon, to the great ioy of many, for his great rigor, and therefore some write of him. Hic situs est Nero, laicis mors, vipera clero: Deuius a vero, cuppa repleta mero, that is, Here lyeth death to Laie-men, a viper to the Cleargie, A straier from the veritie, a cup full of Wine. He left great summes of gold and siluer, whereof he gaue nothing to his parents and friends, but to the Church. Francis Petrarke flourished in this time, and Gregorie de Aremino the Augustine and generall of his order. Orchanes second Emperour of the Turkes, sonne of
Ottoman, who raigned 22. yeares. Clement. 6.Clement Pope, sixt of that name, Limosin ruled in Auignon 11. yeares: before called Peter Roger, borne of Limoges. First hee was Prior of S. Babille, which is a Priorie of the order of S. Be∣net, after Abbot of Fescan, after Bishop of Arras, then Archbi∣shop of Roane, and after by Pope Benet 12. was made Cardinal, and finally after his death was made Pope, although hee was the youngest of all the Cardinalls. H. Marius in his booke Intituled Eusebius Captiue, in this maner describeth the Pope. Clement 6. saith he, a man very de∣sirous of women, of honour and power, being incited with a diabolicall furie, fixed Letters vpō the gates & doores of Tem∣ples, by which he threatned the Emperour vpon grieuous pu∣nishments, that within 3. daies he should renounce the rights of his Empire. The crueltie of this Emperour was maruellous. This Em∣perour came to Francford, and being readie with all his power to do that which was enioyned him, required by his Embassa∣dors, that he would receiue him into grace. This Pope answered the Embassadors, that he would neuer pardon Lewis, vnlesse first he confessed all his errors and here∣sies, and dismissed himselfe of the Imperial dignitie, & put into his hands, himselfe, his children, and all his goods, and that he would promise to take nothing of all those things, but by his consent. And he gaue a Formularie vnto the Embassadors, and commaunded them to present it vnto Lewis. What forme or fashion is there here, I will not say of a Pastor, but of a man onely? Lewis shewed this Formularie to the Princes, to the Elec∣tors, and to the Embassadors of the Imperiall Townes. The Princes detested some of the Articles, for that they were laid by the Pope to the ruine and destruction of the Empire: and they promised the Emperour succours if hee would defend the rights of the Empire, as hee had done before: yet they prayed Clement by their Embassadors, that he would leaue off such Ar∣ticles inuented to the detriment of the Empire; but the Embas∣sadors returned without doing any thing.
Clement laying the cause of all those things vpon Lewis, sought the ruine of him and his children. Wherfore the Thurs∣day before Easter, he excommunicated him very cruelly, and renewed all the rigorous processes made by Pope Iohn, and de∣clared him an heretike and a schismatike: he also sollicited the Electors to chuse an other Emperour. He depriued the Arch∣bishop of Magunce of his dignitie, and of the priuiledge & au∣thoritie to chuse: because that knowing the Emperors innocen∣cie, he would not violate his maiestie. As for the other Elec∣tors, the new of Magunce, he of Treuers and Colongne being cor∣rupted by force of gifts and presents by the king of Bohemia, declared Emperour Charles the fourth, sonne of Iohn King of Bohemia, who was sonne of Henry seuenth of that name, who was crowned at Bohemia during the Empire of Lewis: but hee was not reputed a lawful Emperour, no not after the death of Lewis, as may be seene. Who can here rehearse the horrible warres which proceeded of the wickednesse of this Clement against the Empire? Twentie thousand French men were ouerthrowne by Ed∣ward King of England: who discended into Normandie,The Iourney of Cressy. and came euen to Paris, destroying all the Countrey. It was called the battaile of Cressy; where there was great effusion of French bloud. Chron. Euseb. Callais was yeelded to the king of Eng∣land, after it had endured extreame famine. A great famine was in all Italie, accompanied with a pesti∣lence and mortalitie, which was almost vniuersall. It continued till the yeare, 1350. See the Histories of Almaine & France. Lewis the fourth was poysoned (as is said) hauing drunke  of the Cup of Iane Dutchesse of Austrich,See the Chro. of the Empe∣rours in the 2. Tome. which came to see him; and feeling himselfe grieued he would needs goe on hun∣ting, and beeing in the wood, hee fell from his horse, as if hee had bene stricken with a Palsey, whereof he died soone after. At the article and point of death hee cryed: O my God bee merciful vnto me a poore sinner. Munster and others. After his death, there was yet more trouble then before.Edward chosen Em∣perour. Frederic. The Electors were sollicited to elect Edward king of England▪ but he refused the election as a thing too troublesome. After,
they chose Frederic Count of Misne:Charles. 4. but hee loued better to maintaine peace with the Bohemians, then to charge himselfe with the titles of the Empire. At Francford one part of the Electors chose Gunther of Scwartymbourge: who accepted the Election as being suffici∣ently munited and puissant to hold good against the Emperor Charles, who then remained at Magunce. But Gunther a litle after was poisoned and died at Francford, so Charles raigned a∣lone. Let all people know hereby the detestable tirannie that Popes haue exercised through all the world, spreading the seedes of seditions and warres. The publike reuenewe of the Empire engaged.The Empire was brought into great calamitie: for Charles to the end to leaue his sonne successor, did so corrupt the Elec∣tors with store of gifts and promises, that hee gaged vnto them the publike reuenew of the Empire, which they yet detaine at this day: and therefore the Romane Empire could not relieue it selfe. For then did the Electors constraine Charles to sweare that he would neuer reuoke that he had engaged. The Empire being ouerthrowne, the Turke assailed the Church of Iesus Christ, and ruinated many of them in Eu∣rope, putting all to fire and sword, and laying vpon them that miserable yoake of Mahomet. But how can Christian Princes driue backe Ottoman and his successors out of the Church of Christ, if they first represse not the Turkish Pope an houshold enemie? The Iubile remitted to 50. yeares.This Pope Clement reduced to the fiftieth yeare the Iubile, wherof hath bene spoken, to the end by that meanes to gather more gold: and being absent from Rome, hee made it be cele∣brated  the yeare of the Lord, 1350. All the length of the said yeare there were at Rome euery day to the number of fiue thou∣sand Pilgrimes, entring and going out, as easily might be coun∣ted. Thus saith Peter Premonstre. The bringing in the obseruation of the ceremonie of Iubile, is a renowncing of Iesus Christ, who hath brought vs the agreeable time, and the yeare and day of saluation and perpetuall pardon. 2. Cor. 6.2.
In this time a company of people of diuers Nations were assembled, making a Sect,Lewis.Whippers or beaters. which did beate and whip them∣selues, going from Towne to Towne, from Borough to Bo∣rough, and from Village to Village: There came one time 200. from Souabe, and amongst them was one Prince and two Go∣uernours, whom they obeyed. One day being before the Mo∣nasterie of Spire, in the day about one of the Clock, they made a round and stripped themselues naked, except that they had shirtes like hose, from the thighes to the heeles, and so fell pro∣strate vpon the earth one after an other in forme of a Crosse,A new Sect. Robes. and whipped themselues, singing and Inuocating God: they also laid their faces towards the earth, praying for themselues and for all such as did them good, likewise for them that did euill vnto them. They had certaine Priests amongst them, and some Lettered people: there were also Gentlemen and Han∣dicraftsmen, women and children. If any man Inuited them to dinner, they durst not go, nor take any almes without the leaue of their Gouernours. But they whipped themselues twise a day, and each one once in the night secretly. They spake not to any woman. They all carried Crosses both before and be∣hinde, in their apparell, hattes, or Caps. Their whips were tied to their robes, and they remained no more then one night in a Parish. From the Towne of Spire, there were more then an hun∣dreth which raunged themselues in their company.Error inconti∣nently findeth her adherents Yet none was receiued of their band, vnlesse they promised to keepe all the aforesaid things. And if any had not inough each day to spend eight pence: and if he promised not to be confessed, and to haue good contrition, and to forgiue all iniuries his enemies had done vnto him Moreouer, his wife must consent vnto him. Finally the Emperour forced them to leaue off these toyes and bables: and the Pope forbad them vpon paine of excōmunica∣tion from thenceforth not to whip themselues. Yet in repen∣tant maner they might whip themselues secretly. Imbert Daulphin of Ʋienne, renouncing the glory of the world (as they speake) tooke the habit of a Iacobin in the Couent of Lyons vppon Rhosne: solde the Countrey
of Dolphine to the king of France,Charles. 4. vnder conditiō that the kings of France should not aliene it, and that their eldest children should beare the title thereof. And this did he in despight of such as should haue bin his heires, which had done a thing con∣trary to his will. See the French Histories. Bartholus the Legist or Lawyer was in this time, and Petrus Bercorij, who translated Titus Liutus into French, at the King Iohn his commaundement, and made the Breuiarie vpon the Bible, and the Morall Reportorie. Phillip de Valois 49. king of France, the Coozin-germain of the three former kings, hauing raigned 22. yeares, died at Noo∣gent le Roy, of the age of 57. yeares. Iohn his sonne Duke of Normandie, was crowned at Reims, the fiftieth king of France, and raigned 14. yeares. The brotherhood of the order of the starre, began in the house of S. Oyon nigh Paris, at the instance of King Iohn. The knights of this order carried a starre in theyr hattes or on their coates. About this time the Iewes were sent out of Almaine, be∣cause they had infected and poysoned the Fountaines and Pits of water. Fasci. Temp. Clement the sixt died suddenly, being stroken with an Apo∣steme, the yeare 1353. Innocent. 6.Innocent Pope, sixt of that name succeeded, borne of Limo∣ges,  first called Stephen Aubert, hee was an aduocate Doctor in the Lawes and the Decrees: after he was Bishop of Cleremont and Cardinall of Ostia. After he had taken possession of the Popedome, looking prudently for his profit in time to come,Reseruation of Benefices. he suspended certaine reseruations made by Clement his predecessor: and straight or∣dained that all Prelates and beneficed men should retire vnto their Churches: not to the end to preach the Gospell, but to magnifie and maintaine all abuses and Papish rights. And that they might gather the fruites thereof to liue in all Idlenesse and dissolution. He said well that Sheepe ought to be kept by their owne Sheepheard, and not by an hireling.
This Pope would needs gather a tenthe of all the rents and reuenewes of the Cleargie, but the Prelates of France would not consent therevnto, therefore it was not leuied, yet hee did what he could in Almaine, in the Dioces of Spice. See Nau∣clerus. The dearenes of victualls was extreame in France, for the warres of the Englishmen, the quarter of good wheat was at eighteene pounds at Paris. He diminished his ordinarie expences (which was great) in reducing his familie to a certaine number, yet not very ho∣nest, as may be seene in Petrarke. He would haue no person in his house but such as should serue either his profit or affections, and he very straightly by Edict enioyned all his Cardinalls that they should do the like.Betwixt say∣ing and do∣ing is a long way. And said that his life and that of all Ecclesiasticall persons ought to serue for an example to others, so that all Christian people may take heed to follow our examples. Moreouer hee ordained a certaine sallary or stipend for the Auditors of his Pallace, to the end they should steale nothing. He was sparing in his diet and liuing (say some authors) but in expences of warre very large. The Vniuersitie of Prage in Bohemia,The Vniuersi∣tie of Prage. is instituted and en∣dowed with priuiledges by Innocent, at the request of the Em∣perour Charles the 4. Naucler. Charles the 4. going to Rome to be crowned,Outrage done to the Empresse. his wife was taken at Pise, and carried with her Damzels into a Stewes to despite the Emperour, but shee escaped from thence in great danger: and then appeared the vertue of the Almaines. Nau∣clerus. The yeare 1355. Charles the 4. was crowned at Millaine, and after at Rome on Easter day, vpon condition straight to depart out of Italie. Naucler. What pride was this to commaund the Romane Emperour to retire out of his owne countrey? Franc. Petrarke. The Iourney of Poitiers was to the great dammage and con∣fusion  of all France, and victorie of the English.The battaile of Poitiers. There were slaine the Duke of Bourbon, and the Constable of Fraunce,
the Marshall and others, to the number of eight hundreth knights. The King of France was a prisoner, Phillip his fourth sonne and others, as well Counts as knights and men of armes, at least 17. hundreth. See the Histories of France. The yeare of Christ, 1359. was held an Imperiall Iourney at Magunce, whether the Pope Innocent sent his Legate for the subsidies of the Apostolike Chamber: and the said Legate had power to dispence with all Ecclesiasticall persons touching Be∣nefices which they had obtained otherwise then the holy Ca∣nons permitted. In this assembly were the Archbishop of Ma∣gunce, Treuers, and of Colongne, the Dukes of Saxe, Bauiere and others. The Emperor then called the Legate vnto him & said: The Pope hath sent you into Almaine to exact a great summe of siluer, without reforming the Cleargie. After hee said to a Canon of Magunce; deliuer mee your hatte, and gaue him his which was much worse. Then said he to the Princes which were there; Locke not I with this hatte more like a warriour then a man of the Church? Then turned hee againe to the Archbishop of Magunce, and said. Wee commaund that you reforme your Cleargie, and take away the superfluitie in their garments, shooes, hattes, and other things. The Popes Legate hearing this, went away all confounded, and as it were flying, tooke a boate and got him to Cologne. Naucler. Iohn de Ro∣quetaillaide martired.This Pope, a true Tyrant of Babilon, commaunded that Iohn de Roquetaillaid should be burnt in Auignon, because he said something against the Cleargie. This man (saith Peter de Premonstre) prophecied many things should come to passe touching Antichrist and the Popes, and therefore was he held suspected of heresie. For he began to prophecie the yeare of our Lord, 1345. in the time of Clement the sixt, and many things were seene come to passe of that he had foretold. The Feast of the speare and nailes.This Pope ordained the Feast of Iesus Christs Launce and nailes: to the end those dead Idolls might bee adored by the Christians. Hee Inuironed Auignon with walles and ditches, and without the towne founded the Monasterie of Chartreux. Wonders.Before this Popes death, there was a great Ecclips of the Sunne, such as was neuer seene the like; to shewe that that
very time was so full of darknesse, that scant was there any re∣mainder of the light of truth in the Church. There was also seene in his time a a flame after the sunne-setting (as Masseus witnesseth) which endured a long time, and shewed what a great fire should after come. Moreouer there was great numbers of Grashoppers, which after they had de∣stroyed the corne, euen all trees were burned. As the said Pope was preparing an Armie by sea against the Turkes,The death of Innocent. because the Romanes were in troubles and sediti∣ons, he was so vexed in his minde, that he died with griefe, the yeare 1362. and was buried in the said Monasterie of Char∣treux without the Towne of Auignon. Vrbain fift of Limosin,Vrbain. 5. called before Grinnald Grisant the sonne of an English Phisitian called William, Monke of S. Be∣net, first Abbot of Auxerre, and after of S. Victor, nigh to Mar∣seillis, being absent in a certaine Embassage, was created Pope. He was a great Doctor of the Canon Lawe, and an excee∣ding arrogant Maister. He straight applied himselfe to defend the libertie of the Papall Church by couetousnesse, dissoluti∣ons and pompes, and chiefly serued himselfe therein with such as affectioned him most in such affaires. But aboue all, he sent one called Gilles a Spaniard, Cardinall of S. Sabin as a Legate into Italie with full power: Who as a true Executor of all his bloudie commaundements, rode through all Italie, and so re∣pressed the Vicounts and other gouernours of Townes, brin∣ging vppon them great losses and hurts if they would not submit themselues vnder the obedience of the Romane Church. Yues a Brittaine Priest,Yues. solde his goods and gaue them to the poore, and was Canonized after his death. Sabell. Armacan (some call him Richard and qualifie him an Arch∣bishop) a learned man, published conclusions against Friars,Armacan. teaching that it was a villainous thing for a Christian to begge without constraint. Ʋolater. Baldus a Lawyer of Peruse, was renowned in this time. Baldus. Iesuites.The Monasticke order of Iesuites began by Iohn Colom∣ban and Francis Ʋincent of Bourgongne. Ʋolat. and Sabell.
They were afterward by the Popes priuiledge, called the A∣postolike Clarkes. Brigide Princesse of Sauabe, had foure sonnes and foure daughters: a litle before Pope Vrbain died, she went to Rome to erect the order which after she instituted. Valat. lib. 21. She then to accomplish her vow, procured that the order of Monkes (named with her name) as well men as women might be confirmed. A golden Bull.The Emperour Charles merited great praise by the Bull of gold, wherein he gathered many things very necessarie to maintaine publike peace. Iohn king of France went into England for the deliuerance of his brother Duke of Orleance, and of his sonne Iohn Duke of Berry, and of many others which he left in hostage; and being there, died in London, & after was carried to S. Denis in France. See Emili. lib. 8. & 9. Charles fift of that name, 51. king of France, was surnamed le Sage. Hee caused many Latin bookes to be translated into French, yea bookes of holy scripture. Amurathes the third Emperour of the Turkes, raigned 23. yeares, and was the first that entred into Europe: For hee aided the Emperour of Constantinople, and sent him 12. thousand men, which passed into Greece. This was after, cause of the taking of the Couuntrey of Asia, the yeare of Christ, 1363. Wickliffe beganne as a breake of day, the preaching of the Gospell. Iohn Wickliffe an English man, a man of great spirit, flouri∣shed in this time, and began as from a deepe night to draw out the truth of the doctrine of the sonne of God. He studied in the Vniuersitie of Oxford, and came to such degree of eruditi∣on, that hee was thought the most excellenrest amongst the Theologians. In his readings with the puritie of the doctrine which hee taught, hee also liuely touched the abuses of the Popedome: In so much that the Locusts, that is to say the beg∣ging Monkes, lifted themselues vp against him. But the Lord gaue him for a Protector, the King Edward, during whose raigne, he had great libertie in his profession.
Richard the said Edwards successour, persecuted and banished him: but as a true Champion of the Lord he remained alwaies constant euen to his death. His conclusions, his bookes and his doctrine, shew sufficiently the gifts and graces which God had bestowed vpon him. Whosoeuer will more largely know those things, let him looke in the booke of Martyrs brought by vs in∣to light since the said Wickliffe. Vrbane went to Rome to pacifie Italie, where hee builded  many things at Viterbe, and at Montlacon, minding to returne into Italie. And as he returned into France in hope to bring a∣gaine the Court to Rome, he deceased at Marcellis, not without great suspition of poysoning. Sabel. An Vniuersitie founded at Vienna in Austriche, by Albert Duke of Austriche. Planudes a Greeke Monke liued in this time: hee transla∣ted Cato and other bookes out of Greeke into Latin. Charles King of France often held his seate of Iustice, and was altogether a man of peace, neither was euer Armed. Only walking nigh Paris, he made his warres and other his affaires of importance by his brothers and other Committees, by whom he recouered as it were all that which the English men had ta∣ken from his Father. To helpe the charges of the warre,A Taxe vpon Wine. he laid a Taxe vpon Salt & Wine that men sold. He had fiue Armies at once against the English men. Gregorie Pope, 11. of that name, of Limosin,Gregory. 11. ruled in Auig∣non 7. yeares & 5. moneths, before he was called Rogier, sonne  of the Earle of Benfort, and Nephew of Pope Clement the sixt: hee was the Disciple of Baldus the Legist, who then read at Peruse. Returne of the Papaltie to Rome. Most of the Townes of Italie withdrawing themselues from his obedience (as Ʋolateranus saith) at the perswasion of Caterine de Siene, a Nunne of the order of Iacobins, & of Baldus his late maister, parting frō France with 12. Gallies, with 3. ranks of Ores returned to Rome, the yeare of the Lord 1376. He pronounced sentence of Interdict against the Floren∣tines, which were the first authors of the reuolt, and had seized
all the Popes Townes which were about them. Vpon whom finally he made strong and sharpe warre, because they made no account of the thunder of his excommunications: which the Legists said were of no validitie, because they proceeded of ha∣tred and enmitie. Naucler. Some set downe certaine causes of his returne into Italie. A woman called Brigide (saith Masseus) returning from Ierusalem, writ to Gregorie that the Lord would that the Romane Court should be turned into her house. Cranzius addeth, that as he re∣prehended a Bishop, that he left his Church and followed the Court, he answered him. And thou saith he which art Pope of Rome, and which ought to giue example to others, why goest not thou to thy Bishoppricke? Then transported he his seate to Rome at the perswasion of two women and of a Bishop, the se∣uenth yeare after he was departed. This Pope demaunded a tenth of all Church goods in Al∣maigne, & to gather it sent his Legate. But many resisted & for∣med appellations against the Pope, saying that they could not pay it. Others that they would not pay it: and so was there a schisme in the Churches of Almaigne. Naucler. Petrarke dyed about this time. So did Boccace, of the age of 62. yeares, Abb. Trit. Simon de Cassia was in this time, and S. Bonauenture whom Gregorie 2. made Cardinall and Bishop of Albe. Abb. Trit. Amurathes was slaine with the blowe of a Dagger, by the seruant of a Christian called Seruianus: For that the said Amu∣rathes had slaine his maister. A new Sect of dauncers.Peter de Premonstre hath left by writing, that in this Popes time there was a kinde or new Sect of diuellish people, as well men as women, which without any shame daunced hardely. And he said that in the yeare of the Lord 1375. they came frō Aix in Almain into Henaut, and from thence into France. Some said this signified the returne of Pope Gregorie & his Cardinals to Rome. These thought they daunced in a flood of blood, al∣though such as were present with them saw no such thing. The common people iudged that these people were ill baptized by Priests which keep whores and harlots: and therefore they de∣termined
to haue risen vp against the Cleargy to slay them and pill their goods,Wencelaus. but that God remedied it by the meanes of cer∣taine coniurations, & that which followeth in the said author. The yeare of Christ 1375. the English men and Brytons,The English fall vpon the the Swisses. with other people to the number of fortie thousand and more, fell vpon the Countries of Alsarce and Sangania, and tooke Ci∣ties and Castles and raced them to the ground, violated virgins and wiues, burned Churches and Monasteries, and after many other tyrannies they attempted also vpon the Bernois: but a great multitude of them and their Duke were slaine and dis∣comfited by the said Bernois at Frowenbrun, the rest were assai∣led by other Swisses, and were ouerthrowne, and so they all pe∣rished miserably. Fascic. temp. The Emperour Charles sought to stretch out the limits of his kingdome of Boheme, partly by siluer, and partly by warres and other meanes: which was cause that he gaue to Iohn Henry his brother, the Countrey of Morauia,The Country of Morauia. to the end he might re∣nounce the right he had in the kingdome of Boheme. Long time after he also caused the Princes Electors to elect Wencelaus his sonne King of the Romanes. Finally, after many requests hee obtained that he demaunded, the yeare of grace 1376. and gai∣ned the Princes which elected Wencelaus King of Romanes,Wencelaus. being but 15. yeares of age. After his coronation he espoused Ihehanne or Iane daughter of Albert, Counte of Holland, and Duke of Bauiere. But the yeare following Charles dyed, which was the yeare of grace 1378. and of his Empire 33. Hee was an Emperour worthie of praise, sauing that he regarded more his kingdome of Boheme, then the publike weale of his Em∣pire. For knowing his Sonne should succeede him in the Empire, hee corrupted the Electors by great and faire pro∣mises, the which being not able to accomplish, hee gaged vnto them the publike taxes and tributes, and brought the Romane Empire into that calamitie wherein it is at this day. For the Electors retaine that vnto themselues which should be the Emperours. A great number of the poore of Lyon were burnt at Paris, in the place de Greue. The Sea of Histories.
The Colledge of Benuais was founded at Paris, the yeare 1372. otherwise called the Colledge des Dormans, because it was founded by three brethren called Dormans, the one was Bishop of Beauuais, the other Archbishop of Angiers, and the other Chauncellour of France. Wencelaus sonne of Charles fourth of that name, was cho∣sen king of the Romans, beeing but 15. yeares of age, at the pursuite of his Father, and crowned at Aix la Chappelle, with his wife the daughter of Albert Duke of Bauiere, and Counte of Holland. But this Wencelaus was euil made of bodie and spirit, his bodie crooked and of an effeminate courage. He was borne at Nuremberge, and his mother dyed at his byrth. Assoone as hee was made king of Boheme and of the Romanes, incontinently he gaue himselfe to all Idlenes and dissolution, following his pleasures, caring for nothing but to make good cheare. And because he vsed great tyrannie, in the end the Ba∣rons of the kingdom tooke him & kept him in prison the space of 4. moneths,The Empe∣rour impri∣soned. til he was brought forth by his brother the Mar∣quesse called Iohn: but he became no better. His subiects then seeing that all the Country was infected with his orders, tyran∣nies, whoredomes & dissolutions, they complained to his bro∣ther Sigismond king of Hungarie, and he was againe taken and imprisoned in Austriche, but escaping out of prison, he returned into his kingdome, and returned to his first manners. The Elec∣tors of the Empire often admonished him, but hee cared not, therefore he was depriued of his Empire at Bopard. Baiazet fourth King or Emperour of the Turks, the sonne of Amurathes, after the death of his Father, slewe his brother Soliman traiterously, and so alone enioyed the Empire of the Turkes, the yeare of the world 5335. after Christes Natiuitie, 1373. To reuenge the death of his father, he made war against Marke Lord of Bulgaria,Marke Lorde of Bulgaria. ouercame and slewe him, and so sub∣iected a great part of his Country. A little after he ouerranne Hungarie, Albania and Walachie, and did great hurt, tooke ma∣ny Christians and led them into Thracia prisoners. In his enter∣prises and affaires he was so hotte and so suddaine, that he was called Baiazet Hildrin, that is to say, thunder from heauen. He
brought vnder as it were all Greece, being aided with the goods and graces of nature, both in body and spirit. He besieged Con∣stantinople by the space of eight yeares. Wherevpon the Empe∣rour sailed into France requiring succours, which was graunted him: yet got Baiazet victorie of the French, Hungarians, Al∣maines, Syrians and Misians, in one assembly against him: after hee returned to Constantinople, and there was no other meane to conserue the Empire of Constantinople, but that Tam∣berlan, who was Lord of a certaine Countrie of East Scythia to∣wards Parthia, hauing (as it were) an infinit number of people, put to the sworde in one onely battaile on the Mount Stella (where Pompey fought with Mithridates) 2. hundreth thousand Turkes, and ouercame Baiazet, and bound him with chaines of Gold and put him into a Cage of Iron, and so ledde him through all the Countreys of Asia and Syria: In the which miserable estate the said Baiazet died. He raigned twentie and sixe yeares. Edward King of England who had so many victories in France, died of the age of 74. yeares, the yeare 52. of his raigne. Charles the 4. and Wencelaus his sonne, came into France to accord the French and the English: but they returned with∣out doing any thing, because of the death of the Queene, and her daughter Isabel. The Pope Gregorie after he had done all that belonged to a good Pope, (as Platina saith) being tormented with an intolle∣rable paine of the blather, deceased the yeare of the Lord 1378. Some say that at the houre that he yeelded the spirit, the fire fla∣med in the pallace of Auignon, which could not be put out vntill the greatest part of it was burnt. And after that, followed a schisme in the Popedome, the greatest of all the others. Then saith Masseus, the people and Cleargie of Rome assembled to∣wards the Cardinalls, and prayed them to chuse some Italian, and no French man. Vrbain sixt of that name, a Nepolitain by Nation,Vrbain. 6. called be∣fore Bartholemewe, Archbishop of Bar, being not yet of the or∣der of Cardinalls, and absent at the great pursuite of the Ro∣manes, was created Pope.
He was (saith Crantzius) a cruell man, of whom by pray∣ers nothing could be obtained. Being come to the Popedome he would not procure that peace might be amongst Christians as his dutie was: but sought to reuenge himself of iniuries done him by Cardinals, and by Iane Queene of Sicilie. Clement. 7. This is not numbred in the Catalogue of the Popes.Clement Pope, 7. of that name, was also chosen, and ruled in Auignon 15. yeares. And thus began the 22. Schisme, the cruellest and horri∣blest, which endured long. This came to passe for that after the death of Gregorie 11. the Cardinals parted themselues into two bandes, the Italian Cardinals by constraint of the Romanes did chuse the said Bar∣tholemewe Archbishop of Bar, and called him Ʋrbane the 6. but because he reprooued and reprehended the Cardinals for their lightnesse, they all departed from him, and went in∣to the Cittie of Tendes, where vpon enuie with the Frenche Cardinals they chose one called Robert, borne at Geneua, Cardi∣nall of the title of the twelue Apostles, and called him Clement the seuenth, who came to dwell in Auignon, because of the schisme. Nauclere saith that this Clement was borne at Catalongne, and was chosen 3. moneths after the promotion of Vrbain 6. For the French Cardinals, for the heate of the time demaunded ly∣cence of the Pope to goe into Anagnia, and from thence were transported into Pouille, where they elected the said Clement. When Vrbane sawe himselfe thus left of his Cardinalls, he created thirtie new vpon one day. A schisme of fortie yeares.This schisme endured fortie yeares vntill the Councell of Constance: whervpō came great disorder. The King of France and all his kingdome: Item Spaine and England held the part of Clement the 7. The other Countries, that is to say, Italie, Al∣maigne, Hungarie, &c. followed Vrbane the 6. and on both sides there was great contradiction. The kingdome of France endured great euils about this schisme. For Clement had good 35. Cardinals maintained & li∣uing chiefly of the said kingdome, and all held the best Prelate∣ships, benefices and dignities.
The kingdome there also was sore greeued, with Imposi∣tions, Annuities, Tenths,Inuentions to drawe siluer. expectiue graces and other inuenti∣ons: Insomuch that the poore Clarkes & Students of the Vni∣uersitie of Paris could get no Benefices, but all were occupied for Cardinals and other Courtiers of Auignon, who had euer hi∣red people to enquire of the value of Benefices. Vrbane was cautelous, seditious, and vncurteous,Ʋrbane. memoratiue and reuengefull of iniuries, and one that tooke pleasure to sowe dissentions amōgst Christian Princes, rather thē appease them. Neither could he liue in peace with the king of Hungary and of Naples. He would haue depriued Charles king of Sicilie of his kingdom, Insomuch that Charles came against him, and cōstrai∣ned him to flie to Genues by sea, and as he passed on, the Pope caused 5. or 6. Cardinalls to be drowned, because he thought they fauoured Clement the 7. who was at Auignon. Two other Cardinalls fled towards the said Clement, and were welcommed: but Vrbain excommunicated them, & Cle∣ment absolued them, and the two Popes one excommunicated an other, and their adherents. Naucler. Vrbain absolued the Florentines of an excommunication to acquire their grace and fauour. To shewe himselfe deuout, he instituted the Feast of the visitation of the Virgin Mary in the Mountaines. He went to Naples to put Ladislaus sonne of Charles king of Naples, and Iane his sister from their heritage: but it was in vaine. Therefore he returned to Rome, wherein he was poy∣soned and died. The said Charles at the sollicitation of Pope Vrbain the 6. came from Hungarie to Naples, where being,Acts worthy of the Papall seate. he slew the Queen Iane to please the Popes apppetite. All the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and Priests, which adheared vnto the said Iane, were depriued of their Benefi∣ces by the Pope, and in their places other were instituted. See Naucler. So Charles remained king of Naples fiue yeares, after∣ward he returned into Hungarie, but by the subtiltie of the Queene he was poysoned, and died the yeare, 1385. So wickedly
as hee had caused Queene Iane of Sicilie to be slaine: So the Queene of Hungarie slew him.Note the tro∣bles yt come of the Pope. But the cause why Vrbane sent for Charles to Naples was in despight of Queene Iane, who had receiued his Cardinalls into her kingdome, wherfore he depri∣ued her thereof, and was crowned King of Sicilie by the Pope, the yeare 1381. vnder conditiō that he should leaue to his Ne∣phew certaine Duches & Counts in Sicilia. But because the said Charles was poore, the Pope sold the Churches goods, yea and the goods of certaine Monasteries, euen amounting to 8000. Florence: he aliened also and sold certaine ornaments of Gold and Siluer, Crosses and Images, with which helpe he obtained the kingdome of Naples as is said. The three Flower delu∣ces of France.Charles the sixt, sonne of Charles the fift, was sacred King of France very yong. He would beare but three Fower deluces in the French Armes. His Father left him 1800000. Scutes. (Gaguin saieth 18. Millions) and yet at the beginning of his raigne he had no mony: For it was dissipated and dispearsed by diuers Tutors and Gouernours. The aforesaid Clement 7. crowned Lewis King of Naples, who by armes occupied the Prouince, going into Italie against the said Charles and Vrbane, hauing in his Campe 30. thousand fighters: but hee dyed two yeares after hee was in Italie. The Fountaines and waters were impoysoned, wherof he dyed and all his Nobilitie. Naucler. The said Iane Queene of Sicilie & Countesse of Prouence, the wife of Charles Duke of Calabria, sonne of Robert King of Sicilie and Nauarre, and the sister of the King of France Philip, had made the said Lewis, Duke of Aniou, her heire. (For she had now raigned 30. yeares without hauing any line. The Sea of Histories. Lewis Archbishop of Magdebourge, as hee daunced in the Towne of Caluin with Ladies and Damozels vntill night, sell vpon the ground and brake his necke, and beat out his braines, with one of the Ladies which he led. The same hist. The yeare 1381. Hugo Aubriot, born at Bourgongne, who before had bene great Gouernour de Finances of France, by the meanes of the Duke of Bourgongne was made Prouost of Paris,
and during his gouernment, the policie of Paris was well admi∣nistred. Many buildings were made, as the bridge of S. Michael, the walles towards the Bastile, S. Antonie, and the length of the Riuer of Seine: the litle Bridge, the litle Castle, and many other places. Hee was accused of many crimes, and aboue all, for that hee derided Churchmen, and principally them of the Vniuersitie of Paris; which conceiued great enmitie against him: but especially because hee caused to bee builded the Towre of the litle Castle vpon the litle Bridge to represse the Insolencies of Schollers, and to stay their night courses. Wherefore at their pursuite many secret Inquestes were made against him, and hee was charged to haue had the company of Iewish women.Aubriot. That hee beleeued not in the Sacrament of the Aultar, but mocked at it, and would neuer bee confes∣sed. Beeing charged with these informations, hee was impriso∣ned in the Chastelet, and from thence yeelded to the Bishop of Paris his prison, and was declared an heretike worthy to bee burned. At the Princes request the sentence was moderated, and he was publikely placed on a Scaffold in our Ladies Court at Paris, as an heretike and contemner of Sacraments, and as such an one, condemned to perpetuall prison with bread and water. Hee was afterward deliuered from the saide prison of Paris by a popularie tumult, which would haue made him theyr Captaine, but hee withdrewe himselfe to Dijon where he was borne. The ninth of Iuly, Ludolphe or Lupolde Duke of Au∣striche, with a great company of people of warre deceiued by the counsell of the Nobles,The Swissers prosper. fell vppon the Swissers nigh Sem∣pac, which were in number of a thousand sixe hundreth, which draue away all that multitude, and slewe the Duke of Austrich with eighteene other Princes. Two yeares after the Gentle∣men which escaped, returned with sixe thousand combatants: but two hundreth men of Glaronne put them to flight, and o∣uercame 2400. Fasc. About the yeare 1387 fell there a schisme betwixt the Vniuersitie of Paris, and the Friar Iacobins. One Doctor of the
Friars Preachers called Iohn de Montelon,The disputati∣on of the con∣ception of the Virgin Ma∣rie. preached and main∣tained publikely that the Virgin Marie was borne in originall sinne. Such questions come of pride and ambition, they are not such as the Lord requireth. The name of Huet.At Rouen an other Doctor of the same order preached pub∣likely, that if he prooued not that the Virgin Marie was con∣ceiued in originall sinne, let them call him Huet, that is Owle. Herevpon in despite and derision of them, when men sawe any of the said order, they called them Huets. The Sea of Hist. Charles 6. king of France, visited the Pope Clement 6. in Auignon. Antichrist makes warre vpon himselfe.Clement died the yeare of our Lord Iesus 1392. and was buried in Auignon, as they say. These two Popes sent terrible Bulles into diuers parts of the world, and sowed diffamitorie bookes, wherein they named one an other Antichrists, Schis∣matikes, heretikes, tyrants, traitors, theeues, vniust, sowers of tares, and children of Belial. Iohn de Ligni Doctor of both lawes, published a Treatise in fauour of Ʋrbaine: and the Abbot of S. Vast the kings Councellor of France, an other in fauour of Clement. The seate of Rome could neuer be better approoued of An∣tichrist, then by the acts of these Popes, and the witnesse of their partakers and complices. Boniface. 9.Boniface Pope, ninth of that name, ruled at Rome 15. yeares;  hee was a Neapolitain, & elected of the age of 30. yeares, before called Peter Thomocel. He was the likeliest amongst the Car∣dinalls which Vrbain had created. He confirmed the feast of the visitation of the Virgin Ma∣rie, instituted by Vrbain his predecessor. Hee fortified the Castle of S. Angelo against the Romane people. He made a lawe whereby he obtained the seignorie of all the world: that is to say; That it should not be lawfull for any person to enioy any Benefice wherevnto he should be promo∣ted, before he had paid to the Fiske or Apostolike chamber all the reuenewe of the first yeare.
He abolished Tribuns, which was a noble Magistracie in the Towne of Rome: and constrained the Romanes by a cruel Edict to call a stranger to be Senator, namely, one Maleteste of Piscane. Boniface canonized S. Brigide, as is aboue said, in the life of Ʋrbain the 5. He made great merchandise of Indulgences, and sold them for money. The yeare of Christ, 1394 Clement the seuenth dyed in Auignon. Benet Pope, 13. of that name,Benet. 13. otherwise called Peter de la Lune, borne at Catalongne, father to the king of Arragon, gouer∣ned  in Auignon 21. yeares, and after went into Arragon, in the time of the Councell of Constance. Before he was Pope being a Cardinall, he made a voyage to Paris to cause the schisme to cease. And then in the Vniuer∣sitie of Paris, were M. Peter d' Aliaco, Cardinall,De Aliace. Gerson. Doctor in Theologie: and M. Iohn Gerson, who after the said Aliaco, was Chancellor of Paris. The yeare 1395. the Christian Princes, Sigismond king of  Hungarie and Boheme, brother of the Emperor Wencelaus, Phil∣lip d' Artois, Iohn Count de Neuers, and many other Christian Princes, were discomfited nigh Nicopolis, going against Baiazet the Turke, to giue succours to the Emperour of Constantinople: the pride and dissolution of the French was cause thereof. The beginning of the Dukes of Millaine. Wee haue saide that in the time of Henry the seuenth there was at Millaine two factions, that is,Two factions at Millaine. of the Gibellins and of the Guelphes. The Vicounts stucke to the one, the yeare 1250. and were the strongest in their families. In so much that in the end Mathew Vicount cast out of the Towne of Millaine the great familie of Turrians; Galeace succeeded Mathew in the administration of the Common-wealth. Af∣ter Galeace, came Actio his sonne, out of whose helme fell the Serpent. And because this man dyed without issue, his Vncles Iohn Bishop of Millaine and Luchin, tooke the gouernment of the Duchy, and had great warres against the Cities of Parme,
Lande, Cremone, Bergame, Genes, and others, & subiected them. The Bishop being dead, and Luchin also, the administration came to Barnabas, who with the aide of his brethren, had ma∣ny warres against the Pope of Rome, but principally he a long time molested Bolongne, vntill the Citizens redeemed them∣selues with money. See Munster. Battaile a∣gainst the Turke.The vnluckie battaile for the Christians in Hungaria a∣gainst the Turke, where 20000. Christians were slaine, and in∣finite others taken and put to death. The Count of Neuers was there taken prisoner, but his life was saued with 22. others, Gen∣tlemen. His raunsome was 200000. scutes. Naucler. & the Sea of Histories. Benet the 13. graunted to the Vniuersities, Rolles to haue prouision of Benefices. Mary daughter of king Charles made her selfe a Nunne at Poissy.A Nationall Councell in France. The yeare of Christ 1398. was assembled a Councell by the Prelates of France, wherin it was said, that because Pope Benet would not accord to that way of cession, they would o∣bey him no more in any thing. That Ordinaries should make collation of Benefices. That vnto electiue dignities men should proceed by election, without any more resorting to the Pope Benet. The English men imprisoned, and after vngently murthe∣red their king Richard: because he had made peace and accord with the king of France, without consent of the people. The yeare 1399. certaine Monkes of the order of S. Ber∣nard, brought a S. Snairy, & placed it in an Abbey of theyr or∣der called Cadoyn, in the Diocesse of Cahors. Annales of France. How then say they it is at Chambery? White Man∣tles.The Sect of white Mantles in Italie was destroyed. For Boniface the 9. made take ther Rector, and caused him to die. Some say he was burnt. See Naucler. The Trinetois otherwise called the Bretheren of the re∣demption of Captiues, which was also called the order of In∣ham, multiplied greatly. Turelupins.The Turelupins are persecuted, they were otherwise called the poore of Lyons: many were burnt in Frāce with their babes.
Iohn Hus. The light brought in by the writings of Wickliffe, greatly profited such as came after him, and aboue all to Iohn Hus, who also cleansed the fountaines of the Gospell, which were fil∣led not onely with infectious clay and mire, but also euen with mortall poyson, which the begging Monkes and prophane Schoole-philosophie had tempered. And although the vertue that God had giuen to this person, meriteth a longer recitall of his beginning, yet we will send the Readers to the booke of Martirs, since Wickliffe and Hus. As for vs, we haue chiefly to render thankes vnto God, that through him and other true faithfull, he hath sent vs the light of his Gospell. The Pope Benet gaue to Charles the sixt, king of France,An admoni∣tion to giue thankes vnto God. the tenth part of all Ecclesiasticall goods: partly that the king should maintaine and defend him, and partly to the end hee himselfe might bee partaker of the bootie. And as hee made his residencie in his Countrie of Catalongne, in a strong Castle called Pauiscole, maintaining himselfe to be the true Vicar of Iesus Christ; he was condemned many waies by the authoritie of the said Councell. He assembled a Councell at Parpignan, and created many Cardinalls. Finally, dying at Pauiscole the yeare of our Lord, 1424. he commaunded his Cardinall, that straight they should chuse an other in his place, and they elected one called Giles Munios, Chanon of Bercelone,The Councell of Constance condemned this Pope Clement. 8. and named him Clement the 8. He incontinently at the Instigation of the king Alphonsus crea∣ted Cardinalls, and did all that which Popes are accustomed to do. But after that Pope Martin the first had agreed with the king Alphonsus, Giles by his commaundement, renounced all the rights which he pretended in the Popedome, and was de∣clared Bishop of Maiorque, and the Cardinalls created by him, willingly renounced their dignities of Cardinalls. The witnesse of Mathias Flactius of Esclauonia, a diligent Author, extracted and taken out of Theodoric of Nyem, shall not bee heere impertinent: who made a Chronicle of that schisme, comprised in three bookes. Theodoric of Nyem saith
he, who was a very familiar Secretarie to a certaine Pope, and a good and a wise man, hath faithfully described the historie of this schisme, which hath bene amongst Popes by the space of 39. yeares before the Councell of Constance. Good God what subtilties, what fraudes, what wickednesse, and what straunge acts rehearseth he of those Popes and good spirituall Fathers in that Historie: whereby they mocke God, all Religion, and the Church of Iesus Christ, yea molest and do subiect it to their tirannie? And surely I cōfesse that although before I had read, heard, and seene many of their villainies, and that therefore I had conceiued in my selfe an euil opiniō of the malice of that Antichrist and of his children, yet after I had read this booke, I perceiued that they were ten times more wicked then euer I could haue thought before. In the same booke also he saith, that such are not worthy of the title of Emperour, which make a countenance not to see, yea dissemble the execrable wicked∣nesse of Popes tirannies. Chrysoloras.Chrysoloras of Constantinople, taught Greeke Letters in Italy, which 700. yeares before had not bene in vse: whose daughter espowsed at Constantinople, Francis Philelphe. Gunnes.Bertholde Schwartz Monke and Alchemist was the first of Gunnes and Artillerie about this time. Scotland conuerted to the Faith. Wencelaus Emperour for his cowardise and couetousnesse was deposed from the Empire, and his Nephewe elected. Iosse.Iosse sonne of Iohn Henry, Marquis of Morauia, who was  the brother of Charles the fourth of that name, Marquis of Brandebourge, an vnprofitable man, was chosen king of the Ro∣manes by some, before Robert (as some say) being now old, be∣cause he was the vncle of Wencelaus, yet he was neuer crowned: For there passed not sixe monethes after his Election. Robert.Robert or Rupert, Duke of Bauiere, and Count Palatin of Rhene, was chosen after Frederic Duke of Brunswic and of Lu∣nebourge. This Frederic was a valiant Prince, wise and exerci∣sed in Armes, and truly worthy to gouerne the Empire, but there was long time enmitie betwixt him and the Archpriest of Magunce. For before he was crowned, the Count of Waldec
hauing charge of this gentle Archbishop,Robert. hee slew him villai∣nously, which was cause of great hurly burly and tumult throughout all Almaine, vntill the Princes Electors assembled in the Towne of Bopert: where they Elected Robert Count Palatin, a man well exercised in deeds of warre, and a great lo∣uer of Iustice, but of a small stature: But willing to enter into Aix la Chapelle to be crowned, the Citizens were against it: saying that in that case they could not fauour Robert, because as yet they were not absolued of the oath they had giuen to Wencelaus: But that the election might not be vnprofitable, the Bishop of Colongne,Robert crowned at Colongne. crowned Robert in the Towne of Co∣longne. After this, Robert made preparation to goe to Rome, the yeare 1402. to receiue the Imperiall Crowne, but hee was hindred by the Venetians and Millanois, and so could not exe∣cute that which he had enterprised.The death of Robert. Hee dyed at Oppenhem the tenth yeare of his Empire, and was buried in the Towne of Heidelbourge. Innocent the seuenth, borne at Sulmo, before called Cosmar de Peruse, Priest, Cardinall of the title of Saint Crosse: all Italie beeing in great trouble, was created Pope after Boniface the ninth. This Pope (as Platina saieth) beeing yet a Cardinall, vsed customably to reprehend the negligence and pucillanimi∣tie of Popes: saying that with their carelesnesse the schisme and trouble which was thē so great, as well in the Romane Church as in the common-wealth, tooke yet no end. But being moun∣ted into the Papall seate, and in some things following the fa∣shions of Ʋrbain and Boniface, his predecessors which he re∣prehended, being a priuate person, not onely he did the things which he condemned so sore before, but he could not so much as beare, that one should speake to him thereof. He gouerned the affaires in such confusiō, that once the Ci∣tizens of Rome beeing come towards him to require him that they might haue their old libertie, & be put in possession of the Capitoll, of the bridge Miluins, and of the Fortresse of Adrian:The Romanes request to the Pope. And that that pernitious schisme which was in the Church might be takē away: wars & seditions banished: remonstrating
that to do the same, the king of France promised to deliuer his hand, and that Leter de Luna would not refuse to enter into the way of agreement. But in place to graunt their request, hee sent them towards his Nephewe Loys, who remained at the hospitall of the holy spirit as were towards an hangman pre∣pared for them, who tooke eleuen of his Citizens which came to consult with him touching the affaires of their Common-wealth, which was in perishing by the Popes negligence, and put them all to death, he after cast them out of the windowes to the ground, saying that schismes and seditions could not be o∣therwise taken away. With this crueltie the Romane people being mooued, ha∣uing called to their aide Ladislaus (or Lancelot) king of Pouille, tooke Armes for the punishment of that cut-throate Lewis; but the Pope to shunne the furie of the people, fled to Viterbe, with Lewis his Nephewe. Rising of the Romane peo∣ple.The people seeing they could not take vengeance of him that had committed such wickednesse, fel vpon the Curtezans, whose goods were almost all pilled: yet some saued themselues in the Cardinals houses: which being ayded with their people, receiued such as came vnto them, although very hardly. After the Romanes hauing taken the Capitoll, and being seized of the Mount Miluins, they assailed the Fortresse of Aebrian: but it was lost labour, although Iohn Colomne the Count of Troy, and other valiant Captaines assisted them vnder the conduction of the King Ladislaus. In the end this stirre be∣ing appeased, the Pope came againe to Rome, where he crea∣ted many Cardinalls: amongst which was Angelius Corrairus a Venetian, Petrus Philargus of Creete, and Otho Colomnus a Ro∣mane Gentleman.The Marqui∣sate of Pise. Hauing by this meanes strengthned & esta∣blished his Popedome, he created Lewis his Nephwewe, Mar∣quis of Pise, and after appointed him for the principalitie of Firman. This Pope demaunded as well in France as in England, the halfe of all Ecclesiasticall reuenewes (as Gaguin saith) but it was not graunted him. After which things he liued not long: for the yeare 1407. he died at Rome.
Diuisions in Religion in the Country of Boheme. We haue abouesaid that the Emperour Charles the fourth instituted the Vniuersitie of Prage, and prouided it of learned men: and as a Prince giuen to Letters, adorned often with his presence the disputations made in Schooles. But because the Teutonians in that Vniuersitie seemed to carry away the prise and honour there in disputations aboue the Bohemians,Teutonians or Almaines. they were greatly ashamed that straungers should surmount them: It came to passe that one of the Bohemians hauing recouered the bookes of Wickliffe, communicated them to his compani∣ons, and they drewe out of them great arguments, which the Teutonians could not resist, wherevpon many dissentions fell amongst them, euen to batteries and murthers. The Teuto∣nians seeing this, forsooke the place; Insomuch that more then 2000. Schollers on one day went out of Prage, the yeare 1048. and came to Lipse, where they begun an Vniuersitie after leaue obtained. Iohn Hus then had the greatest renowne,Iohn Hus. a man that came out of a village called Hus, which signifieth an Hen, whereof he tooke his name. He was of a great and quicke spirit, and well spoken, beginning to recommend the doctrine of Wicliffe to the people. The Bohemians instructed with this doctrine, be∣gan first to set against the Pope, esteeming him no more ho∣nourable nor greater then other Bishops or Priests. And there∣vpon reformed the doctrine by the conclusions and Articles following. Articles of the doctrine of the Bohemiās. 1 That the dignitie makes not the Priest or Bishop hono∣rable, but sanctitie of life and good doctrine. 2 That soules seperate from bodies, goe right vnto eternall paines, or straigth obtaine happie life. 3 That there is no witnesse in all the scripture wherby can be proued that there is Purgatory after this life. 4 To make oblations and sacrifices for the dead, is an in∣uention of the couetousnes of Priests. 5 Images of God or of Saints: benedictions of waters and such like things, are forged of men against the word of God. 6 That the orders of begging Friars were inuented by di∣uels.
7 That Baptisme ought to be administred with water, with∣out creame, oyle, spittle, and such pollutions. 8 That the Temple of God, is the world▪ That such as build Churches, Monasteries, and Oratories, therein to enclose him, do enclose Maiestie which is incomprehensible. 9 That the ornaments of Priests, Chasubles, Corporals, Chalices, Plates, Vestments and Aultars, are all but vanitie. 10 That in vaine we implore the helpe of Saints, and that it is time lost to sing the Canonicke houres. That fastings merit nothing. 11 That the Eucharist ought to be administred vnder both kindes. 12 They reiected the Masse, and receiued onely the Com∣munion of the supper, the word and prayer, and many other Articles drawne from the holy scripture. Gregorie. 12.Gregorie 12. of that name, borne at Venice, called before Angelus Corrarius, Patriarke of Constantinople, and Cardinall, Priest of the order of S. Marke, was chosen at Rome after the death of Innocent: but vpon this condition, that if the profit and vtilitie of the Church required it, he should giue ouer his Papall dignitie, because of Benet 13. named Peter de la Lune, who suc∣ceeded Clement 7. in Auignon. The Venetians tooke of one named Franciscus Curiario Vicar of the Empire, two Imperiall Cities, Verone and Padua, after, the said Francis was sent prisoner to Venice, where finally he was slaine in prison. So after they vsurped traiterously the Towne of Rauenna, which was the Romane Churches Patri∣monie. They sent to summon with great magnificence the Gouernour Hostasius Polentan, his wife and his sonne, and pray∣ed them that they would come and take their pastime at Venice at a certaine great Feast and solemnitie which was made there. But whilest he was at Ʋenice, they tooke Rauenna by treason, and sent the said Lord, his wife, and his child, into perpetuall exile into the Ile of Candie, where they died poorely. Iohn le Maire. Lewis Duke of Orleance, comming from the Queenes house about eight of the Clocke at night, was murdred at Paris by
Apostate people, which first threw him off his Mule, & when he was fallen on the earth, an Almaine his Squire fell vpon him thinking to saue him, who was also put to death with his Maister. Iohn Duke of Burgongne caused him to be slaine: who after the case was knowne, fled incontinently from Paris and came to Arras, riding 42. Leagues that day. See the Annales of France by M. Nichol. Gille. This Pope Gregorie approoued the Sects of the Monkes of Mount Oliuet and Hieronymites,Monkes of Mount Oli∣uet. with the congregation of them of Venice, which were named of S. George de Alga. Benet the 13. beeing in Auignon, the king Charles the sixt sent in Embassage towards him, the Dukes of Bourgongne, of Berry & of Orleance: to the end to perswade him to giue place to his right for the good and vnion of the Church: and that on the other part Gregorie the 12. would do the like. Wherevnto the said Benet gaue no answere, but left the said Princes with∣out bidding them farewell,Benet in the Castle of Pa∣nisole or Pe∣ninsole. and retired into Spaine for feare he should be compelled to renounce the Popedome, and held a Councell at Parpignan, and after went to remaine in the Castle of Panisole, to be there more assured. In this time was a Councell held at Pise,A Councell at Pise. to revnite the Vni∣uersall Church, wherevnto Gregorie and Benet were cited, but they had no care to appeare, but derided it. And so thinking to do well, they made a double schisme and diuision. Before there was two Popes, and now three. For at the said Councell Gre∣gorie and Benet were deposed, and one called Alexander was in∣stituted. During the said Councell of Pise, Gregorie the 12. fled also into Austrich: but fearing not to be there in suretie, he re∣turned into Italie, and dwelt in the Citie of Arinunum, vnder the protection of a Baron called Malateste. To the said deposi∣tion of the two Popes, as it were all Christian Nations consen∣ted, except a part of Spaine, and the Count Arnimake, and the kingdome of Scotland, which fauoured the said Benet the 11. What shall we say of this schisme of three Popes, but that it is a token that that seate of Babilon shall bee diuided in three parts: as it is said in the Apocalips, and that from thence shall come the ruine of Antichrist and his end?
Alexāder 5. The yeare of Christ, 1409. Chrisebeles or Calephin, the first, the fift Emperour of the Turkes, obtained victorie against Sigismond. This Calephin raigned sixe yeares, & left two sonnes, Orchanes and Mahomet: but Orchanes was slaine by his Vn∣cle Moyses, who was after slaine by Mahomet the first of that name. Alexander Pope, fift of that name, was elected at the Coun∣cell of Pise, borne in the Ile of Candie, of the order of Friars, cal∣led before Peter Philarge, or of Candie: First Bishop of Nauarre, after Archbishop of Millaine; and consequently Cardinall, Priest of the title of the Church of the 12. Apostles, and succee∣ded Gregorie in the Popedome. Two Popes deposed.After that the two old Popes Gregorie and Benet were de∣posed at the Councell of Pise as is said, this was chosen by the consent of all the Cardinalls, vnto which degree and dignitie he being come (as Platina saith) it was with good right that they called him Alexander: Seeing he that before was but a poore begging Friar might be compared to any Prince whatsoeuer, in matter of prodigall and superfluous expences, and in great∣nesse of courage. Herehence it comes that that Graspopper in times past of small and base condition, did obtaine in the Kingdome of A∣baddon, a face like a mans, and teeth like to them of a Lyon. This Pope also vsed commonly to say as hee played, that hee had bene a rich Bishop, a poore Cardinall, and a begging Pope. Ladislaus depriued of his kingdome.This Alexander was of so great boldnesse, that in the Coun∣cell of Pise with the consent of the Priests that were there pre∣sent, he tirannously depriued of the right of his father the king∣dome Ladislaus then king of Naples and of Pouille: who occu∣pied certaine seignories which the Church had ill gotten: And vniustly adiudged it to Lewis Duke d' Aniou. After that this Councell of Pise was finished, this Pope went to Bolongne: of which Towne a wicked Sodomite called Balthasar Cosse, Cardinall of S. Eustache, had the gouernment: whom Alexander confirmed in his election, because through his subtill deuises that Councell had bene assembled: And
also for that hee was a man meete encounter at any time with such as would seise vpon any goods of the Church.Robert. There was in this man (as Platina saith) more fiercenesse, boldnesse and secularitie (if I may say so) then his estate requi∣red. His life was esteemed like a man of warres, giuen altoge∣ther vnto crueltie. In such sort that in this holy singlenesse of life, he thought that many things were lawfull vnto him, which ought not so much as to be named. See what Platina saith. Amongst other acts worthy of a Pope,A Bull of the Stigmates of S. Francis. this Alexander published certain Bulles touching the Stigmates or markes and wounds of S. Francis his Idoll, that they might be placed in the ranke of the Articles of the Christian faith: and ordained them a solemne Feast that they might be honoured of the faithfull. As this good Pope began to be sicke of a poysoned drinke which was giuen him by Marcillus of Parma, a Phisitian whom Balthasar had hired to do it for a great summe of money (as Panetius reciteth it in his 56. Sermon) And knowing that his death was nigh, he exhorted the Cardinalls as they came to∣wards him to mutuall concord, and to maintaine the libertie of the Church. That is to say, to make peace amongst the wicked, and to maintain the Papall pompe and seate, that Iesus Christ may be troden vnder foote. Iohn Bauiers Bishop of Liege, the Duke of Bauiers his bro∣ther, Lord of Holland, and Count of Hainaut, being chased from the Towne, demanded helpe against the Liegeior of the Duke of Burgongne that married his sister:16000. after the Chron. of France, and 36000. after the Chron. of Almaine. who fighting against them of Liege, hee slew more then fortie thousand of them, burnt their Citie, Churches and Monasteries. The Priests slew and put to death their women and children. Fascic. Temp. The Vniuersitie of Lipse or Lypizen, was set vp by the Maisters of the Vniuersitie of Prage, by the aide of Frederic Marquis of Misne, and after Duke of Saxonie. Sigismond sonne of Charles the fourth,Sigismond. King of Hungarie and of Boheme, brother of Wencelaus, after the death of Albert was chosen Emperour of Rome by the consent of all. He per∣forming
the dutie of a true Emperour,Sigismond. was very renowned in wisedome, knowledge, and bountie: Hee loued vertuous peo∣ple and such as were learned, and raised them vp vnto honour and dignitie: yet he was vanquished by Amurathes Emperour of the Turkes, and lost a great battaile, and his Tents & Pauili∣ons. He went by the space of three yeares through Europe, to set order, and to roote out the great schisme so damageable to all Christendome. Therfore hauing reiected three Popes, schis∣matikes and vnlegitimate, and which held the seate at Barione, Oddo Columnius was made Pope by the consent of all. Iohn. 24.Iohn Pope, 24. of that name, succeeded Alexander, and ru∣led at Bolongne fiue yeares or thereabouts: hee was before cal∣led Balthasar Cosse, or Ihea de Coza, after the Sea of Histories, Cardinall of Eustache. Some there are, euen of such as approoue the Popish ty∣rannie, which affirme that he came vnto the Popedome rather by force and violence, then by free and Canonicke election. For (as Stella saith) being at Bolongne rather as a Lord and Mai∣ster then as a Legate, when the Fathers were there assembled to chuse a new Pope, he exceedingly threatned them if they elected not such an one as pleased him. Therefore many were presented whereof hee would not approoue one. Then said the Cardinalls vnto him; Name him of whom you can like. And he answered; Giue me S. Peters Mantle and Pontificall habit, and I will giue them vnto him whom I would to bee Pope. When hee had the habit hee put it vpon himselfe, and saide, it is I that am Pope. But although it displeased the others which were there present, yet they must needs dis∣semble it, so furious, terrible, and enuironed with souldiers was hee. A Sinode at Rome.After his election he remained a certaine time at Bolongne, then went he to Rome, it beeing the chiefe of his enterprise. There he assembled a Sinode, to the end to giue the Imperiall Crowne to Sigismond. Historie of the Owle.In the first Session of this Sinode, as the aforesaid Iohn was sitting on an high seate, after the Masse of the holy Ghost was sung, there came an Owle, who placing her self vpon one of the
balkes of the Temple, and looking directly vpon the Pope, sa∣luted him in a straunge maner with his fearefull song. Such as were there present began to wonder, looking one at an other: and also casting their view vpon the Pope, they could scant keepe themselues from laughing. As for Iohn hee began to bee much ashamed, to sweate, and to bee sore anguished and tor∣mented in himselfe. Finally finding no other meane whereby hee might remedie his so great confusion, after hee had giuen leaue to such as were there assembled, he rose vp and retired. There was an other Session after this, wherein came the like. For this Owle could not bee chased away neyther for any cryes, no nor yet for stones and staues which were cast at him. There were then many which by this spectacle were indu∣ced to beleeue that such spirituall pillers haue long time go∣uerned the Church of Rome. Nicholas Clemengis Archdeacon of Baieux, reciteth this Historie in his Epistles. A Councell assembled at Constance. To put end to the aforesaid discords and slaunders, they were forced to assemble a general Councel, for which, the place was assigned at Constance. This was against the Pope Iohns wil, who desired it might be held in such a place wherein hee had more powre then the Emperour. See Naucler. & Leonard Are∣tin, who were in this time. In the said Councell finally appeared Pope Iohn the 24. of that name, and arriued at Constance vpon S. Simon and Iudes euen. Anno. 1414. Likewise the Emperour Sigismond came thither on Christ∣mas euen after midnight, with the Empresse his wife, and many other Princes, Counts, Barons and Nobles, which were in number about 30940. persons Courtiers, saith the Sea of Histories. With the Pope Iohn arriued foure Patriarkes, twentie and nine Cardinalls, 47. Archbishops, and 160. Bishops. See Naucler. On Christmas day the Pope sung three Masses, one at
midnight, one in the morning, and one at noone: and Sigismond attired Deacon like, sung the Gospell, Exijt edictum a Cesare, &c. Naucler. This Councell endured three yeares and seuen weekes after some, or about foure yeares after Naucler. and there was 46. Sessions. See the 2. volume of Councells. Champaine besieged.The yeare 1414. the king of France laid siege before Champaine, and it was taken by composition. Hee tooke Sois∣sons, and after laid siege before Arras: but a peace was made by the Duchesse of Holland, sister of the Duke of Burgongne. The Sea of Hist. The Friday after Candlemas day, (as they call it) there arri∣ued at the Councell sixe Cardinalls of Pope Gregories the 12. which approoued the Councell by the authoritie of the said Gregorie. Naucler. The Iourney of Blangy.The yeare 1415. was the battaile of Blangy, betwixt the English and French, wherein the chiefe bloud of Fraunce was shead: and it was commonly called La male Iournee. The Sea of Histo. In this time Wencelaus king of Boheme, was required by the Councell to send Iohn Hus, who went thither with the Empe∣rours safe conduct.Iohn Hus and Ierome of Prage. There went with him also Ierome of Prage, with one onely Clarke. They were admonished and greatly sollicited to desist from their opinions, but they were constant. They maintained that they were true in their propositions and reasons, being founded on the truth of the holy Gospell. And contrary, that the Romane Church had withdrawne it selfe from the truth and the Apostles doctrine, &c. See a more ample declaration of this Historie, in the first part of the booke of Martyrs. The death of Iohn Hus & Ierome of Prage.They were both condemned to be burned. Iohn Hus was first executed about the fourth day of the moneth of Iuly, the yeare 1415. and a good while after, Ierome of Prage was also burnt in the moneth of September. They endured death con∣stantly, and merily went to the fire glorifying the Lord, euen in the middest of the flame. Their Ashes were cast into the Lake of Constance.
The Bohemians vnderstanding what was done at Constance against their Doctors, sacked and spoiled all the Couents and Monasteries of the Countrey, and fired them: and from that time withdrew themselues from the subiection of the Romane Pope, as is said. In the said Councell Iohn Wickliffe an English man,Wickliffe burnt after his death. was condemned an heretike: and although dead, yet his bones were condemned to be vnburied. Also Lay-people were inhibited to communicate the Sa∣crament vnder both kindes. There was also a Decree that the Councell was aboue the Pope, and not contrarie. That the Councell hath full power to correct, iudge, and depose the Pope, yea to ordaine of all things, and not the Pope to Iudge, correct, or chaunge Decrees and Statutes of the Councell. Iohn 24. Pope, seeing that in the said Councell many crimes were obiected against him,Iohn 24. fled away in a disguised ha∣bit, by the helpe of the Duke of Austrich, Frederic, and by the  Councell of the Archbishop of Magunce: although the Em∣perour did all he could to hinder it. Naucler. He fledde first to Shaffufe, and from thence to Lusemberge, and after to Fribourge, to take his way towards the Duke of Bourgongne if hee could get thither. Naucler. The Duke Frederic was cyted in full Councell by the Emperour and that many times: And for that hee appeared not, the Emperour absolued his subiects of the oath of disobe∣dience which they ought vnto the Duke. Also hee depriued him of all his riches and goods; and gaue his goods to such as could take and occupie them. This gaue many occasion to assaile his person and his goods, whereof yet at this day the Cantons and the Valesans hold many places, as Bade, Me∣lingen, Prenigarten, Wallestat, Diossenhosen, which they got by force of Armes. Others occupied other Townes and places. See Naucler. Iohn was taken and brought to Constance, and there detei∣ned prisoner at Richman.
After they prooued against him 40. criminall Articles. He was deposed by all the Councell, the Wednesday of Tri∣nitie, 14. and 15. and hee himselfe approoued his deposition. In the second Volume of Councels there is mention made that more then 54. Articles were proposed and proued against him, to euery of which he answering cryed; Ah I haue yet com∣mitted a greater crime; namely, I haue passed the Alpes, and am come into Almaine. After his condemnation hee was gi∣uen vnto the Count Palatin, who kept him three yeares in Men∣hen: he was not suffered to haue any Italian with him, no not his Chamberlaine: his Gard were all Almaines, and he spake vnto them by signes onely. Naucler. After the deposition of Pope Iohn, they proceeded also a∣gainst Pope Gregorie the 12. who was cyted to appeare in per∣son, but he would not come there: yet either by faire meanes or force, hee sent Malateste, Lord of Armenia, with an ample procuration and power to resigne the said right hee had in the the Papall dignitie into the hands of the said Councell. The which was done, and the said Gregorie 12. was created Legate in the Marquesdome of Ancone, where he died soone after with mourning in the Towne of Racany, which is a Port of the Adriatike Sea. Iohn le Maeire. There remaineth yet the third Antipope, Peter de la Lune. Of him it was that Gerson often said: We must needs take away this man of the Moone (called Benet the 13.) who would not obey the Councell, but died obstinately in the Kingdome of Arragon: and commaunded his Cardinalls on his death-bed, that as soone ar he was dead they should elect an other, which they did, and elected Clement the 8. borne at Barselone, where∣in they profited litle. For the Pope Martin (as shall bee saide) had the Popedome whole, and had the obedience of all the Princes in Christendome: yet the saide Clement the eight was after made Bishop of Maiorque. See Iohn le Maire. That Pope Benet troubled much the Emperour Sigismond, For seeing hee would not consent to any agreement, the said Emperour was constrained in person first to goe into
France vnto the King, then to the King of England, to make an attonement betwixt those two Kings. Item, towards the King of Arragon in Spaine, with certaine Embassadors deputies of the saide Councell, to exhort them to hold the hand to the vnion of the Church, and to perswade the said Pope to doo as others did, which hee would neuer be brought vnto. Then the Princes of Spaine, the Arragonians, the Cathelains, Armignaes, and the Kings of Fraunce and England seeing his obstinacie, followed the opinion of the Councell, and withdrew themselues from the obedience of Pope Benet the thirteenth, which Sigismond signified to the said Councell. Naucler. Sigismond returned after to Constance about Candlemas, and the Councell with burning Candles excommunicated and depriued the said Benet of his Popedome, & after declared him an heretike & a schismatike, the 18. day of March. 1417. Naucl. This Pope Iohn whilest he was placed in the Romane seate, amongst other Ieasts of a Pope, he did that which followeth in diuers Authors. He had stirred maruellous warres against the king Ladislaus, and assembled a Councell at Rome to find means to driue him from his kingdome. He also commanded to make a procession with the head of S. Iohn Baptist, for that subtilly and cautelously he had determined to sell it to the Florentins. He approoued the Sect of such as named themselues De la Chemise, or Frisonniers,The Friso∣niers, or de la Chemise. which lifted themselues vp in the terri∣torie of Luques: and admitted the congregation of that new reformation in the Monasterie of S. Iustine, commenced at Pa∣doue by Lewis Barbe. As Pope Martin the fift was at Florence, this Pope bee∣ing deliuered from prison (contrarie to the opinion of all, so that all that were present maruelled thereat) came thither to∣wards him, and after he had kissed his feete, acknowledged him as his Pope, the successor of S. Peter, & saluted him as if he had bin some earthly God. Martin mooued with affection, certain daies after receiued him into the number of Cardinals, and hee made him Bishop of Tusculū: but after certain moneths he fini∣shed his life sad and grieuous, the yeare of the Lord, 1419.
in the same Towne of Florence: where he was honourably bu∣ried with great pompe in the Temple of S. Iohn Baptist by Cosme de Medicis, who euer bore him great loue. Cleues Sauoy.In the said Councell the Counts of Cleues and Sauoy were erected to Duchez by the Emperour Sigismond. Things being effected as is said, the Emperours will was that there should now be an handling to correct the maners of Ecclesiasticall persons, and to reforme the Church: but it was said that this could not well bee done during the vacation of the Apostolike seate: wherefore it was concluded to proceed to a new election of a Pope. Naucler. Martin. 5.Martin Pope, fift of that name, called Otho, a Romane  Cardinal Deacon of the house of Colonnois, of one same accord and will, by the consent of all was chosen of 33. Cardinalls, at the Councell of Constance: and was called Martin, because hee was consecrated on S. Martins day, hee gouerned fourteene yeares. The Emperour Sigismond very ioyfull that the Cardinalls had chosen such a Pope and so necessarie to the Christian com∣mon-wealth, entred into the Conclaue, where without regar∣ding his dignitie, falling on his knees before the Pope, in great reuerence hee kissed his feete. On the other part the Empe∣rour receiued him beningly, and heartily thanked him for the diligence and paines which he had taken to establish the vnion of the Church. Naucler. After that the Emperour had long time trauelled to assem∣ble this Councell of Constance, desiring to see the particular re∣formation of the Church, excused it that Rome had bene long without an head, and the time would not permit to begin a re∣formation, for the Councell had long endured. Wherefore an other Councell should bee assigned at Basil where that should be done, and so the Emperour was frustrate of his purpose and hope for seeing a reformation in the Church-people. In the said Councell was dispatched Letters and Bulls to Lewis Duke d' Aniou, to goe take possession of the kingdome of Pouille for him and his. Naucler.
Martin Pope returning from Constance to Rome, remained two yeares at Florence, and for recompence of his entertaine∣ment, he ordained that the Bishop of that place should bee a Metropolitane, and subiected there vnto the Church of Ʋo∣laterre, Pistorie and Fesides. The Hussites came vp at this time,The Hussites which reiected all hu∣mane traditions, more purely preaching the doctrine of Iesus Christ, which engendred many contentions betwixt Lay-men and Clarkes. A pestilence was at Florence, where died more then 16. thousand men. Chron. Euseb. Mahomet Emperour of the Turkes, died after he had raig∣ned  14. yeares. Wencelaus died taken with feare, because of a tumult raised  at Prage: hee fell into an Apoplexie, and from that euill into a palsie, which within 18. daies tooke away his life, the yeare of his raigne 20. Charles 7. of that name, king of France, the onely sonne of Charles the 6. succeeded his father. Hee was assailed by the English and Bourgonions, and hauing lost as it were all the Countrey of the Frontiers, tooke his recourse into Bourges, and there remained a certaine time, and therefore the enemies in mockerie called him king of Bourges. Henry sonne of Charles his sister, called himself in his titles, king of England & of France: and at Paris was crowned king of France. A pucell or maide plaide the part of a man at Armes,Iane the Pucelle. and gaue succours to Orleance which was besieged, constrained the enemies to leaue the siege: conducted the king Charles to bee crowned at Rheims, passing through the places which the ene∣mies held. The English after were driuen from Paris. The Taberlites, Adamites, Orebites, heretikes in Boheme were in this time. See Naucler. Sigismond with the Pope and Almaine, banded themselues together to make war against the Bohemian Hussites, but they got nothing, but were faine to leaue them. Naucler. Iohn Gerson maintained in this time that wee must ra∣ther beleeue the sentence and opinion of one Doctor ap∣prooued
and confirmed by the Canonicke Scripture, then the Popes declaration. Item that wee ought rather to beleeue a Doctor well learned in the holy scriptures and alleadging a Ca∣tholick authoritie, then a generall Councell. A Councell began at Pauie, but the pestilence became so  great there, that they were constrained the place and time, and was ordained at Pise the yeare 1424. and from thence remit∣ted to Basill seuen yeares after in the yeare of Christ, 1430. The Venetians corrupted with store of siluer, the Captaine generall of the Duke of Millaine called Carmagnolle, a valiant man, but a Traitor: who stole from the said Duke the strong Towne of Brixe,Ambition of the Venetians and the yeare following the Towne of Per∣gamum and their appendances: which places, King Lewis the 12. recouered, the yeare 1509. after that the Venetians against all right and reason had avowed themselues to be right possessors thereof the space of 80. years. Iohn le Maire. The Pucelle of Orleans.The Pucelle or Maide aboue mentioned, called of Orle∣ance, borne in Lorraine, called Iane, did things incredible in war∣like affaires for the King of France his succour. Finally hauing found meanes by force and subtiltie to enter into the Towne of Campaigne, (which was besieged) making sallies vpon the e∣nemies, was taken by Iohn de Luxembourge, and from thence sent to Roane to the Duke of Sommer set where hauing beene kept certaine time, she was burnt. She was accused to be an En∣chauntresse. See the Annales of France. The Pope Martin of the age of 63. yeares, died at Rome of an Apoplexie. He commanded before his death to assemble the Councell of Basill: For in the Councell of Constance, it was concluded that from 10. yeares to 10. yeares, there should be held an Vniuersall Councell of the Church; which was not ob∣serued. Eugenius. 4.Eugenius 4. of that name, borne at Venice, of the order of Ce∣lestines, called before Gabriel Condelmer, the sonne of one cal∣led Angelus, being Cardinall, Priest of the title of S. Clement, obtained the Papall dignitie in the place called Minerua, (as Platina saith) by this meanes. When Gregorie the 12. who was of the house of Corrariens, and Venetians by Nation, was
chosen Pope, being before Canon of the Celestines of the con∣gregation of S. George in the place of Alga, he carried with him this Gabriel, who was of his profession, Henry King of England of the age of 12. yeares was crow∣ned in the great Temple of Paris as King, by the Cardinall of Winchester. Sigismond went to Rome and was Crowned Emperour by the Pope Eugenius, after he had raigned 23. yeares. Chron. Euseb. At the instance of certaine reporters and flatrerers which said that Martin his predecessor had bene very curious to ga∣ther great treasures: some brought this man into such a rage, that he caused his Vice-chauncellor, with all his familiars and Nephewes to be taken and dispoiled of their goods. After this, the Romanes applying themselues to recouer their auntient libertie, crying let vs goe to Armes, and hauing driuen away all Eugenius his officers, and taken Francis Condel∣mer, his Nephewe or bastard, and his Chamberlaine, they crea∣ted new Magistrates, which they called Gouernours, and had power of death and life ouer all. Eugenius amongst so many troubles being vncertain what to doo, began to thinke to flie away:Eugenius fli∣eth away. hauing then chaunged his habit and taking a Monkes frocke onely with a Monke called Arsennius, put himselfe in a fishers boate; and without that they which kept him perceiued he retired to Ostia by the Riuer Tiber, Then when certaine of the Romanes knew that he was fled, they assailed him as well as they could with stones and shot. From thence he went vnto Pise, and after vnto Flo∣rence in certaine Gallies which purposely had beene prepa∣red for that purpose. Where making his residence certaine yeares hee made sixteene Cardinalls, amongst which there were were two Grecians, namely, Bessaron, who was a cun∣ning man in Philosophie, borne at Nice, and Isidorus of Russia, and Guillam de Stouteuile, Archbishop of Rouan. The Coucell of Basill. After the Councell of Constance, there was an other held
at Basill, which Cardinall Iulian began by the Popes comman∣dement: beeing forced so to doo by the Emperour Sigismond: And because then Sigismond was gone into Italie (as is said) to receiue the Imperiall Crowne, the Italians sought to per∣swade the Pope to breake the Councell of Basill and bring it vnto them, that the Townes of Italie might bee inriched with the great summes of money that should be brought thither: and that the Countrey should not bee subiected vnto straun∣gers: alleadging for a shewe, that Sigismond came for no other cause but to make himselfe Lord ouer Italie. Sigismond after his Coronation returned vnto Basill. This Councell endured tenne yeares, and there the Car∣dinall Iulian called of S. Angelo, was President. The Bohemians being called vnto the said Councell with sure accesse and safe conduct, proposed 4. Articles wherin they differed from the Romane Church. Articles pro∣posed by the Bohemians. 1 The Communion giuen to the people vnder both kinds. 2 That ciuill dominion is forbidden by diuine right to the people of the Church. 3 The preaching of the people ought to be free. 4 That publike sinnes ought not to be borne, if it were but to shunne a greater mischiefe. In the said Councell the Bohemians were permitted to communicate vnder both kindes, as a thing lawfull by the au∣thoritie of Christ, and profitable and healthfull to all such as duly receiued it. Ʋadian & Naucler. In the time of this Councell of Basill was Papistrie set vp in Bohemia by the great meanes and industrie of Sigismond: but incontinently after they came to that they did before. Naucler. About the yeare of Christ, 1436. (as saith Naucler,) or 1438. after others, Eugenius would needs transport the Coun∣cell of Basill to Ferrara,A Councell at Ferrara. for his commoditie; and after vnto Flo∣rence: his excuses were because the Greeke Church would ra∣ther agree there with the Romane Church then at Basill: not∣withstanding the Councell proceeded against him, and he was cyted three times, but would not appeare. There was against
him proposed that he was a fauourer and a louer of warres, a persecutor of Church men, and a man of bloud, and scandalous. Naucler. In the Counccell of Ferrara were presented the Pope Eu∣genius, the Patriarke of Constantinople, and the Emperour of the same place, Iohn Paleologus, with his brother and fiue hundreth men: so was the said Church of Greece revnited with the Ro∣mane Church. The said Councell was transported from Fer∣rara to Florence, the yeare 1439. The Grecians accorded the holy Ghost to proceed as well from the Sonne as the Father. They agreed also to Purgatorie: and the Romane Pope to be the primate of the Catholicke Church: which they had ne∣uer done before now, but euer were of contrarie opinions. But as soone as they were come to their Countrey againe, at the perswasion of Marcus Bishop of Ephesus, they againe denied the two last Articles, Plat. Vola. and Naucler. It is straunge that the Grecians which haue beene so slowe to acknowledge and confesse so true a doctrine of the holy Ghost, are now so quick and light to accord so friuolous and false a thing: that is, to receiue and beleeue against all holy scripture that there is a Purgatorie, and Romane Pope to be Primate of the Catholicke and Vniuersall Church: wherevnto the first generall Councell had openly resisted in the time of Con∣stantine the great. In the said Councell of Florence, the Armenians and Indians were also brought into the vnion of the Romane Church, and promised to keepe and maintaine the Sacrament of Confirma∣tion. Naucler. This Pope Eugenius confirmed Annates vpon all Benefices.Annates. Hee Canonized S. Nicholas Tolentin, of the order of the Hermits of S. Augustine. Bessarion Cardinall flourished, and his house at Rome was open to euery man of knowledge like a Colledge. Vadian. Sigismond of the age of 70, yeares died, and was buried in Hungarie, in the citie called Albe. His wife Barbara was without all religion and without God, insatiable in all paliardize and whoredome. Shee mocked her damzels because they fasted
and prayed,Albert. 5. saying; they must liue iocondly and merily, and take all their pleasures during this life: for after death the soule perisheth with the bodie. The Councell of Basill continued still, and proceeded a∣gainst Eugenius the fourth: who after many times cyting and not appearing, was publikely deposed by the authoritie of the Councell, the tenth of Iuly. Eugenius mooued herewith, inci∣ted the Dolphin of France,The end of he Councell of Basill. (who after was called king Lewis the 11.) to lead a great Armie in to the Countrey of Ferrara and Alsarce, and to come to Basill. Wherefore the said Councell brake vp, and herevpon came many mischiefes. See Naucler. Albert the fift of that name, Duke of Austrich, and second king of the Romanes of that name, sonne of Albert the fourth, Duke of Austrich, was scant 10. yeares olde when his father di∣ed of poyson, fighting against Iosse Marquesse of Morauia: but being yer vnder Tutors which were his vncles, there was great strife betwixt them for his tutelage. Therefore Vienna and all the Countrey of Austrich endured great calamities till Al∣bert came to age and was dispatched of his tutelage and plan∣ted a peace in Austrich, which was before full of theeues and of Intestine warres. After the yeare 1422. he espowsed Eli∣zabeth the doughter of Sigismond, and had with her in marriage the noble Townes of Maruia.Hungarie & Boheme came both to one. But after the death of Sigis∣mond▪ he was chosen king of Hungaria by the consent of all the principall of the Countrey, and Crowned the yeare of grace 1438. After this he was also made king of Bohemia: and that came, because there was a great alliance betwixt the Kings of Boheme and the Dukes of Austrich: whereby they had ordai∣ned betwixt them, that whensoeuer one of the houses remai∣ned without heire-male of the other, they should create a king. He was also chosen king of the Romanes by the common accord of all the Princes Electors. The yeare 1459. the 17. day of Nouember, in the Coun∣cell of Basill, after the deposition of Eupenius, the Cardinalls e∣lected Amedeus of Ayme,23 Schisme Ayme Duke of Sauoy. Duke of Sauoy, and called him Felix the fift: so came into the Church the 23. schisme and diui∣sion, which endured the space of sixteene yeares.
Some followed Eugenius, others Felix: some said they were newters, and so obeyed neither one nor the other. The Kings of France, England, Spaine, & Scotland, obeyed the Pope Eugenius: For although he was deposed, yet held he good du∣ring his life. This Councell of Basill assembled with great authoritie, was notwithstanding dissipated and broken by one onely Pope. That of Constance deposed three, and ordained the fourth. This could not bring about to depose one. Fa∣sci. Temp. In the Councell of Basill it was forbidden that secular Prin∣ces, Councellors, and Communalties vpon paine of excommu∣nication, should not bee so hardie to greete and submit the Churchmen with tallies and common collection. Fasci. temp. Augustine of Rome was condemned an heretike in the said Councell:The concep∣tion of the Virgin Ma∣rie. and there was confirmed the Conception of the Virgin Marie to bee kept as a solemne Feast: But to the con∣trarie see Epiphanius in his 3 Booke, and 12. Tome, 68. and 69. heresie. See also S. Bernard in the Epist. 154. to the Canons of Lions. The said Councell then confirmed that the Virgin Marie was conceiued without originall sinne: it also confirmed her visitation. In this time was a Councell held of the French Church at Bourges in Berry,The Pragma∣tike sanction. and there was published the pragmatike sanction (which is all the marrow and substance of the Canons of the Councell of Basill) to bee expresly obserued for euer. Iohn le Maire. The Duke Aime of Sauoy after the death of his wife Mar∣garite of Bourgongne, had left his Ducall estate and withdrew himselfe into an hermitage pleasant and delightfull, called Ri∣paille,, vpon the Lake of Lansanne, which he had caused to bee sumptuously builded, and so left the gouernment of his signio∣ries to his eldest sonne Lewis, father of Duke Phillebert of Sa∣uoy. Beeing then in his said place of Ripaille, the said Duke Anne with tenne knights all hermits, wearing great beardes and simple cloathing, and writhen staues full of knottes,
in great renowne of sanctetie of life,Albert. was by the said Councell elected to be Pope, (as is said) the 17. of Nouember, the yeare 1439. and the 17. day of December the election was denoun∣ced vnto him, and he went vnto Basill, and was there solemnly crowned in the presence of two of his eldest sonnes. Before this ceremonie his Beard was taken from him, and in a small time he learned the Romane office. He created some Cardinalls of great estimation and vertue. Iohn le Maire. The Emperour being called to goe into Hungarie, sound himselfe greatly tormented in the moneth of August with an intollerable heate, which hee thought to haue taken away by colde viands, which brought to him a fluxe of the belley, euen to bloud,The death of Albert. whereof he died, the yeare 1439. nigh Strigoma, af∣ter hee had beene Emperour almost two yeares, Hee left two daughters, and his wife with childe, who soone after brought forth Ladislaus. Frederic Emp.Frederic Duke of Austrich, after Albert, was Emperour of Rome. He loued peace and rest, restrained and brideled easily them of Austrich which stirred strifes and commotions. So ex∣tinguished he the warre alreadie commenced by Matthias king of Hungarie by agreement with him. Likewise this Frederic making warre against the Flem∣mings to haue his sonne Maximilian (whom they detained pri∣soner) appeased and contented them by the punishment of some, and so taking and receiuing his sonne Maximilian, he gently buried all occasion of warre commenced. Hee was crowned at Rome, & his wife Helenor, which he espoused at Na∣ples, in king Alphonsus his Court. At his departure from Rome, he went to Naples vnto the said king Alphonsus, his wiues nigh kinsman: of whom, and after of the Venetians, he was enter∣tained with great honour and prouision: and so euer after hee loued the Venetians. He would often say to his wife (vnto whom her Phisitian counselled to drinke wine to auoyd barrennesse) that he could better loue a sober barren woman, then one fruitfull giuen to wine. Naucler. Chron. of the Emper.
Printing inuented.Frederic. 3. The noble Art of printing with Letters made in Brasse,Printing In∣uented, in what time & by whom. was found out in this time: a verie diuine inuention, worthy of memorie and admiration: yet were it more admirable if it were not so much prophaned. The inuention was Germanike, and very straunge at the beginning, and of great profit: Iohn Gutemberge Knight, was the first Author of this goodly inuen∣tion. The thing was first assayed at Magunce 16. yeares before it was divulged in Italie. One saith that Iohn Faustins, called Gutman, inuented it, with Peter Sheffer. Eun. 10. Dionysius Charthusianus in this time writ vpon Daniel. The Pope Engenius retiring from Florence, came and dwelt at Rome, where he was welcomed because hee diminished their tallies and subsidies. Naucler. The Swisses (except Berne and Soleure) made warre against some of their Allies called in Latin Duricenses, because contra∣rie to their alliances, they ioyned with the Dukes of Austrich: and the said Swisses obtained victorie against their said Allies. Naucler. Foure thousand Swisses were put to death against the Ar∣mie of the aforesaid Dolphin, which was of 25. or 30. thousand horsemen, besides footemen, and was ouerthrowne nigh the Hospitall of S. Iames by Basill. The said Dolphin hauing wasted the Countrey of Alsarce, returned with great losse of his Campe. The yeare of Christ 1444. on S. Martins euen the Turke Amurathes gaue battaile against the King of Polone, Ʋladis∣laus and the Cardinall Iulian, who was president in the Coun∣cell of Basill. The said Iulian, the Apostolike Legatein Hungarie, fled after the battaile was lost: but as he let his horse drinke he was perceiued and knowne of the Hungarians, who slew him, thin∣king he had had much money about him: and hauing dispoy∣led him, they left him naked. See Naucler. This Legate vppon the exhortation of Pope Eugenius, councelled the King Ʋladislaus to breake his faith with the
Turke and to assaile him in his Countrey:Note how ma∣ny euils faith-breaking brin∣geth. the which hee did with 30000. combatants; all which vnluckily perished in that warre: whereof rose infinite mischiefes, and carnall and mor∣tall warres throughout all Christendome. The King fell from his horse, & had his head cut off, which was carried on a Launce throughout all the Countrey. The bloud of many Princes and Prelates was shead. Two Bishops were cause that the Chrsti∣ans lost the victorie. For beeing willing to pursue the Turke, they kept not the places which they had in charge. In so much as the Turkes as it were vanquished, returned againe into bat∣taile, and entred into the Christians Armie. Iohn Huniades fled from the battaile with a great number of people, to the number of tenne thousand Hungarians, Francis Caldemonio a Cardinall of Venice, Nephewe vnto Pope Eugenius the fourth, being Legate and chiefe of the Armie by sea, ordained to keepe the straight of the Arme S. George, that the Turkes should not passe that way to goe to the suc∣cours of their people: and although he had a great and puis∣sant Armie of the Christians, yet vpon treason and cowar∣dise hee let passe through that straight an hundreth thousand Turkes, with Amurathes their Prince: and which is worse, hee vsed not diligence to aduertise the Christian Armie. A Carack of Genoua ledde their way: whose patron was of the house Grimald, and made the said passage vpon a couenant with the said Turkes; namely to haue a Ducat for euery head. The said Grimald of Genoua Patron, went from thence into Flaunders to employ his hundreth and 60. thousand Ducats which hee had gotten: but he was consumed before he came there with a Sea-tempest. Constantine Paleologue, the brother of Iohn Paleologue, was the last Christian Emperour of Constantinople, and raigned eight yeares. Eugenius the 4. died the 20. day of the moneth of Aprill of the age of 64. yeares: hee did many good things to the Towne of Rome, and in diuers places caused it to be repaired and paued. Amurathes the second of that name being Victor, did not
pursue the Christians after the discomfiture, nor shewed him∣selfe merrie as his custome was: being demaunded why he was so sad, not reioycing at his victorie, Hee answered; I would not alwaies thus ouercome.Amurathes maketh him∣selfe a Monke. Soone after hee dismissed him∣selfe of his dominion and principalitie, and left the gouern∣ment to his sonne Mahomet, he after made himselfe a Monke of the straightest religion that was amongst them. See Nau∣clerus. Nicholas Pope, fift of that name, borne at Genes,Nicholas. 5. ruled at Rome eight yeares: before hee was called Thomas de Sirsone, or Sarresane, in the signiorie of Lucan: Cardinall of Bolongne, sonne of a Phisitian. Suppl. Chron. This Pope in lesse then a yeare was made Bishop of Bo∣longne, Cardinall and Pope of Rome: hee was elected the sixt of March, and crowned the ninteenth of the said moneth, the yeare 1447. yet ceased not the schisme of the Church. For still liued Felix the fift, of Sauoy, who accounted himselfe Pope. Nicholas was esteemed a great Theologian. In this time writ Laurentius Ʋalla, Blundus the Histo∣riographer: Trapezontius the Rhetoritian, and Theodorus Gaza. The King of Fraunce recouered Normandie which the English men held. And recouered the yeare after the Coun∣trey of Aquitaine. The Sea of Hist. The yeare of Christ 1448. after some 1449. Felix the 5. renounced his Popedome and sent to salute Nicholas the true successor of S. Peter: so was obedience giuen vnto Nicho∣las, and by that meanes ceased the 23. schisme. Then brake off the Councell of Basill, which for that purpose was assembled. This treatie and composition of that Session was made as Lau∣sanna by many Princes of France, Almaine, England, and Sauoy, for the vnion of the Church. And this was at the sollicitation of the Emperor Frederic, and the request of Pope Nicholas. The King Charles the 7. to bring a peace in Christendome, caused a Councell to be assembled of the French Nation at Ly∣ons to appease all. Iohn le Maire.
This yeare brought the first inuention of the Francarchers in France. Nicholas Pope, sent the Cardinalls Hatte to the said Felix, appointed him Legat a Latere, in Saouy, in France, and in Al∣maine. This Felix, or Ayme de Saouy, was of litle stature, a deuout man, founder of the Monasterie of Rapaille, vnder the rule of S. Augustine: wherein hee was sumptuously buried. Fasci. Temp. Whatsoeuer hee said Felix had done and decreed during his Papaltie, was ratified and held for good. Iohn le Maire. A Iubile.The yeare of Christ 1450. the Pope Nicholas held a Iubile at Rome, wherat there was such a multitude of people, that ma∣ny were stifled as they entred and came out of Churches: There perished more then 200. persons besides an infinit num∣ber which fell into the floud as they passed ouer the Bridge of S. Angelo. This is the reward that such deserue that leauing the truth, follow the inuention of Antichrist. Amurathes Turke second of that name died, after he had raigned 31. yeares, whom Mahomet the second succeeded. This Amurathes tooke the Lord of Seruia, and Mesia, and oc∣cupied Sophia, &c. Also he tooke captiues three of his children: whereof two were males, and put out their eyes with an hotte Iron, and the third a maide, hee tooke to wife. He made warre vpon the Venetians and occupied Thessalonica, which at this day is called Salonike. The yeare 1453. the 28. day of May, after Naucler. or of March after some, Mahomet the second, surnamed the great, sonne of Amurathes, by the cowardise of Iohn Iustinian of Ge∣noua, tooke Constantinople, hauing with him 300000. fighters. The siege endured 60. dayes. Michael Paleologus a Grecian, tooke it of the French by the helpe of the Geneuois. The said Ionh Iustinian was made king by the space of three daies, as the Turke had promised him: but the fourth day he was be headed saith Fasci. Temp. The Patriarke and all the Christians were slaine without any mercie. They had sent to demaund helpe
of the Pope and the Christians, but no helpe came. It is impossible to recyte the horrible crueltie which was there exercised. Constantine the last Emperour of the last Greekes, as he fled was encountred and murthered nigh the gates. His head was stucke on the top of a Launce and carried about the Towne. Mahomet also caused to be erected an Image of a Crucifixe, and did write vpon it; This is the God of the Chri∣stians: and commaunded to cast dung and other filth against the said Image. The Emperours wife, with her daughters and the most noblest Damzels there, were brought before Maho∣met, and after he had done them all the shame he could, yea the greatest villanies of the world, he caused theyr bodies to be cut in peeces. Such examples of so extreame crueltie ought to induce vs to abhorre so barbarous an enemie: and to detest the Papists Idolatrie, which by the adoration of Images are the cause wherefore the passion of Iesus Christ is thus slaundered. The King of France recouered all the Townes which the English held in France, except the Towne of Callais. The Sea of Histories. In this time flourished Nicholas Perotus, Ioannes de turre oremata, a Iacobin, Doctor in Theologie, Bishop and Car∣dinall. Nicholas Canonized S. Bernardine of Senes, a Friar. Chron. Euseb, He was a louer of Letters and learned people, & greatly lo∣ued such: Bookes were also presented and dedicated vnto him on all sides. For hee stirred such as were learned to translate Greeke Authors into Latin. Naucler. He couered with lead S. Marie the round, auntiently called the Pantheon: he repaired the Church of S. Stephen: he also builded the Church of S. Theodore, repaired the bridge Miluius, paued many streetes: hee gaue to many Churches vessels of gold and siluer, and many Crosses adorned with pre∣cious stones. The yeare 1455. the 25. of March, Nicholas the 5. died of a
Feauer, hauing bene sore troubled with the taking of Constan∣tinople. Naucler. The Sea of Hist. saith he was poisoned; as was found by effect when he was opened. Scanderbeg so called of the Turkes when he was circumci∣sed, (for before he was called George Castriot) was giuen in Ho∣stage by his father king of Epire and Albania, of old called Ma∣cedonia, to Amurathes the 7. Emperour of the Turkes, who af∣ter he had in many deedes of Armes experimented his pro∣wesse, made him chiefe of the Armie against the Hungarians: vnto whom he yeelded himselfe, and moreouer constrained Bassa the Turkes Secretarie to write Letters to the Gouernours of the Towne and Countrey of Croya: whereby was sent in the name of Amurathes, that the said Towne should be deliue∣red into his gouernment. So subtilly recouered he his Coun∣trey about this time. But Amurathes fell vpon Egipt with a  great power: after hauing in vaine besieged Croya many mo∣nethes, he died of griefe. Calixtus. 3.Calixtus or Calistus, the third of that name, a Spaniard, cal∣led  before Alphonsus Borgia, being alreadie of a great age, by the consent of the Cardinalls succeeded Nicholas: a man onely learned in the Lawe or right Canon. Some say he was first, Secretarie to Alphonsus King of Ar∣ragon, and was made Bishop of Ʋalence by Martine the fift, and vnder Eugenius was made Cardinall of the title of foure Crownes, as commonly they say at Rome (de Sant quatre) As soone as hee had receiued the Papall dignitie, hee publi∣shed warre against the Turkes, according to a vow hee had made. Rom. 12.18.But by the dutie of his office hee ought rather to haue sought peace with all men: Painims should be taught and not assailed by warre. The Turke Mahomet went into Hungarie against Alba and was vanquished, and more then fortie thousand of his peo∣ple perished. Naucler. Iohn Huniades a vertuous Captaine at the iournie of Albe, died shortly after the said victorie. But the Pope the better to execute so couragious an en∣terprise,
sent preachers like himselfe in capacitie and couetous∣nesse, with Bulles and Indulgences: That is,Apoc. 9.3. certaine begging Friars garnished with power like the Scorpions of the earth. The principall of them all were Iohn Capistran and Robert de la lice, of the order of Friars and hypocrites: which euery man re∣ceiued with great admiration. These men knowing the Popes subtiltie, and hauing no certaine hope that they could gather much money out of the Iubile, did all their businesse and traf∣ficked by the the meanes of feigned prayers full of hypocrisie, of Letanies, of Images, of crosses, of songs, of ringing of Bells, and of their pastie God: to the end they might fill all the purses, budgets, and sacks of their maister. Calixtus ceased not by his Embassadors to exhort other Christian Princes to enterprise that warre as a thing very ne∣cessarie and holy. Therefore sent he to all Priests that as they sung Masse they should pronounce certaine Prayers or Col∣lects against Painimes and Turkes. He also commanded that at noonetime a Bell should toll as there was done at night to salute the Virgin Marie:Wherefore a Bell was knol∣led at noone. to the end that (as Stella the good Popish Theologian saith) they which ordinarily fight against the Turkes, might be helped by that prayer. This is also the reason saith he wherefore hee or∣dained the Feast and seruice of the transfiguration of Iesus Christ: and commaunded it should bee celebrated with like pardons and Indulgences, as that of the Feast of the body of Iesus Christ. This was for the victorie which the Christians had against the Turkes the sixt day of August before Albe in Hungarie. Hee sent also towards the Armenians and Persians to sol∣licite them to doo the like against the Turkes, and caused cer∣taine peasants to be hanged and strangled which mocked and derided these toyes and follies. He placed in the Kalender of Saints one Ʋincent borne at Valence, of the Iacobin order, Albert of Dropan Carmelite, and Edmond of Canterburie English. He ordained also that no person should appeale from the Pope to the Councell, and yet had done more if he had liued longer.
He gaue too much licence to his followers, and made one Roderic Borgia his Vice-chauncellor, who after was Pope, cal∣led Alexander the sixt. He published (saith Valerius) Letters of pardons which he solde then for fiue Ducats a peece, but now they are better cheape) by the meanes whereof he left vnto his successor an hundreth and 15. thousand Ducates. Iohn Capi∣stran Robert de la Lice.Iohn Capistran and Robert de la Lice, aboue named (as is said) were sent by the Pope into diuers Countries to preach the yeelding of obedience to the Romane Church, to giue some colour and appearance to their filthy fooleries, prohibited pa∣stimes, and other ciuill exercises, as bankets, daunces, and other like things. Briefly they acquired such great brute and fame by their hypocrisie, that afterward they were adored as Saints of many, although they knew not what the doctrine of Iesus Christ meant. The world meriteth to haue such Doctors since they make so small account of the truth. This Pope Calixtus died in Iuly the yeare 1458. beeing very olde, and left great riches. Frauncis Foscarius was Duke of the Venetians about 36. yeares, who hauing conquered (or rather vsurped) many lands and dominions in Italie vnto the profit of the Seignorie of Ve∣nice, in the end of his dayes for a repentance the Venetians de∣posed him of his Ducall dignitie, without alleadging any other reason but his age and impotencie:Ingratitude of the Veneti∣ans. And constrained him to leaue his Ducall Pallace, to see a new successor enter into it, whereof incontinently after he died. After his death his sonne was banished, and after called againe and cruelly tortured, and againe sent into perpetuall exile: although they found no∣thing in him of that which they laide to his charge. Chron. Euseb. Pius. 2.Pius the second of that name, a Tuscan by Nation, borne in the Towne of Sienes: whose father was Siluius, and his mo∣ther Ʋictoria, before called Eneas Picolominius: although long time he had bene spotted with the vice of ambition, yet finally he came vnto the Popedome.
This poore young boy became so great (as all Historio∣graphers say which haue written of the Popes liues) that hee was held one of the learnedst Popes and much esteemed, for that he had written many things worthily. In the Councell of Basill he was the Popes Secretarie, and by Orasons and Epistles he purged the authoritie of Eugenius, a litle after that, he was crowned a Poet Laureate, by the Em∣perour Frederic the third of that name, and being called from his Court, he came vnto greater estates, and was both his Se∣cretarie and Counceller. He was sent Embassador hither and thither vnto many Prin∣ces, and after ordained Bishop of Trieste by Nicholas the fift, and consequently Bishop of Siennes, and after placed in the number of Cardinalls by Calixt. Finally comming vnto the Papaltie, following the exam∣ples of his predecessors, hee published a voyage against the Turkes: but being preuented by death he could not put it in execution. Some there are (as saith Iohn Functius) which haue left in writing, that he sought to draw to himselfe a great summe of siluer from the Almaines, vnder a colour to make warre vpon the Turkes, because he knew well the riches of the Almaines as he that had long conuersed with them, and that to the end he might dispend them in pompes and papall dissolutions, and to inrich his parents and friends. Vnder the shadow of warring against the Turkes, Popes get store of siluer. Lewis 11. sonne of Charles the 7. the 54. king of France, being in Bourgongne, and hearing newes of his fathers death, came straight into France and was crowned. The aforesaid Pope though before he was Pope, hee had with singular diligence written two bookes of the acts of the the Councell of Basill, yet as soone as he was made Pope, hee sought to suppresse it. For as he was very ambitious in all hee did when he was Pope, so he trauelled in nothing to lessen the Maiestie or rather Papall tyrannie, but rather to encrease it what he could. Which to maintaine (saith Stella the Venetian)
it is found that hee spared neither Kings nor Princes, people nor tyrants: hee I say which was more cruell then any ty∣rant. He was a great enemie of Lewis king of France, the eleuenth of that name: because he would not consent to the abolition of the pragmatike sanction in his kingdome, because it deroga∣ted from the libertie of the Cleargie. Hee was angry against Borge de Est Duke de Mutine, and made warre vpon him be∣cause hee fauoured Sigismond Malateste, and the French men against Ferdinand. For vpon his owne authoritie and by force of Armes hee put in possession of the Kingdome of Naples, Alphonsus Bastard of the King Ferdinand, to the great disaduantage of Iohn de Aniou sonne of King Rene. He pursued with cruell and sharpe persecutions Sigismond Duke of Austrich, because hee had chastised Nicholas de Cuse a Cardinall, for his rapacitie and couetousnesse full of arro∣gancie. He shead out also the venome of his malediction against Gregorie de Hambourge, a man very learned in the Ciuill lawe, as it had bene a chased viper (as Wolfgang de Winsebourge, a Di∣uine of Basill saith) and so sharply pursued him with the Letters of his thundring excommunications, that he was constrained to remooue into Boheme. He furiously cast out of his feat Diether d' Eisenbourge, Arch∣bishop of Magunce because (as he said) he had an euil opinion of the Romane Church, and placed an other in his place. Besides, he depriued the Archbishop of Beneuent of his Archbishop∣pricke: because against his will he tooke in hand new enter∣prises. He caused a day to be giuen to George king of Boheme, be∣cause he fauoured such as held the doctrine of Iohn Hus, & that vpon the paine to loose his kingdome. He for his particular profit deposed many Bishoppes, and added 12. newe Cardinalls to such as were alredie be∣fore. He celebrated a Councell at Mantua, and abbrogated in
France the pragmatike sanction,The pragma∣tike sanction abbrogated. Abbreuiators created. as a pernitious practise against the Romane Church. Hee was the first that created the Abbreuiators of the Chauncelerie, and reducted them into their order. He brought vnder his gouernment many Townes of Campania, called at this day Terra de lauoro: the Land of Labour, and maruellous∣ly encreased the Churches reuenewes and rents. He neuer graunted any thing eyther to kings or to people for any feare hee had (as his fierce and arrogant Papists say) but he sharply persecuted the enemies of the Cleargie, as if they had beene publike enemies. As for his friends, hee shew∣ed himselfe very gentle towards them, and greatly helped them. At the sollicitation of Soreth,Katherine de Sienes Canonized. he Canonized one called An∣gelus, borne at Ierusalem: and placed in the number of Virgins Katherine de Sienes, a Iacobin. Because he was a very curious builder (as the Papists giue him that praise) he repaired the Courts of Vatican: and had sooner atchieued a Castle in the Towne of Tiuoli then was thought he had begunne. At Sienes where hee was borne, hee builded a goodly Porch of wrought stone. At a place called Corfinium he founded a Citie, and named it Pientia of his owne name, and builded there a vaulted Temple very sumptuous, and a pleasant house: and besides this, a Sepulchre of Marble for his father and mothers bones. See what Platina sayth thereof. The Kingdome of Bosne. The kingdome of Bosne stretched euen vnto Macedonia: It was made tributary vnto the kingdome of Hungarie, the yeare 1415. After it reuoulted from the kings obedience and made alliance with the Turke. Sigismond King of Hungarie sought to chase away such as occupied it: but the Turke was the stronger, and reteined the Countrey of Bosne. After the Hungarians got together a great Armie, came into Bosne, and slew the king Itrarch who was a Turke, and subiected to their power all that Region, and constituted a king there: namely the first Christian which had yet bene.
There was a Prince in Ruscia called George Despot, who had giuen his daughter in marriage to the Turke. Hee had three sonnes, Stephen, George, and Lazarus. Lazarus succeeded his fa∣ther and had but one daughter, who espowsed Stephen king of Bosne: who soone after his enioying the principalitie of Ruscia, gouerned with a Turkish spirit, full of great impietie and wic∣ked religion. But it hapned that about the yeare of saluation 1463. as hee had a great land in the higher Misia, Mahomet  the Turke by flatteries drew him out of the Castle where hee was, and calling him to him to talke vnder the shadow of ami∣tie, laid hold on him, and caused him to be scorched aliue: so lost he both his life and kingdome which he had by his father. By this mans temeritie and wickednesse together, Ruscia and Bosne with the greatest part of Seruia, fell into the Turkes o∣bedience. As the Pope Pius was at Ancone, vpon his departing to goe to warre, he was surprised with a slowe feauer, the yeare of  the Lord 1464. whereof hee died. From thence he was carri∣ed to Rome, and buried in the Church of S Peter. One vice of Ambition saith Volaterane, contaminated and defiled all the vertues of this person: as he that alwaies greatly desired great estates and honours. And for that cause endured hee great trauells, and alwaies maintained himselfe in the fauour of Princes. The warre called The publike Weale, was begunne the yeare 1464. by the conspiration of the Princes of France, meaning to reforme the kings affaires: who tooke offices and dignities from such as had long time faithfully exercised them: He greatly also vexed the Nobles and puissant of the King∣dome by demaunds. The Duke of Britaine and the Count de Chaelois, the Duke of Bourgongnes sonne, perswaded Charles Duke of Berry to bee the chiefe Captaine and Prince of that warre and conspiration: which Phillip de Commines handleth at large and truly: therefore see his historie. The aforesaid Pope Pius, as Platina and Sabellicus recyte, amongst other sentences which he vsed commonly, left this in writing. With great reason was marriage taken from Priests:
but yet there is a farre greater reason wherefore it ought to haue bene yeelded them againe.A sentence of Pope PIus a∣gainst single∣nes of Priests. He inserted also this sentence in his second booke of Councells. It may be (saith hee) that it were not the worse if a many Priests were married: For many being married Priests should be saued, which in their barren singlenesse are damned. He himselfe would needs abolish cer∣taine Monasteries of S. Brigide and S. Claire: commaunding them out that they might burne no more, and vnder the ha∣bit of religion they should not hide whoredome, saith Caelius Secundus. About this time there was no small debate in Italie betwixt the Friars Minors and such as they called Bullists, which of those should guard and gouerne the Nunnes there: As for the discords which were betwixt the Obseruantins and the Non Obseruantins, Baptista Mantuanus accordeth them in his Buco∣liques,, in the tenth Eglogue. Paul the second of that name, borne at Ʋenice,Paul. 2. the sonne of Nicholas and of Polixene, called before Peter Barbe or Balbe, and Nephewe of Eugenius the fourth, on his sisters side, beeing Cardinall of the title of S. Marke, was chosen in the place of Pius, and occupied the seate of Antichrist. Before he was made Bope, he meant to traffique as a Mar∣chant: but hearing that his Vncle Gabriel was chosen Pope, he gaue his minde vnto Letters: and comming to Rome, he was first created Archdeacon of Bolongne after that Bishop of Cer∣uio, consequently Cardinall, and as hath bene said,Ambition. finally Pope and Romane Antichrist. It was he who first vaunted that hee held enclosed in his breast all Lawes both diuine and humane. He was a goodly man and of faire representation, but of a proud spirit and very couetous to gather riches, and yet more to distribute Ecclesiasticall Benefices for his owne gaine and profit. As for his Popish apparell (saith Platina) you neede not doubt but he surpassed all his predecessors, and especially in his Mitre, which he maruellously inriched, buying from all Coun∣tries, Diamonds, Saphyrs, Emeraudes, Chrysolites, Iaspers, Pearles, and other precious stones of great price. Thus adorned
and shining he would come publikely abroad with an excee∣ding magnificall apparence.A sumptuous Mitre. Then would he be seene and ado∣red of each one: & for that cause would he often stay Pilgrims in the towne, deferring the accustomed day to shew the Snaire, that at once he might be seene of more people. And that hee alone might not differ from others in habits and garments, he commanded by publike Edict vpon greeuous paines that none should weare redde Bonnets but Cardinalls:Red hats. vnto which also the first yeare of his Popedome he gaue them a cloath of the same colour for footcloathes for their Horses and Mules when they rode. Platina. He fought to encrease his maiestie as well by authoritie as by force of Armes.Ariminum wasted by the Pope. All the time of his raigne he stirred great warres in Italie by his deuices and practises. Hee assailed the Towne of Ariminum and others, and miserably destroyed and wasted not onely the suburbes, but euen the Townes them∣selues with Gun-shot. He greatly hated the decrees and acts of Pius his prede∣cessor: and depriued also of their goods and authorities such as (for their knowledge and doctrine) hee should haue sought through the world and haue drawne them vnto him by gifts and promises. He declared such to be heretikes as from thenceforth should but onely name an Academie or Vniuersitie, eyther in sport or earnest. He was of an heauie and grosse spirit, and therefore loued neither Letters nor vertues.The Pope an enemie of Letters. As one that was giuen alto∣gether vnto ambition, dissolution, and voluptuousnesse. He employed all the day either in gourmandizing or waighing peeces of Gold, or in regarding and contemplating the auncient money, precious stones, or Images and Portrai∣tures. In the Romane consistorie, Gregorie King of Boheme was condemned an heretike & depriued of his kingdome: and after the Pope by his Legate sollicited the Princes of Almaine and the king of Pannonia to inuade the kingdome of Boheme, which they did: and the said George was cast out of one part thereof. Chron. Euseb.
In the moneth of September a Legate arriued in France to breake the pragmatike Sanction: vnto whom Iohn de S. Romain the Kings Proctor generall would not consent for any menaces of the said Legate: but said hee would rather loose both his office and goods before hee would yeeld to doo any thing so greatly to the preiudice of the Realme and Common-wealth. The Towne of Liege was put to fire and sword by the Duke of Bourgongne because they had put their Bishop in pri∣son, who was his Nephewe by his sister, as is reported by the Chronicle of Eusebius. Others say he was his brother by his wife, the Duke of Bourbon his daughter. Frederic the third vpon deuotion went to Rome in winter. Chron. Euseb. Pope Paul hauing made alliance with the Turkes, ioyned in league also with the Venetians. Chron. Euseb. The Pope Paul held Platina the Historiographer in pri∣son wrongfully: but his successor deliuered him. He destroyed the Abbreuiataires in hatred of his prede∣cessor, who had reduced the said estate into order. At that time it was a Colledge of learned and studious people in Diuine and Ciuill Lawes, Poets, Orators, Historiographers, &c. See Naucler. He set the Iubile from 25. yeares to 25. yeares, not for the saluation of soules: but rather to drawe new money vnto him, saith Fasci. Temp. There is found in the booke of Stanislaus Ruthen, a thing worthy to bee noted. That is, that this Paul hauing read certaine Poesies that were made against him and his daugh∣ter, began to weepe, and amongst his friends began to accuse the rigour of the lawe of his former predecessours which forbadde Priestes to marrie: for as much as hee which ought not onely to bee the head of the Church, but also of continencie, sawe that each one had talke of his daugh∣ter to his great dishonour, and had theyr eyes continually vpon her. And although shee were most excellent in beau∣tie, yet did it grieue him that men should thinke that hee
had engendred her in whoredome: Seeing hee knew well that there was a lawe ordained of God, whereby shee might haue bene borne in wedlocke, had it not bene for that singlenesse (that is the defence for Priests to marrie) which hindred it. Therefore he had determined to haue set vp againe the marri∣age of Priests, but he could not execute it, because death pre∣uented him. For as he perswaded himselfe that hee should liue long, he was suddenly taken with an Apoplexie, and died sud∣denly, hauing well supped the night before. The Pope∣dome fell.After this time the Popedome fell and decayed more and more. The Kingdom of Cyprus. The Venetians got the kingdome of Cyprus: First the yeare 1470. they had established in the kingdome one Iames, bastard of Cyprus, against Lewis sonne of the Duke of Sauoy, and the Queene Charlotte his wife, daughter of Iohn king of Cyprus, the true heire of that kingdome. But for the better vn∣derstanding of the matter, you must know that the said Vene∣tians gaue to the said bastard in marriage, Katherine the daugh∣ter of Marke Corrario, a Gentleman of Venice: who vpon their commaundement had ayded the said bastard in all his affaires against the said Lewis of Sauoy, and the Queene Charlotte his wife, euen to cast them out of Cyprus: This Katherine was so∣lemnly adopted a daughter by the Signiorie of Ʋenice: but it was not but for to adopt also the kingdome therewith. But the said king bastard with his Venetian wife espowsed the cause of their death: for as soone as she was espied to bee with childe the Venetians poysoned the said king, & caused a fame to runne, that he died of a Fluxe of the belley, and that hee had left his wife and the childe she was with, his heire, recommen∣ding them vnto the Seignorie of Ʋenice. When then shee was brought to rest, they did with the chide as they had done with the father. And they tooke the said Katherine which they cal∣led Queene, and brought her to Ʋenice, and from that time they ceased and tooke possession of the said Kingdome, which they haue held since the yeare 1470. vntill this day, saith Iohn le Maire. Of this Iames bastard and of the oath he made vnto the Souldan, see Naucler.
Sixtus or Sistus, fourth of that name,Sixtus. 4. a Geneuois by Nati∣on, borne in the Towne of Sauonne, called before Francis de Ruere, generall of the order of Friars, and Cardinall of S. Sixtus, after the death of Paul, succeeded in the execrable Chaire. As the solemnitie of his Coronation was done, whilest they carried him in his Litter to the Church of Laterane, hee was in great daunger of his life in a mutenie which arose suddenly: in such sort that he was assailed euen with stones, and forsaken almost of all that accompanied his Litter. This Pope was very liberall towards his, and bore them such an affection, that in fauour of them, he did and agreed vnto many things a∣gainst all right and reason. He promoted vnto the dignitie of a Cardinall before all others, one called Peter de Ruere, one of the same order and Na∣tion, and had bene nourished from his Infancie with a brother of his called Hierome: although it seemed this man was borne foolishly to spend money. For in two yeares that he liued af∣ter, he consumed in all dissolution and violence, the summe of 200000. Skutes, besides many debts he left. Iohn Textor in his Officine makes mention of this Cardinall, and saith, that in two yeares he spent in dissolutions, vanities, and incredible luxurie, 300000. skutes. The yeare 1475. a Citizen of Trent, lost in the weeke be∣fore Easter, commonly called the passion weeke, a childe of two yeares olde. And hauing sought him through all streetes in the Towne, and not finding him, he suspected he was carried away by the Iewes which inhabited there. Wherefore he got him towards the Magistrate, making great sorrow and deliue∣ring his suspitions. The Sunday following the Iewes told the Bishop that they had found a childe betwixt the floud called Rusch and the house of Samuel, a Iew which the force of the water had cast vp there. Certaine men were appointed to visit the childe which was found in the house of the said Samuel with his garments all wette: his body was marked with diuers prickes. Being asked how this childe came there, they answe∣red they knew not, but that the fiercenesse of the water had driuen him thither. But as soone as they were put to the Racke
they confessed and rehearsed the case in order: that is to say, how they had consulted and chosen amongst them one Tobias to steale a Christian childe and to crucifie him at Easter, and that this Tobias did take vp the said childe for that purpose, called Simon, and hauing offered him in the full assemblie of the Iewes in the house of the saide Samuel, they clasped his necke with pinsons to keepe him from crying: then stretched his armes on a Crosse, cut off his priuities, after his right eye∣lid, then each one pricked him with sharpe Instruments euen to death, and lastly cast him into the floud. After informati∣on made of this execrable murder, all they were executed which were attainted about this deed doing in the said Towne of Trent. The Common-wealth of Florence. Cosme.Although in the time of the Emperor Henry the seuenth, the Florentines receiued Robert King of Naples to bee their Protector to resist the Gibellins or Imperialistes, (so much hated they the Emperours of Almaine) yet about this time Cosme by surname Medices, flourished in that Towne in great pre∣heminence, prudence, and authoritie: and was held as a Prince and chiefe of the Towne. He led the Senate at his pleasure, inriched the poore Citi∣zens, builded many places, for more and more to maintaine his authoritie. Peter, Law∣rence, Iulian.But after that Cosme was dead in the yeare 1464. hee left a sonne called Peter, who also was mightie in the Towne. Vn∣to whom succeeded in the administration of the Common∣wealth Lawrence de Medices his son: who with his brother Iu∣lian augmented the Seignorie of Florence. And because this greatly displeased certaine Bishops, Cardinalls, and other Lords, they made a conspiracie together, and came to Florence the yeare 1478. which with one of the noblest of the Towne called Francisquinus de pactis, dissembling their hatred entred into the Tmple: and as they lifted vp the Host they slewe Iulian, and wounded Lawrence, who escaped their hands. But the Malefactors thought they had done an act greatly plea∣sing to the Citizens to recouer libertie, but they were decei∣ued:
for they were all taken, and neither Priest nor Bishop pardoned. Frodesque Saluiat Archbishop of Pise, who said the Masse, was giuen to the slaughter-man and hanged at an high window in his habit: for hee had sung Masse in his coate of Male. The Pope being grieued at these dooings, excommunicated Lawrence de Medices, and stird vp Ferdinand king of Sicilie, Alphonsus Duke of Calabria, and Frederic Duke of Ʋrbin, a∣gainst the Florentines to be reuenged of them. But Lawrence seeing he was not puissant enough to sustaine such enemies, by the consent of the Citizens got him to a shippe, and se∣cretly came into Sicilie to the King Ferdinand himselfe, and promised him tribute if he and his would leaue that enterprise begunne at the Popes instance. Which was done, & the towne with all the countrie by that meanes was deliuered from the de∣struction of the enemies. The Pope heereat was more inflamed then before: but the Venetians gaue aide vnto the Florentines against the Pope, after they had made peace with the Turke: who du∣ring these stirres besieged Rhodes and got it, the yeare 5488. In this time began the superstition to toll a Bell at noone as a pardon, called the (Aue Maria pacis) which the King had entreated of the Pope. The yeare of Christ 1475. the great Iubile alreadie ordai∣ned  and commaunded by Paul the second, was confirmed by Sixtus, and obserued at Rome this yeare. Charles the sonne of Phillip Duke of Bourgongne, agrreed with King Lewis the 11. Frederic the Emperour refused to e∣rect Bourgongne for a Kingdome, whereat Charles was moo∣ued, therefore he besieged Nisse, (which is a Towne placed in the territories of Colongne) and held it during a yeare besieged. Hee did it to gaine vpon the Empire the Diocesse of Colongne: but the Emperour prepared a great power to meete him and to leuie the siege. In the ende they accorded: so that Maximilian the sonne of Frederic should take in marriage Marie the onely daughter of the saide Duke of Bour∣gongne.
After these things the said Charles fought twise against the Swisses vnluckily enough for this cause. About the years 1460. Sigismond Duke of Austrich enga∣ged to Charles Duke of Bourgongne his lands which he had, as well on this side as beyond Rhene: namely Sungaw Brisgaw, the blacke Forrest, and the Townes scituate vpon Rhene, for 7000. Florents. Great mischiefes came herevpon. For the Duke of Bourgongne appointed ouer those Lands as Gouernor general, Peter de Hagenbach, who exceedingly tormented them of Mulhuse and Swisses. About this time Charles Duke of Lorraine died of the pestilence at Nancy, which gaue occasion to Charles Duke of Bourgogne, to see if hee could conquer Lorraine by force, ta∣king the cause against Rhene the successor of Lorraine, that Charles his predecessor was bound vnto him in a certaine sum of money: and by the same meanes though also to vsurpe the royall title of Sicilie and Ierusalem. Peter de Hagenbach Count of Thiersteine, greatly molested the subiects of Sigismond, Duke of Austrich, who had lately after long warres made peace with the Swisses. Wherevnto they of Strasbourge Sicistad, Colmar, and Basill had sealed. And the money due vnto the Duke of Bourgongne, was committed into the hands of a Changer or Banquer of Basill, and the paiment signified to the Duke of Bourgongne by an Herauld. After they proceeded against Peter de Hagembach, who being taken prisoner was solemnly disgraded of his order of knighthood, and publikely beheaded after he had gouerned the said lands engaged three yeares and an halfe. The Duke of Bourgongne hearing hereof, determined to reuenge the death of his Gouernour, and assembled an Ar∣mie, being also aided of the Duke of Millaine and the Duchesse of Sauoy, and tooke Lansanua a confederate of the Swisses: From thence hee besieged the Towne and Castle of Granson, solliciting them to yeeld: when they had yeelded, the Duke caused to hang 80. and to drowne in a lake nigh the Towne 200. Such an act greatly stirred the Swisses, and not only them, but also whole high Germanie: which with the Armie of the Duke of Austrich, (of which the conducter was Herman d'
Extingen) chased from Granson the Duke and slew one part of his Armie, lost his Artillerie and his furniture for warre,The Dukes first ouer∣throwe at Granson. which was very magnificall. After they tooke downe their compani∣ons which the Duke had hung vp, and hanged in their places as many Bourguignons. Gelatius Maria Duke of Millaine, on S. Stephens day, in  the Church of S. Stephen being at Masse, was slaine by a Citi∣zen of Millaine called Andrew de Lupagnano, who making a shewe to speake vnto him stabbed him in the stomacke. He said the cause was for that the Duke deteined from him vniust∣ly certaine possessions, that he kept his wife, and further, hin∣dred that iustice could not be done him touching an Abbey: for which he had paid at Rome during vacation, and the Duke would haue had an other to haue had it. Sixtus cast the Manfrois Lords of the Towne of Imola, namely the father and the sonne out of the Seignorie, and gaue it to one of his houshold. Likewise he deiected the Gouernours of Forliue, and con∣stituted there a familiar friend of his. Charles Duke of Bourgongne returned the second time a∣gainst the Swisses: Before, he had taken from the Duke Rene of Lorraine Nancy:The second ouerthrow of the Duke of Bourgongne nigh Morat. wherefore the Duke of Lorraine ioyned with the Swisses. And when the Duke of Bourgongne was be∣fore Morat, they of the Towne came out and altogether inua∣ded the the Armie of the Bourguignons, and put them vnto flight. In so much that 17. thousand Bourguignons or 20000. after Fasci. Temp. or 22000. after the Sea of Hist, were there slaine. The spoile was there left to the Duke of Lorraine for recompence, who also after recouered Nancy. See Nau∣clerus. The third time the Duke of Bourgongne being greeued to haue beene vanquished by so weake a Prince as the Duke of Lorraine was, returned and againe besieged Nancy.The third o∣uerthrow of the Duke Charles. Hee had 14000 combattants, and still looked for other Bands of souldi∣ers. Vpon this the Duke of Lorraine and the Swisses came vpon them, parted in two Bandes. The Bourguignons were discomfited and put to flight: some slaine in the woods, and
others drowned. There was also slaine the Duke of Bour∣gongne, hauing receiued three mortall woundes, one on the head, an other in the thigh, and the last in the fundament. See Naucler. The Bourguignons would not beleeue he was slaine, but that being escaped hee retired into Almaine, and hee had vowed to make his penance there seuen yeares, There were amongst the Bourguignons which solde precious stones, horses, and other such like things, to be paid at his returne. Yea euen in Bruchel in the Diocesse of Spine, there was an olde man which men thought to bee the Duke of Bourgongne, making there his pe∣nance, whom euery one desired to see, and therby got he good almes. Nauclerus saith hee sawe the said poore man in the said place. The king of France vnderstanding of the death of the Duke of Bourgongne, tooke Monididier, Roy, Peronne, Abbenille, Monstraeul, Arras, an Hesdin. See the Hist. of France. Maximilian sonne of the Emperour Frederic the third, af∣fianced Mary the onely daughter of Charles Duke of Bour∣gongne, with whom he had Bourgongne, Brabant, Flaunders, Lux∣embourge, Hainaut, Zeland, Artois, Guelders, with other Sergno∣ries and lands. The said Maximilian had of his said wife one sonne called Phillip; and a daughter called Margarite. They had two other children Francis and George, which died in their youth. Phillip espowsed Iane Queene of Chastile, of whom hee had Charles the fift Emperour, and Ferdinand, and foure daugh∣ters, Leonor, Isabeal, Mary, and Katherine. Iacobins a∣gainst the Carmes.The Iacobins Inquisitors, deputed against heretikes (as they call them in diuers sorts) molested certaine Theologians of the order of Carmes, in certaine causes of the faith. Amongst which they said one was called Iulian de Bresse, an excellent Preacher of the word of God, and an other Peter de Neuolaite, for whom Mantuan writ an Apologie conteining three bookes. But all this was pacified by the Pope Sixtus at the pur∣suite of Christopher Martignon, which Sextus (as tutor and de∣fender
of Monkes (as Stella witnesseth in the Popes liues) that he might take away all occasion of enuie and riots amongst them,Mendicants made equall. ordained that all Mendicant and begging Friars should bee equall in such priuiledges, as all Popes had graunted vnto them. The Vniuersitie of Tubinge in the Diocesse of Constance, by Apostolicke authoritie was instituted at the instance of the Count of Wittemberge. Naucler. The Swisses beganne now to receiue wages of the king of  Fraunce, Lewis the 11. casheering the French Archers,The Swisses receiue the Kings wages. be∣cause they pilled and spoyled, and did many other mischiefes. Naucler. Platina composed the Popes liues in Latin, and dedicated them vnto Sixtus the 4. Wessalus of Frise, in this time writ against the Pope, his doctrine and traditions. Mahomet the second died of poison as was suspected. Nau∣cler. or else of a Collicke passion, of the age of 50. yeares, & af∣ter Naucler. of 53. Baiazetes his son succeeded him. Paul. Iou. Margarite the daughter of Maximilian was brought into France and espowsed vnto the Dolphin Charles the 8. in the moneth of Iuly at Ambroise, who afterward was sent backe a∣gaine. Naucler. Mary Duchesse of Bourgongne, Maximilians wife, Madam Margarites mother, being on hunting fell from her horse and died. Chron. Euseb. and Naucler. The Pope Sixtus Canonized S. Bonauenture. The last of August died Lewis King of France,The death of king Lewis the 11. a very su∣perstitious man. He pilled the people to inrich Churches. Hee worshipped and kissed bones and relickes of Saints, to obtaine health. For hee maruellously feared death: In so much that in the end of his dayes hee gaue excessiue gifts to his Phi∣sitian each moneth, if at the least they might but prolong his life. Sixtus made many warres wrongfully against Ferdi∣nand King of Pouille, because hee gaue ayde vnwilling∣ly to his sonne in lawe Hercules d'st Duke of Ferrara,
which was besieged of the Venetians, against the Venetians, which he excommunicated. Also against the Florentines (as is said): although that the matter better vnderstood hee absol∣ued them and restored them to their honour, and Lawrence de Medices likewise. Sixtus being deteined sicke in his bed of a Feauer, vnder∣standing that a peace was made betwixt the Venetians and o∣ther Potentates, suddenly yeelded the spirit. Naucler. Innocent. 8.Innocent 8. of that name, borne at Genes, the sonne of one  called Aaron, called before Iohn Baptist Cibo, of a Cardinall, Priest of the title of S. Cicilie, was created Pope of Priests and Monkes, after of Sixtus. Ʋolaterane saith he was once a poore childe, yet faire, and was nourished amongst the seruants of Ferdinand king of Sicilie, where he learned all the fashions of the Court life. Comming from thence to Rome, he remained long time in the house of Phillip, Cardinall of Boulongne. After this he was made Bishop of Sauonne, and thirdly of Melphe by the Pope Xistus and also Dataire, finally Cardinall, & after Pope as hath bin said. He was of a great stature, a white man, and of faire re∣presentation: but of an heauie and dull spirit, and far from all studie of good Letters: In so much that sometimes when he was Idle from publike affaires hee seemed as though he slept. Al∣most frō the beginning of his Popedome he conspired against Ferdinand king of Sicilie, with the Princes of the kingdome. See how Popes vse to recompence the amitie of such as nourish and educate them. Hee called one named Robert d' S. Seuerin to be chiefe and Captaine of the Armie which he sent against Ferdinand. This holy man said that for the Churches dignitie and the defence of Saints, it was lawful to take Armes, that peace might follow of it. Yet seeing himself deceiued, he was forced to make peace vpon this condition, that his yearely tribute should be paid him, and that such as rebelled should not be in daunger. But the king Ferdinand kept neither the one nor the other condition: although hee sent one named Peter de Ʋincence an hardie and bold man, who was Auditor of the Chamber with his Secreta∣rie to sollicite his causes.
After these things Innocent wearie of warring, delighted in nothing but a dastardly idlenesse, ful of sloath: which brought with it nothing but diuers concupiscences, fraudes, pleasures, pompes, gourmandizes, dissolutions, pailliardizes, and Idola∣tries. He erected a new Colledge of Secretaries, for his owne profit, augmenting, the number of them which were there be∣fore. He builded a new Pallace and an house of pleasure,Townes giuē to the Popes bastards. of a new fashion. He was the first of all the Popes which in an in∣vsuall maner aduanced his bastards vnto honour and riches. For hee gaue certaine Townes nigh Rome vnto his bastard Francis, and greatly inriched his daughter called Theodorine, which he married vnto a very rich man of Genoa. Charles eight of that name King of France, succeeded his father Lewis the 11. being of the age of 14. yeares. The three Estates were solemnly assembled at Tours for the Kings person. Hee was very conscionable, yeelding vnto the King of Spaine the Countes of Roussillon and Parpignant. Hee conque∣red the kingdome of Naples: and the Princes and Gentlemen went thither of their owne charge. At Rome the Pope decla∣red him Emperour of Constantinople. The King Alphonsus and his sonne Ferdinand for feare retired into Sicilie, and Charles en∣tred triumphantly into Naples. Then the Lords and Townes in Italie banded themselues against the King to enclose him at his returne, yet he got through with a great victorie ouer them at Fonnone, (for he had fewe people against many) and as vanquisher returned into France.Naples re∣volted. But at the end of the yeare Naples reuolted vnto the said Ferdinand. King Lewis the 11. would not that his sonne Charles should learne any part of the Italian tongue, but onely this Prouerbe (Qui nessit dissimulare, nescit regnare) that is, hee that cannot faigne and dissemble knowes not how to raigne. A poore lesson, better beseeming a Tyrant then a King. M. Iohn an English man, a Priest in this time,Iohn the English man burnt at Paris Corpus Chri∣sti. was burnt at Paris, in the place called the Swine Market: because in the morning of the day then called Corpus Christi, in the great Church of our Lady, in the Chappel dedicated vnto S. Crispin
and Crispinian, he tooke from a Priest that sung Masse his Host, and cast it on the ground. The Pope Innocent absolued the Venetians which had bene excommunicated by Sixtus for acts before recited: and solde pardons and Indulgences as well for the liuing as for the dead. He inriched with great presents many Temples through Italie. He gaue vnto the Augustins of Bergoine, a Church of sil∣uer of an exquisite and maruelous worke. He by his Bulles permitted to them of Norway that they ought to sing Masse without wine. Moreouer seeing that Par∣dons, nor the Iubile, nor the warre against the Turkes serued him any thing to gather siluer: hee inuented a new maner of gathering siluer. For he found inclosed in an old wall, the title which was set vpon the Crosse of Iesus Christ, written in three languages, Iesus of Nazareth, &c. with the Iron of the Launce wherwith Christ his side was pearsed. Being hindred by a long disease he could not accomplish that which he purposed in his courage. But the yeare of our Lord 1492. he deceased out of this world. There was a Poet called Marcellus, who made an Epitaph in Latin Verses,An Epitaphe of Innocent. whose sence is this. What needest thou seeke witnesses to know whether Cibe be male or female? Behold onely the great troupe of his children, they will yeeld a certaine testimonie thereof. He begot eight sonnes, and as many daughters. It is not without cause that Rome calls him Father, &c. The Towne of Arras was againe taken by the Flemmings in the nigh time. The keyes of one of the Towne gates was counterfeited and giuen to foure of the conspiracie, poore Me∣chanikes: the one of which was called Grisard, who had an or∣dinarie garde of the gate, and vsed customably vpon the wall to sing with an high voyce. What houre is it? It is not time. What houre is it? It is not day. This was to aduertise the enemies when they should approach. And when they were nigh hee sung an other Song. Marchez la duron duraine, marchez la duron durean. So the Towne of Arras was by him deliuered into the Emperours hand without any effusion of bloud.
Horrible things of Roderic Borgia. To shewe the horrour of that abhominable seat of Rome it shal not be impertinent to declare how and by what meanes a Spaniard came thither. In the time of Innocent the 8. after that Borgia was placed in the number of the Cardinalls and Fathers of the Romane Church, his affection was incessantly set to mount higher, and to that ende hee inuented each day all the meanes hee thought good and meete to enioy the accomplishment of his desires. Finally he gaue himselfe to the diuellish Art of Necromancie: to the end that by the helpe of diuells and euill spirits he might enter into the way whch he sawe shut to him, as well by the ri∣ches as the great credit and prerogatiue of his companions. Af∣ter hee had certaine time employed his studie and diligently watched about the cursed and dammable Art of Necromancie,Conuention betwixt Sathā & Borgia. he began to inquire of his diuels, (wherewith he prooued very familiar) if they would not sauour him so much as in the pur∣suite of the Papall dignitie, they would giue him support and helpe. Wherevnto they readily agreed, but yet vnder this espe∣ciall rescription and couenant, that by certaine words he should deliuer an oath to shewe himselfe in all things a faithfull pro∣tector of Sathan. To which this Cardinall of a wicked minde consented: onely he required that when hee should come to do his homage and take his oath, the diuell would not ap∣peare vnto him in any hideous and fearefull forme, but rather vnder some humane forme, namely vnder the person of a Protonotaire: which hauing graunted him, at the time assigned and established, on a Sommers day the Cardinall beeing reti∣red into a place called Montcauallus, being alone in a chamber, the saide Protonotaire presented himselfe vnto him, like a man of meane age, honourably apparelled, who after cer∣taine talke helde betwixt them, hee assured the Cardinall that hee should bee Pope. Then Roderic Borgia beeing very ioyous, began to inquire of him how long hee should raigne. This Protonotaire deliuered him a very ambiguous answere, (namely that hee should raigne the space of eleuen and eight)
the Cardinall foolishly promised himself the time of 19. yeares in his Papall dignitie, although Sathans meaning was but 11. yeares and 8. monethes. After Pope Innocent was dead, by pluralitie of voyces hee was established Pope. And because there should be no want at the solemnities, he named himselfe Alexander the sixt, be∣fore named Roderic Borgia,Alexand. 6. borne at Valence in Spaine, the Ne∣phewe of Calixtus late Pope, third of that name; As one that long time had had the handling of the office of Vice-chaun∣cellor, hee knew all the estate of the Court of Rome, and knew all the councels and enterprises of the Princes and Communal∣ties of Italie. Being then placed where he desired, he subiugated almost them all by the meanes of his bastard called Valentin: which of a Cardinall he made a Duke, and surnamed him.Cesar Borgia the Popes ba∣stard. Besides this, hee exterminated all the mightiest houses that were in the Towne, so that after he feared them no more. In which com∣bat (as Valerius reciteth) being munited and strengthened with the succours of the French and Swisses, he shead much humane bloud. The Emperour Frederic the third, died at Vienna the 26. of August, vpon the eating (as is said) a great quantitie of Pom∣pions as hee meant to refresh himselfe, and was buried in the Church of S. Stephen. The malladie of Naples, called the French disease, or the poxe, began about this time. MaximilianMaximilian the Emperour Fredericks sonne, third of that name, held the Empire alone after his father, and was a fautor and louer of learned people. The Almaines made a great discomfiture against the French men, nigh Salnis in Bourgongne. The Religion and Couent of the obseruation of Lyons vp∣on Rosne, was founded in the suburbes of the said Towne, in the place of two Louers. The founder was king Charles the eight, and Anne of Britaine Queene of France, and the said Couent was named Nostre dame des Anges. That is, our Lady of An∣gells. If they had said of Asses, they had said better.
The last day of December the King of France, Charles the eight, arriued at Rome, and made a magnificke entry there∣into. The kingdome of Granado was recouered by Ferdinand King of Spaine, which had about 80. yeares before beene taken from the Christians. Batazetes came into Hungarie, where were slaine 7000. of them that met him. Alphonsus King of Portugall fell from his horse and died, and in his place succeeded Emanuel his brother. The order and Religion des filles Repenties began at Paris,Repenties. by Friar Iohn Trisseran, Religions of the obseruation of Lyons, borne at Bourge in Bresse. Maximilian by an Embassage affianced the Duchesse of Britaine, which thing greatly displeased Charles the 8. king of France. Wherefore he made warre against the Britaines and had a great victorie vpon them: and incontinently after, ha∣uing repudiated Margarite of Flanders (whom he had affianced (as is said) during his fathers life) tooke Anne the eldest daugh∣ter of Francis Duke of Britaine: so was the peace made with the Britaines. She had by him many children, all which died before their father. Maximilian afterward (that is, the 16. of March) espowsed  in the Towne of Insprulz Blache, Marie, an honourable virgin, daughter of Galeatius Duke of Millaine. Alexander celebrated a Iubile, Anno 1500. whereat he de∣liuered this grace and fauour by his Bulles to such as had made no account to come thither, or such as could not come, that they might gaine and obtaine the Iubile by sending thither. He sought by all meanes to heape vp siluer as much as he could to satisfie his lusts. Wherefore hee set vs a new Colledge of Abbreuiators, to the number of 80. of which each place was folde at 750. Ducates. He inuited all Princes vnto his Iubile by his Bulls, and ordained that in euery Towne men might haue Stations. He created in his time 36. Cardinalls, amongst which were 18. Spaniards, and of his kinsmen three: that is to say, Iohn
Borgia,Maximilian. Valentin Borgia, and Francis Borgia. Hee receiued the oath of fidelitie of Alphonsus king of Naples, which he tooke betwixt the hands of the said Iohn Borgia, touching the keeping of loyaltie to the seate of Rome, and to pay him his annuall tribute. He fortified at his great charge the Castle S. Angels, repai∣red and beautified the Temple of S. Mary Maior. That which followeth is extracted by Iohn Functius out of the workes of Volateranus. The Cardinalls which elected him (he speaketh of Pope Alexander) were the first that felt his ingratitude. For he oppressed them all by diuers calamities, banishing some, and imprisoning others. He made warre vpon the Vrsins, which he vanquished and tooke prisoners by the meanes of his sonnes. Alexander setteth vp his bastards.After this hee desired nothing so much as to life vp vnto honours his bastards, as Innocent had done: yea this, farre more. For now this began to be held a thing much honourable, and worthy of great praise amongst the venerable Fathers. He made the youngest of his sonnes a Prince in Sicilie. The second cal∣led Caesar Valentin, he made Cardinall. And the eldest he made a Duke in Spaine: who not long after was slaine at Rome & cast into Tiber. As for the Cardinall Caesar, reiecting the order of Priesthood, after his brothers death came into the kingdome of France with a great summe of siluer, where he espowsed one of king Lewis his kinswomen of the house of Albert,The Duke of Valentinois. and there was giuen him the Duchie of Valentinois in Daulphine. After this by the kings helpe and the alliance which was made with him, he acquired many Seignories in Italie: vnto whom also his father gaue the hand, who desired nothing so much in the world, as to see his sonne so great a Lord. Lucrece the daughter, wife & daugh∣ter in lawe of the Pope.His daughter Lucrece whose carnall company himselfe had (which was an horrible and detestable thing) was married vnto three Princes successiuely. First vnto Iohn Sforza Duke of Pi∣sance. After being repudiated by him, to Lewis the bastard sonne of Alphonsus king of Arragon. Finally after hee was slaine, shee espowsed Alphonsus d'Est, Duke of Ferrara, Men may easily knowe (by her Epitaphe made by Iohn Iouian Pou∣tanus,
in very elegant Latin, Verses) what was the chastitie, sanctitie, and religion as well of the father as of the daugh∣ter and sonne. For shee was renowmed to haue companie of them both. This also which followeth is drawne out of the booke of Hierome Marius, in his booke called Eusebius Cap∣tiue. What need we to recite the infamous and dishonest deeds of Alexander the sixt, seeing hee made alliance with diuells, gaue himselfe altogether vnto them, and subiected himselfe vnto them. Hermolaus Barbarus a very learned man,The crueltie and ingrati∣tude of the Venetians. died of griefe in exile at Rome, depriued of his Church and Patriarkship of A∣quilea, by the ingratitude of the Venetians, whom he had ser∣ued as an Orator and Embassador vnto diuers Princes of Chri∣stendome. The cause wherefore he was thus handled of the Venetians, was because hee had receiued the Patriarkship of the Pope without theyr priuitie. Therefore not content, they banished also his parents, and confiscated their goods. See Iohn le Maire. Iohn Picus Prince de Randole, a mirrour of true Nobilitie, in the flower of his youth died at Florence. Wee finde many things written of this Pope by notable Authors of his time: as certaine excellent Latin Verses well worthy to be noted, which recite the praises of this holy Fa∣ther. Whereof this is the sence following. Alexander sells Cros∣ses, and Aultars, yea Iesus Christ himself. He first bought them, and may well sell them. Rome passeth from vice to vice, and from flame to fire vnder the gouernment of this Spaniard. Tar∣quinus was the sixt king of Rome, Nero the sixt Emperour, and this Pope the sixt of his name: alwaies Rome hath bin destroy∣ed by the sixths. This was he who for the summe of 200000. Ducats which he receiued of the Turke called Baiazet,This act brought great damage to I∣talie. poysoned Gemen his brother who fled to Rome. This is he (say I) who being willing to maintaine his tirannie, called to his helpe Baiazet Emperour of the Turkes, against the king of France Charles the eight: and sought to make the Kingdome of Naples, yea the very Citie of Rome, the Frontiers of the Turkes Empire.
Lewis the 12. as the nighest, succeeded to the Crowne of France after Charles the 8. He sent his Armie into Lombardie vnder the conduct of Iohn Iaques Trivulse, and of Sieur Au∣bigny, which tooke Alexandria and Pauie: so that then Lewis Sforza abandoned Millaine for feare and retired into Almaine. The King vpon these newes passed into Italie,Lewis Sforza. and made his triumphant entrie into Millaine: from whence hee departed hauing diminished the charges of the people and left the said Trivulse as Gouernour. Lewis Sforza returned within a yeare after, and againe tooke Millaine, and from thence being againe chased by a new Armie from France, hee tooke his flight towards Nauarre: after his comming from whence, being pursued by the French, hee was taken and led a prisoner into France. This king ordained in France that (O salutaris hostia) should be sung in the eleuation of the Host. Friar Hierome Sauanarola of Ferrara, of the order of Do∣minicains, preached at Florence. He was burnt at the instance and by the commaundement of that monster Alexander Pope the sixt, because hee preached against him, and his more then notorious wickednesse. He composed certaine meditations vpon the 50. Psalme and certaine others. See the Booke of Martyrs. Mancinellus.The Pope caused to bee cut out the tongue and both the hands of Anthonius Mancinellus a learned man: because he had written a very elegant Oration against the wicked maners and villainous and dishonest life of him. The warre of Maximilian against the Swissers is renowned in this time. Batazetes the Turke, tooke by force a Towne in Macedonia called Dyrrachium: and the yeare after in Morea hee tooke Methone which belonged vnto the Venetians: as also certain time before he had vsurped Naupactus in Epire. He also behea∣ded the Bishop of the said Towne of Methone. Italie was greatly afflicted by the Turkes: as soone as warre against the Venetians was on a flame. Charles after Emperour, sonne of Phillip Arch-Duke of
Austrich, and of Iane daughter of the king of Castile was borne at Gaunt on the Bissext day, the 25 of Februarie, on S. Mat∣thias day. The Marrhans (these were Iewes which made themselues Christians fearing to leese theyr goods,Marrhans. such are commonly in Spaine, and secretly obserue the Iewish ceremonies) are recon∣ciled with the Pope, hauing with great summes of money ac∣quired his good grace. Naucler. The Towne of Basill, the ninth day of Iune made alliance  with the Cantons of Swisse, in the Towne of Lucerne:Basil Schaffu∣sen. And the tenth of August, they of Schaffusen made also a perpetuall alli∣ance with the Cantons of the Swisses, in the said Towne of Lu∣cerne. They of Noremberge were discomfited by Cassimere Mar∣quesse  of Brandebourge, with great effusion of bloud nigh their Towne. King Lewis the 11. tooke the kingdome of Naples vnder the conduction of Sieur d'Augbini, Frederic,The Veneti∣ans vanqui∣shed. his wife and his sonnes prisoners, were carried into France. He recouered Bo∣longue, vsurped by Bentiuoli, and yeelded it vnto the Pope: After in proper person going against the Venetians, which vsurped many Lands of the Duchie of Millaine, valiantly van∣quished them nigh Agnadel: tooke Bartholomew Balnian, the conducter of that Armie, and carried him prisoner into France. Hee tooke againe the said vsurped Townes and many others, yeelding vnto the Pope such Townes as the Venetians had taken from him. The issue of the Pope Alexander was fearefull, and with manifest token of the iust iudgement of God, and therefore would diligently be noted. As on a certaine day he had made readie an exceeding great banket for certaine rich Senators and Cardinalls, and had recommended to his sonne Valentin, that he should giue wine to drinke vnto one of the said Cardi∣nalls wherein there was poyson put: It came to passe that hee that had the charge to deliuer the wine, vnwittingly gaue to the Pope of that flaggon wherin the poison was: who being of great age, was taken with a languishment and grieuou paine.
He had by the space of eleuen yeares and certaine mo∣nethes excessiuely oppressed Italie, and troubled the world. Being then deteined in his bed (as Iohn Baleus saith) hee com∣maunded one of his men called Madena (which amongst all them of his Court and house was his most faithfull and famili∣ar) to goe into his gardrobe or wardrope, and to bring him a certaine litle booke enriched with gold and precious stones: which was in an Armorie which he specified. But this litle booke conteined all maners and kindes of Illusions and En∣chauntments of Negromancie: whereby the old man thought to enforme himselfe, to be certified of the closure and ende of his life. An horrible illusion of Sa∣than.The seruant obeing the commaundement of the Pope his maister, and going vnto the place specified: as (after hee had opened the doore) he was readie to haue entred into the cham∣ber, he sawe a certaine person sit in the Popes Chaire there, who was altogether like vnto his maister: At the sight where∣of beeing surprised with an horrible feare & astonishment, and and as it were halfe dead, without taking the booke, ranne backe againe towards Alexander, vnto whom he rehearsed what hee had seene: namely that in his Wardrope hee found such a Pope as himselfe set in a Chaire. Alexander after he had vnderstood the thing, and seeing his seruant to be exceedingly affraide, suffered him to rest a while: After hee did so much perswade him, that he returned into the said Wardrope to see if againe hee could finde the said Pope. The seruant then being entred, found in the said chamber him whom before he had seene: and that more is, being asked by him that sate there what cause brought him into that place, and what businesse hee had there, Hee be∣ing taken with a sore trembling, and as it were out of breath,The diuell saith he is Pope. aunswered, hee came to take a certaine garment for the Pope. At which words, the diuell beeing then in the Chaire, making an horrible noise siad, what Pope? I am the Pope. But after that those things were reported vnto Alexander, his euill began to encrease, and death approached.
A short day after, a man apparelled like a Carrier or Lac∣key, came and fiercely knocked at the chamber doore where∣in the Pope was deteined sicke, saying hee must needes speake with him. The doore being opened and hee admit∣ted parley with the Pope, all others drew aside, and the Pope and hee spake together, as two vse to doo in secret cau∣ses, yet men might see a great and maruellous strife and debate betwixt them two, and that the Pope was not content.A strife be∣twixt the Pope and diuell. For hee said vnto him. How goes this? my terme is not yet accomplished. Thou knowest that thy promise was nine∣teene yeares, whereof I haue liued but eleuen and eight mo∣neths. Vnto which words the Lackey hardily answered: you vnderstood not well the speech, but are greatly abused. For I said not nineteene yeares as you imagined: but I said you should remaine Pope eleuen yeares and eight moneths, the which are come and passed, and therefore you must needes die. But although the Pope was very actiue to require and to pray instantly that he would haue regard to his life,Alexander prayeth that his terme may be longer. and to the terme that hee had graunted him in his Popedome, yet it was as to speake to a deafe man, and to pleade in vaine. For all his alligations, remonstrations, exceptions, and re∣quests profited nothing: so that they which were in the cham∣ber and heard this maruellous debate and difference, might iudge that Sathan was more expert in the Art of Arithme∣tike then the Pope was, and they might easily conclude that Alexander erred in his account. Finally to close vp the matter, euen as Sathan went and departed from the place, in like manner also with great cries, sighes, and fearfull sobbes, the Popes soule (as it were follow∣ing his steppes) dislodged and miserably departed from his body. Thus miserably and vngodly died this Pope Alexander, leauing to his sonne his Seignory, altogether wasted and rui∣nous, and to the Italians, their Comonwealth all confused, per∣uerted & wasted: to the end he might be a publike example to
all ages, how things euill gotten melt away, and are wickedly and vnluckily spent. This Pope had with his said sonne a daughter called Lucrece, with whom both he and his sonne lay, as Pontanus and Samaza∣rius haue left written. Phillip Archduke of Austrich, the son of Maximilian and of Mary, the onely daughter of Charles Duke of Bourgoine, tooke to wife Iane the onely daughter of the king of Arragon, and by reason of her right, going into Spaine, passed through France in the yeare, 1501. After returning into Flaunders, to appeease certaine stirres of warre betwixt them of Gilders and Brabant, he tooke many Townes of Gelders, with the Duke of Suffolke a young Gentleman, which he nourished in his Court with his children. The said Phillip yeelded homage vnto king Lewis the 12. for the Counties of Flaunders and Artois, before Guy de Rochefort, grand-Chauncellor of France, and Lewis de Luxem∣bourge Count de Ligni, Embassadors sent for the purpose vnto Arras. Pius. 3.Pius third of that name, a Tuscan by Nation, borne at Si∣enna, Nephew of Pope Pius the second, on his sisters side Laoda∣mie, before called Francis Picolhomineus, that is, a litle man, suc∣ceeded the said Alexander, being elected by the Cardinalls af∣ter great strifes and debates. Ʋalentin Borgia hauing seized vpon all the treasures of his father Alexander, after his death with twelue thousand souldi∣ers occupied Vatican where the Pope should be elected, ten∣ding to this end, to constraine the Cardinalls to choose such an one for Pope as should like him. Sackagemēt of Borgia.The Cardinalls to shun this danger, withdrew themselues first incontinently into the Temple of Minerua, where straight they were besieged by him. But as a bruite went through the Towne that the Cardinalls were taken, and that he commit∣ted many murders and sackagements through the towne, they were all taken with a great feare. After this, the shops were shut, and each one ranne to Armes. The issues and endes of streets were stopped with bankes, peeces of wood, and chaines of Iron: no more nor no lesse then if the enemie had againe
bene nigh the walles. Borgia then seeing that he had enterpri∣sed a thing so hard to execute: and also being required by the Cardinalls to cease frō such doings, promised that, which a litle after he obeyed. After Pius was chosen, Borgia hauing passed his choller, thanked the Cardinalls that they had chosen such an one, as he had greatly wished. Hee then incontinently as he was made Pope, made a cōspiracie against the French which had occupied a part of Italie; For he tooke in very euill part that their king had brought Pouille & a great part of Italie vnder his subiectiō. This Pope hoped that a day would come, when he should doo some great damage vnto the French, after he had drawne them into Ambushes that he had laid for them; and with the helpe of such as had conspired with him, he hoped to driue thē cleane out of these Lands. But whilest he went about this, he died, the 27. day after his election, they yeare 1503. of an vlcer, which he had in his thigh, wherwith he had long time bene troubled, without doing any thing at al of that which he had enterprised. For beside the war he purposed against the Frēch, he determi∣ned to haue reformed the Church to haue celebrated a Coun∣cel, and haue gotten an Armie against the Turkes, after the ex∣ample of his Vncle. Aduertisement. Note Reader for a conclusion of the precedent Popes, that such as were since Siluester the second, vntill Innnocent the fourth, had the key of the bottomelesse pit giuen them: to the end that by the horrible smoake thereof they might send out the Locusts or Grashoppers to deuoure all,Deuouring Grashoppers or Locusts. through all Chri∣stian Regions, and that they might worke the secret of their Iniquitie. As for the last which were after Innocent the fourth, vntill Iulius the second of that name, they haue bene permit∣ted to nourish and maintaine it, to obscure all truth: that by their false doctrines, and lying myracles they might seduce and deceiue euen the elect of God (if it were possible). For that great Dragon, which is Sathan (that is the Angell of the bottomelesse pit, and the king of these Locusts, that is to say of Mendicant Friars, and of the Massing Priesthood) called
Abaddon, which signified as much as destroyer, saccager, and ex∣terminator, or rooter out. For these by their infernall doctrine of Popes decrees of Lombardike sentences, of ordinarie questi∣ons, determinations, quodlibets, summes, monasticall predicati∣ons, and other such bables, haue drawne into hell an infinite number of people since the said Innocent the fourth,Apoc. 9. li. 8. by the space of 260. yeares. So that those Popes and Doctors are signified by the pale horse vpon which sat death as well of the body as soule, after whom followed hell. Moreouer these Popes and all other wicked persons vsing the insatiable tirannie, leese and destroy euery day the bodies of the true Martyrs of the truth of God, by fire, sword, water, halters, and all maner of punish∣ments, because they would not renounce Iesus Christ, to obey theyr Prince Abaddon. The wai∣ning of the Popedome.But from hence forward, that is, since the yeare of our Lord 1503. vnder Iulius the second and his successors, vntill the last iudgement, the Papacie dooth and is like to decay. For the power that the diuell hath to deceiue by his Antichrist is di∣minished, and from day to day shall decay: but not the power that hee hath to exercise his crueltie against the elect of God. Tokens of the Popes fall.There haue bene many signes of the ruine and fall of the Popish kingdome before the time of Iulius. Iohn the 24. was maruellously troubled and molested by an Owle, as is afore said: And as he was in the way to Constance, he fell from his Charriot. He was there ignominiously depo∣sed, and there was it concluded that the generall Councell had power ouer the Pope. And therefore from his time, and also from Paul the second, the affaires of the Papacie haue gone ill, and haue alwaies past from worse to worse. Vnder the gouernment of Alexander the sixt, the Angell which was placed in the dungeon of the Castle S. Angelo, was stricken downe by a fearfull thunder, and fell into Tiber. Apoc. 19. d. 20There is hardly any person which knoweth not the mis∣chiefes which haue hapned since Iulius the second, vntill this present. But according to the sentence of S. Paul, Iesus Christ shal shortly destroy that wicked Antichrist by the brightnesse
of his comming. He shall be put aliue (saith the Angell spea∣king to S. Iohn) into a poole of burning fire & brimstone, where he shall be tormented for euer. So be it. So be it. Iulius the second of that name, borne at Genes, Nephew of Sixtus the fourth, who had bene named before Iulian Reuerins, of the title of S. Peter ad Vincula, was chosen Pope. Hee was a man of a quicke spirit, and very subtill, and as it were chiefly borne for warre. Phillip, willing againe to passe into Spaine, by Sea-tempest was cast vpon England, and well receiued of king Henry the se∣uenth: yet he payed for his welcome, and redeemed his depar∣ture by deliuering to the said King, the Duke of Southfolke, who was of the house of the white Rose, and thought the nigh∣est heiremale of the Crowne of England: who by the said Phil∣lip had bene taken in Guelders, whither he was fled for feare of king Henry. This Iulius plucked away by force, and by excommunica∣tions many things from certaine Christian Princes. And in the space of seuen yeares he was cause of the death of infinite per∣sons: yea this tyrant because of the victories which he had ob∣tained, (wherein hee reioyced that hee had shead so much hu∣mane bloud) gaue vnto the Swisses the title of defenders of the Ecclesiasticall libertie,The Swisses honoured by the Pope. and with a certaine number of Ensignes of warre, and priuiledges, cōfirmed by his Bulls, a golden sword and an hatte. He very straightly besieged Rauenna,Rauenna oc∣cupied by the Pope. which the Vene∣tians had occupied: and in the end hauing taken it, he reduced it into his obedience. With a litle brauerie he plucked into his hands from certaine Princes, Setina, Imola, Faience, Boulongne, and other Townes, which was not done without great effusion of bloud. Philibert the eight Duke of Sauoy, succeeded his father Phillip in the yeare 1495. He was a magnanimous and vertu∣ous Prince, and full of great beautie, in so much that he was cal∣led Philibert the faire. He was amiable also, and courteous to euery one. He espowsed Margarite the Emperor Maximilians daughter.
But after hee had done many things worthy of memorie he di∣ed, without leauing any heire issuing of him: wherfore Charles his brother succeeded him in the said Duchie. Margarite for a witnesse of the loue she bare him, would neuer manie againe: but alwaies remained a widow. Phillip returned into Spaine, and died in the yeare 1506. of his age, the 28. The king Lewis had sent Phillip de Rauestone as Gouernor  of Genes. The Towne reuolted the yeare 1507. but inconti∣nently it was taken againe by the French. The Iacobins and Friars of Berne.The yeare 1509. there was a great contention betwixt two orders of begging Friars: that is to say, the Friars, and the Iacobins. And this was because of the conception of the Vir∣gin Mary. The Cordeliers or Friars said that she was preuen∣ted of the grace of the holy spirit, so that she was nothing spot∣ted with originall sinne, and the Iacobins affirmed the contra∣ry, that she was conceiued after the manner of the other chil∣dren of Adam, and that priuiledge to be conceiued with∣out sinne, was onely reserued to Iesus Christ: yet they saide that the holy Virgin which was the mother of the sonne of God, was sanctified in his mothers wombe, & purged from all originall spot, as S. Iohn Baptist, Ieremie, and certaine others were: which by especiall priuiledge were sanctified, before they came out of their mothers wombes. The said Iacobins made themselues strong to prooue that opinion, by reasons of the holy scripture: as also they had enterprised to make publike disputations at Heidelberge, touching the conception of the Virgin Mary, but nothing was executed. Afterward the said Iacobins began to prooue that opinion, euen before the people, by certaine false myracles and visions, which they them∣selues had inuented. But these bad people were deceiued, and their lies turned on their owne heads. For there was a Lay Friar, simple and an Ideot, which they had enterprised to seduce and deceiue by their Inchauntments, who in the ende reuealed all their knauery. There were foure bretheren of that order taken at Berne, vnto whō the torture was deliuered: which after they had confessed the matter, were disgraded, and finally burnt for
their fraudulent and diabolicall machinations which they had forged to maintaine their opinion. For they had Inchaunted with superstitious charmes, a poore Nouice. It was at the great instance of the Bernois, that Haimo Bishop of Lansanna, (in which Diocesse Berne is) tooke knowledge of their cause, and after inquisition made therof, brought it to this point, that they were disgraded, and deliuered vnto the secular arme, and burnt the last day of May in the Meade nigh the Riuer side of Ar. There were other culpable of this deed, but they escaped from the hands of the Bernois. The King Frederic of Naples, and the Cardinall de Ambose died. In this time happened a great malladie and sicknesse in France, which they called the Coqueluehe. The Pope Iulius excommunicated the king of France and Iohn d' Alebret king of Nauarre, and gaue their kingdomes to whomsoeuer could first occupie them. Masseus in the 20. Chapter of his Chronicles, reciteth that the king of France perceiuing that the Pope Iulius with the Venetians went about something against him, assembled a Councell in the Towne of Tours in the moneth of September:If it be lawfull for Popes to make warre. where he proposed the questions following, namely; Whether it were lawfull for the Pope to make warre against any Prince without cause or reason: And if such a Prince defending him∣selfe may not assaile the said Pope and withdraw from his obe∣dience? It was answered that it was not lawfull for the Pope so to do: but that it was lawfull for the Prince to do that whereof he had enquired. Moreouer it was agreed that the pragmatike sanctiō should be kept through the Realme of France,The pragma∣tike sanction. and if hee thundred his excommunicatiōs, that they should make no account of them because they should be vniust. After these things the King sent to Iulius the answere of  his Councell, requiring him, either to agree to peace, or in some place to appoint a generall Councell to dispute the said questi∣ons more at large. The Councell of Laterance was begunne by Iulius thisThe Councel of Laterane.
yeare 1512. Leo his successor continued the said Councell, the ende whereof was the 16. of March, 1517. This horrible monster died the yeare following after he had begun the said Councell, that is, the yeare 1513. hauing committed an infinit number of murders and wickednesses vn∣heard of before, he died the yeare 1513. the 21 of Februarie, before the Councell which he had assembled at Rome was en∣ded. See Functius in his Commentaries. There was an Almaine called Conrade Garbelius, who made of him Tetrastike in La∣tine verses, whereof the sence was this. Hee that hath for his father a Genoua, for his mother a Grecian, and that is borne in the Sea, it is impossible he should be good. The Genouaes are deceiuers; the Grecians are lyars, and there is no securitie nor faithfulnesse in the Sea. Thou Iulius hast in thee all these things. We read a certaine Commētarie of the Doctors of Pa∣ris against the Lutherans, being drawne on by a diuellish rage, had by force the carnall company of two young children of a noble house which the Queene Anne of France had sent to Roberte Cardinall of Nantes, to teach. Melancton amongst others hath written certaine Latine Verses: how that Iulius meaning to go to warre, cast S. Peters keyes into Tiber, and tooke the sword of S. Paul, saying. Seeing the keyes of S. Peter serue vs to no purpose, it may be S. Pauls sword will do something. Gaston de Fouex the Kings Nephewe, was sent into Italie, and tooke Bolongne and Bresse by force. The Swisses alreadie practised by the Pope, passed into Italie. On Easter day, the yeare 1512. the French got a battaile at Rauenna, and tooke the Towne against the Pope, the Span∣iards, and the Venetians. Gaston died there, aduauncing himselfe with too small a company vpon his enemies. Iulius practised with the Emperour and the King of England, to assaile the King of Fraunce in diuers places of his King∣dome. Ferdinand king of Spaine, tooke and occupied against all right vnder colour of excommunication, the Arrathame of Iu∣lius, the kingdome of Nauarre.
The King of England beeing assured of succours from Flaunders, discended to Calais: but the king of Scotland Iames the fourth, and the king of France his Allie, entered into his Countrey, but lost a great battaile, and was himselfe slaine. They did litle in Guien or Normandie, whether they sent two Armies. Afterward the French and they fought vpon the Sea. Two faire Ships well furnished, that is, the Regent of Eng∣land, and the Cordelier of France, grapled one with the other: And the most part of such as were within, were either burnt or drowned. A peace was published betwixt the King and the Ve∣netians. The English men besieged Terwine. At the Iourney of Sporrs the French fared ill. The Townes of Terwine and Tor∣nay were taken by the English. Anne de Britaine the wife of king Lewis the 12. and before the widowe of Charles the eight, dyed at this time leauing two daughters: Claudia which afterward espowsed Fran∣cis de Ʋalois and Renee, at this present widowe of the Duke of Ferrara. Leo the tenth of that name, borne at Florence,Leo. 10. of the house of Medices, before called Iohn de Medices, being Cardinall of the title of S. Mary (in Dominica) beyond all mens expectation was elected Pope, and succeeded Iulius: Hee had beene very diligently instructed in good Letters in his first youth, and had had learned schoolemaisters: Amongst others, Ange∣lus Politian, a man very learned as well in the Greeke as Latin tongue, & this was the cause he loued so much men of learning and knowledge. Being of the age of thirteene yeares hee was chosen Car∣dinall by Innocent the 8. and in the 30. of his age he was cho∣sen Pope of Rome. This Leo of his owne nature was debonaire, gentle, and peaceable, but he was too much gouerned by such as were ene∣mies of rest, and cruell: after whose wills many things were done very disloyally.
The King Lewis died the first day Ianuarie 1514. ha∣uing raigned 17. yeares. He was called the Father of the peo∣ple, a title which fewe kings had after him. The greatest pleasure that Pope Leo had, was delicately to nourish himselfe in all things pleasant to the flesh, and such delights as would soonest drawe men into all wicked concu∣piscences. He tooke great pleasures in Singers and Musitians to recreate his spirit at Table, as hee dranke and made good cheare. Hee bare an irreconciliable hatred vnto the Gos∣pell of the kingdome of God: which he persecured in the per∣son of Luther and many others. For as one day the Cardinall Bembo vttered before him a certaine thing drawne from the Gospell,O execrable blasphemie. he answered him mocking. It hath euer sufficiently bene knowne what profit that Fable of Iesus hath brought vs and our company. This marchant gaue hereby sufficiently to be knowne that he was that Antichrist which S. Paul called the man of sinne, and the sonne of perdition. Indulgences.He spread abroad through the world certaine pardons and Indulgences full of all impietie, yea and ridiculous: to the end to heape vp siluer to maintaine his pleasures, to nourish his whores, and enrich his bastards. And heerein he serued him∣selfe with Mendicant beggers, which in infinit number traced and ranne ouer all Christian kingdomes. Sampson of Millaine a Friar.One called Sampson of Millaine a Friar, heaped vp by that meane so great a summe of siluer in diuers Countries, that the world was astonished thereat as a thing contrarie to nature. For he one day offered the summe of an hundreth and twentie thousand Ducats for the Papacie. This Pope Leo created in one day one and thirtie Cardi∣nalls, and by that meanes pursed vp a great sum of siluer: And that same day were seene very horrible signes and wonders, the yeare 1521. at which time Soliman Emperor of the Turkes tooke Rhodes.Rhodes takē. On the day of Christs Natiuitie as Leo went out of his chamber to goe sing Masse at the breake of the day (af∣ter their maner, a marble couer well couched and laid, fell sud∣denly downe, so that many of his company were there slaine,
and amongst others the Captaine of the Swisses gard. By such a presage God shewed that the Popedome should shortly perish, because of the enormeous and detestable wic∣kednesse committed therein. He greatly inriched at other expences his bastards, and erected and lifted them vp to principalities and dignities, as well Secular as Ecclesiastice. Hee created Duke of Mutine, Iulian, whom some said was his Nephewe, his sisters sonne: and Laurence Duke of Ʋrbin, and married the one, that is to say Iulian, with the Duke of Sauoyes sister, and the other with the the daughter of the Countesse of Bolongne. But hee had de∣priued the true Duke of Ʋrbin of the possession of the Duchy, to the ende hee might establish one of them in his place, hee sought also to doo the like to the Duke of Ferrara, but it was in vaine. As for his Nephewe Iulius, hee made him a Car∣dinall. The yeare 1421. and the first of December, vnderstan∣ding that the French had bene vanquished at Millaine by the Emperours people, and chased out of all Italie: which also was not done without his meanes, drinking & making good cheare, hee maruellously reioyced at this newes, and herein suddenly died as they say. Hee which neuer beleeued there was either hell or heauen after this present life. There was a Poet called Sannazarius which made a Distiche, that is, two Latin Verses of the death of the said Leo, which because they seeme to be wel made, are set downe. Sacra sub extrema, si forte requiritis hora. Cur Leo non poterat sumere: vendiderat. The sence of these Verses is: If you aske wherefore Leo could not take the Sacraments beeing so nigh his death: the reason is, he had sold them before. That which is aboue spo∣ken of the taking of Rhodes and of the wonders seene the same day, that agreement was made to yeeld the Towne into the Turkes hands, cannot accord with that which is spoken of the death of Leo. For it is a certaine that Rhodes was taken by Pope Adrian his successor, and was yeelded to the Turkes. Anno 1522.
An Aduertisement touching a certaine coniecture of the sup∣putation of time. It would bee noted in this place, that the yeare after the In∣carnation of Iesus Christ, 161. Paulus Samosatenus beeing Bi∣shop of Antioche, began to disgorge his blasphemies against Iesus Christ, denying that he was the true and eternall sonne of God. Which most daungerous and pernitious heresie of all others, was afterward augmented by Arrius and Maho∣met, and is yet at this day by that Antichrist the Pope. More∣ouer, the Monkes which began as it were the same yeare vn∣der Paul the first, here vnto haue nourished and maintained the same heresie in theyr diuers maners of life, and theyr wicked doctrines whilest Antichrist raigned in the Temple of God,Apoc. 11. a. 2. and dealt with preaching and teaching publikely in the Church, namely, by the space of 42. moneths, or of 1260. dayes, which is all one, which dayes if wee take them for yeares as they ought, adding thervnto the first number of 261. yeares, they will come to the yeare 1521. after the Natiuitie of Iesus Christ. 2. Thess. 2. a. 4.But that you may vnderstand this secret; That yeare was discouered that great aduersarie of God, who lifted himselfe aboue all that ws called God, or worshipped as God. This yeare then, that error which so long time had beene maintei∣ned vnder the tyrant of Antichrist, began to bee shaken and to fall, because the truth and righteousnesse of Faith through the spirit of Iesus Christ were reuealed by the meanes of cer∣taine learned persons. For in the said yeare 1521. Martin Luther beeing well fortified by the spirit of God, in the presence of all the E∣states of the Empire assembled at Wormes, confessed and maintained constantly and hardily the true doctrine of our Lord Iesus Christ, which the aforesaid heretikes denied. And since this confession, the true Church of our Lord Iesus Christ hath againe begun to renew it selfe, and his kingdome to take and gather more greater forces: And the kingdome
of Antichrist hath begun to diminish and approacheth his ruine. This which followeth is extracted out of the book of Christien Masseus. The yeare of the Lord 1515. Frances King of Fraunce receiued of Leo a Iubile, (that is to say, pardons to sell) to be published through all France: which was also spread through all Christendome. This was a bottomelesse depth of all euills; for vnder the shadowe of fighting against the Turkes, they heaped vp in∣estimable treasures. They which had this charge and com∣mission, perswaded the simple people, that whosoeuer would giue tenne French soules, should deliuer the soule for whom hee gaue them from the paines of Purgatorie. For they held this for a certaine rule, that God would doo whatsoeuer they would, according to that which is said. All that you doo on earth, &c. So that if there had wanted but one farthing lesse then the said tenne soules, they said all could profit nothing. Such like marchandise displeased many good men, and they began to debate this question touching the Popes power: whereof the old Bishops neuer heard speake. Martin Luther was then in Almaine, who then began to cry very sharply against Indulgences, against whom one called Iohn Bekins opposed himselfe, and they two ente∣red into great disputations and contentions touching this matter. Pope Leo the tenth thundred a great processe against Martin Luther, and condemned him as an heretike, and re∣iected him from the communion of the faithfull. He straight appealed vnto the Councell to come. After this, Leo com∣maunded that his bookes should be burnt at Rome, and on the other side Luther burnt at Wittemberge, his Canons and Popish Decretalls, saying: As they haue done to me so haue I done to them. Thus farre Masseus, The rest of this historie you may see in Sleidon. Baptista Mantuanus had before exhorted the said Leo to doo his office, thus speaking vnto him in the fourth booke de fastis. Yet there remaineth many things for thee to doo of great importance holy Father.
If they be great and waightie, thou must enterprise them with great courage. But there are there amongst others which are most worthy wherin thou shouldest employ thy selfe and tra∣uell therein. The first is warre wherewith Italie alreadie ty∣red, and the fields thereof bedeawed with humane bloud. An other is; That the Romane Court is infected with a daunge∣rous poison which spreadeth it selfe ouer all Nations. Lastly, there is a Faith which is oppressed, and on all sides offered a pillage, vnto all cruell and barbarous Nations. All these things cry after thee, and demaund succours of thee: helpe them, for the Commonwealth of Christ staggereth, and Faith is sick and alreadie nigh her death. Leo hauing gathered a great summe of siluer for pardons which he sold, inriched his parents bankers, and listed them vp into great dignities. Martin Luther a great Theologian, began to preach the true and pure doctrine against the hypocrisie of Papists, and from thence forward the Popedome ceased not by litle and li∣tle to fall into ruine. Francis de Ʋalois Duke de Angoulesme as the nighest and meetest to succeed in the Crowne, was King 57. yeares after the death of Lewis the 12. whose eldest daughter called Clau∣dia, he married. Selim hauing driuen away and after poysoned his olde fa∣ther because he liued too long, was Emperor of the Turkes in the yeare 1510. Vnto this wickednesse he added the murde∣ring of his bretheren and the strangling of his Nephewes. He vanquished and droue the Sophie away: and in many bat∣tailes ouercame the two Souldans, Campson, & Tonombeus, with the Mammelus and Arabians: hee added to his Empire, Egipt and Arabia,The death of Selms the yeare, 1518. and tooke the great Caire. Afterward returning the into his Countrie an Vlcer engendred in his loynes, which still encreasing as a Canker, killed him the 7. yeare of his raigne. See hereof Munster in his Cosmographie, Paulus Iouius, and Ritche the first booke. Soliman the onely sonne of Selim aforesaid, succeeded him in the Empire of the Turkes, Anno 1518. Soliman three yeares
after tooke Belgarde in Hungarie, which was the Fortresse and defence of the Christians, and from thence about other three yeares he tooke Rhodes by composition, hauing in his Armie 200000. Turkes, and 400. Gallies: and two yeares after that he destroyed the Country of Hungarie with fire & sword, van∣quished the King of the Country, and tooke Bude. But the 14. of his kingdome comming to besiege Ʋienna in Hungarie with a great puissance, he was put backe by God his grace, and the force of the Almaines. By nature he was hautie and glorious, hauing so great dominions and victories. Hee pretended that the Empire of Rome and of the West appertained vnto him: For he said he was the true successour of Constantine, who trans∣ported the Empire from Rome and vnto Constantinople. His ordinary reuenew is of sixe millions of skutes (some say seuen) for each yeare: and whensoeuer it pleaseth him to make warre, he gai∣neth more thereby then he leeseth, because of the great store of siluer he taketh of his subiects. He hath more treasure and precious stones then all other kings together, as Paulus Iouius saith: who also attributeth the losse of Rhodes to the carelesnes and negligence of the Pope. Maximilian deceased in Austriche the 12. Ianuary, af∣ter the obteining of the Empire 27. yeares. Charles 5. the sonne of Phillip Archduke of Austrich,Charles. 5. of the age of 19. yeares was chosen Emperor of Rome the 25. Iune, and succeeded his graundfather Maximilian▪ The Pope would haue hindered his election, because he was king of Naples, and that the kings of Naples were bound to the Pope to denounce that Empire, whilest they should be kings of Naples: but it was in vaine. Zuinglius is called from Glarone to Zurich, to read & teach Theologie. The bookes of Luther are burnt the Popes partakers  in Almaine: Luther also for his part publikely burnt at Wittem∣berge the Popes Canon lawe, as also a new decree whereby hee was condemned: and after yeelded a reason of his so doing. The Emperour at the instance of Frederic of Saxonie, sent  the 6. of March to Luther, that vnder his faith and safegard he
should come to a Iourney held Wormes,Charles. 5. whither hee came against the aduise of his friends: and entering there the 16. of of Aprill, he came out againe the 26. of the said moneth. Ferdinand the Emperours yonger brother Prince of Au∣strich, tooke to wife Anne, the onely daughter of Ʋladislaus King of Hungarie and of Boheme, the sister of Lewis, the last King of the line of Hungarie. Luther apposed by Eckins the Lawyer at the Iourney at Wormes, constantly maintained the truth. The Emperour writ Letters to Princes,Luther ex∣communicated and assai∣led on al sides. wherby he declared his aduise that Luther should be abandoned to whosoeuer would sley him. He is ex∣cōmunicated & anathematized by Pope Leo. The Sorbonists of Paris assailed him: so did Henry the 8. King of England by his owne writing. Wherevpon the Pope gaue him the title of De∣fendor of the Church. A Decree at Wormes published by the Emperours Letters Patters against Luther and his fauorites. Adrian. 6.Adrian Pope sixt of that name, borne at Ʋtrict, in the coun∣try  of Holland, come from a poore house, passed his youth in studie at Louaine, norished and brought vp amongst the poore of the Colledge called du Pourcean. From a Doctor in Diui∣nitie and Doyen of S. Peter de Louaine, he was called to be a Pe∣dagoge and Schoolemaister of Charles the fift, after Emperor. Erasmus hauing bene cast off as a suspected person, because of the doctrine, which after Luther published; afterward being sent Embassador towards Ferdinand King of Spaine, he obtei∣ned the Bishoppricke of Derthuse. The Emperour passing into England to goe into Spaine, made alliance at Windsore with Henry the 8. to espowse Marie his daughter (then of the age of seuen yeares) when she should be of full age. Iohn Rouchlin, restorer of the Hebrew tongue in Almaine, this yeare died. The taking of Rhodes.Rhodes besieged in the moneth of Iune by Soliman Empe∣rour of the Turkes, the seuenth moneth following is taken by composition, to the great damage and dishonour of the Chri∣stians.
Christierne King of Danemarch; Noruege and Snede,Maximilian. for feare  that for his great tyrannie, and ill gouernment, he might fall in∣to some daughter of his person, this yeare fled into Zeland, with his children and his wife Isabel the Emperours sister, brought vnto great necessitie. We may learne by such examples to feare God his iudge∣ments, when hee chastiseth both Countries and Kings for our instruction. Charles Duke of Bourbon, Constable of France, willingly departed, partly drawne by the Emperors faire promises, & tur∣ned himselfe against the French King, to the great misfortune both of his owne person and of France. The bookes of a Phisitian & Magician were burnt at Rome, some of which were brought vnto Adrian, whereof hee made great account: and they were after his death founde amongst his secret papers. And some thought he came to his Popedome by an euil art. Paralip. Chron. Abb. Vrsp. The Pope Adrian after like others, he had persecuted the truth of the Gospell in the person of Luther and Oecolampadius, died of a death suspected of poison in September, the se∣cond yeare of his Popedome. Clement Pope, seueth of that name, a Florentine,Clement. 7. of the Sect of Knights of S. Iohn of Ierusalem, Prior des Cappes, suc∣ceeded Adrian. He before was called Iulius, but admonished by his familiar Cardinalls, he tooke the name of Clement, Functius. Some write him the Nephew, others the sonne of Leo, others his bastard brother, of the house of Medices. At Zuric there was a disputation three dayes whether the Masse and Idolls should be abolished. The 20. of Ianuarie following, the Iourney of the Swis∣ses was held at Lucerne,Zuric is ha∣ted of all the Swisses. where they wholy cōfirmed the Popes doctrine, and condemned that of the Gospell. The Swisses in common complained of them of Zuric. Bourbon besieged Marceill in vaine, from whence hee re∣tired into Italie, where he was pursued of the French King, who tooke Millaine, and in winter besieged Pauie vppon Tesin.
Charles. 5.Anthonie Duke of Lorraine sharpely persecuted such as bare any fauour to Luthers doctrine. About the ende of this yeare, certaine Countrey-men or peasants of Snabe beganne to rise and rebell against the Count de Loupae their Lord, and after their example their neighbours did the like, vnder the colour of certaine charges, wherewith they complained to be burdened. This stirre was after verie pernitious, and brought great troubles and effusion of blood. The Iourney of Pauie.A battaile giuen at Pauie betwixt Charles de Lauoy, a Gen∣tlemen of the Country of Hainaut, the Emperours Lieutenant, and the French King, wherein the said King was taken in the combat, and from thence carried by sea into Spaine. Diuision be∣twixt Luther and Zuingli∣us.Zuinglius agreed not with Luther in an Article of the Sup∣per. He said that in the words of Iesus Christ there is a figure, such as there is found in infinit places of the scripture the like. Luther denieth it, and saith that the bodie of Iesus Christ is within the bread & wine, and that it entreth into the mouth. The Saxons follow Luther, and Swisses, Zuinglius. Of long time hath Sathan with his darke cloudes obscured the doctrine of the Supper: and now by contentions and de∣bates hee also seeketh to take away from men the true taste thereof. The sedition of peasants remained not only in Almaine, but spred it selfe also in Lorraine, nigh to Sauernes. Duke An∣thonie accompanied with his brother Claude de Guise, and of some of the French troupe which were at the Iourney at Pa∣uie, fought with them and slew a great number, keeping not his promised faith vnto them. The Sorbonist Doctors of Paris whilest their king was in, draue out of France Iames Faber d'estaples, partly vpon enuie, and partly vpon suspition of Religion. The King aduertised hereof, made the cause to be staied vntill his returne. Frederic Duke of Saxonie dyed, and Iohn his brother was his successor. Carolostadius writ against Luther, vnto whom hee answe∣red at large.
The Pope Clement whilest the King was a prisoner writ Letters vnto the Parliament of Paris, greeuously to persecute the Lutherans. Touching the seditions of the peasants multiplied in di∣uers places. See the Historie of Sleidan. Luther taketh a Nunne to wife, whereby he receiueth ma∣ny reproaches at his aduersaries hands. In Ianuary a peace was made at Madril in Spaine, betwixt  the King and the Emperour, vpon condition, aboue all to ban∣die himselfe against the Turke, and the heresie of Luther. The King after he had seene his two children as hostages, returned into France. The Emperour espowsed in Spaine Isabel the daughter of Emanuel, and sister to Iohn, king of Portugall. The Turke departed from Belgrade, and hauing passed from Danubie and Sauo, hee drew strait into Hungarie, and bad battaile vnto king Lewis, who died in the fight, and his wife Mary the Emperours sister, saued her selfe with swift running. Iohn Sepuse, Vaiuoda de Transiluania,Wartes be∣tweene Vai∣voda & Fer∣dinand. after being allyed with the Turke against Ferdinand, was appointed king of Hungaria, as his vassall and Tenant. Whilest they debated their rights by dint of the sword, there fell out a very damageable warre both for them and their neighbours. Francis king of Fraunce returned from Spaine, allyed him∣selfe with the Pope & the Venetians to defend Italie by sea and land, against the Emperour, and to recouer the kingdome of Naples: and published a writing, whereby he shewed his rea∣sons. And the Emperour caused to be published an other to the contrary. Swisse infected with Anabaptists. At Saint Gaull, one  of that Sect, before his Father and Mother, and others his Pa∣rents, cut off his brothers head, saying hee had beene so com∣maunded of God by reuelation, Ioachim Ʋadian a learned man, Consull of the said Towne, with other Iustices, inconti∣nently caused the head of the said paracide Anabaptist to be cut off. They of Berne made knowne to their next Bishops their
disputations, touching the reformation of Religion: and pub∣lish Articles. The taking of Rome.Bourbon willing to passe for the Emperour into the king∣dome of Naples, tooke his way towards Rome, which he got by assault, Bourbon was there strooken with a Bullet as he sca∣led the wall, and there left his life. The Towne was pilled the sixt day of May. Clement was besieged a long time with his Cardinalls in the Castle of Saint Angelo. And finally the seuenth moneth after, hee was deliuered by his raunsome of 40000. ducats, after some. The birth of Phillip, the Emperours sonne; was this yeare 1527. The King of France hauing made a league with the King of England, sent into Italie the Lord de Landrece, to succor the Pope: he tooke Alexandria, and after Pauie. The seuenth of Ianuary, they of Berne held disputation, wherein Zuinglius, Oecolampartius, Bucer, Capito, Blanrer had by the holy scriptures surmounted and vanquished such as were of the aduerse partie. Finally, they confirmed by the authoritie of the Magistrate through all theyr lands, the said Articles, abolished the Masse, and threw downe Images and Aultars. The Kings of England in France demaunded of the Em∣perour many things by their Heraulds: The King of Fraunce his children, offering siluer for them. He of England first three hundred thousand skutes for the borrowing of fiue hundred thousand of interest, because the accords made betwixt them, in the yeare 1522. had by him bene violated and broken. Fi∣nally three yeares pension, which by paction betwixt them the Emperour was bound to pay him: that is to say, 133000. skutes by yeare. If hee refused, their Heraulds were to de∣nounce warre. At Strasbourge, by the Popes aduise euery man assem∣bled in his Tribe. The Masse was laide downe, vntill the Pa∣pists should shew by the holy scripture, that it is a seruice agree∣able vnto God.
It may then lie downe long enough. For contrary it is who∣ly opposite vnto the Supper of Iesus Christ. Sedition at Basil, betwixt the Burgesses and certaine of the Senators for the cause of Religion. The Burgesses hauing taken Armes, cast downe the Images in Temples: which was the cause that the Senate agreed to what they demaunded: yea and that twelue Senators which fauoured Papistrie should be deiected out of the Senate: And that from thenceforth, when any question fell out to ordain any thing, concerning the com∣mon wealth, that a Councell of 200. should be called there∣vnto to haue their aduise therin. The Masse then was abolished through all their Seignorie, and Images publikely burned as the Instruments of Idolatry. Vpon a Wednesday which the Papist call Ashwednesday, the Idolls were burnt at Basil. Lantrec being dead, and Andrew Danre of Genoua reuol∣ted, the French King began to hearken vnto peace. Margarite the Emperours Aunt, and Loyse the Kings mo∣ther, assembled at Cambray,A peace at Cambray. and dealt for a peace in the mo∣neth of August in this sort. The Emperour left to the King, Bourgongne, if he engendred any male childe of his sister. The King gaue for the deliuerance of his children to the Emperour, twentie hundred thousand Skutes, the debt of England being comprehended therein. The Article againe is added to extirpate the Lutherans. The Emperor returning from Genes, and arriuing at Aus∣bourge, denounced vnto the Protestants that they should let their preaching cease, and goe to Masse with him. They refu∣sed both he one and the other: shewing there was no reason to constraine them to do it, vnlesse the cause were debated. The 24. of February after he had sworne,The Empe∣rours Coro∣nation. namely that he should all his life defend the honour & dignitie of the Romane seate, he is with great pompe & magnificence crowned Empe∣rour at Boulogne. Ellenor the Emperours sister and the Kings spowse, came from Spaine into France with the Kings two children, Frauncis,
and Henry, after they had bene foure yeares in hostage in their Fathers place. The Pope Clement and the Emperor besieged the Floren∣tines, because they set out of their Towne such as were of the house of Medices. In the ende Ferrand de Gonzague brought them to composition, and they receiued for their Prince, Alex∣ander de Medices: vnto whom the Emperour promised his ba∣stard daughter Margarite. In this time Tiber at Rome ouerflowed his bankes, and the winde so beat back the surges and waues therof, that the whole Towne was greatly terrified therewith. A deluge of waters.The like and more greeuous tempest, came also in Hol∣land & the Countries adioyning, the sea hauing burst her banks and leuies, and tooke away all it met withall, the length of the flat Country. Ferdinand the Emperours yonger brother, the fift of Ia∣nuary, at Cullen is proclaimed king of the Romanes: And the eleuenth of Aprill following crowned at Aix, notwithstanding the Duke of Saxonie protested by his sonne that he would not agree there vnto. The Turke returned the second time against the Towne of Vienna in Austrich: but the Emperour and Ferdinand went against him in battaile, and forced him to retire. The eleuenth of October, Zuinglius of the age of fortie foure yeares, younger then Luther by foure yeares, was slaine at a battaile of the petit Cantons, against them of Zuric: and about the ende of Nouember Oecolampadius of the age of 49. yeares, passed also from this life into an other, in the Towne of Basil. Mary, the widowe of Lewis King of Hungarie, is ap∣pointed by the Emperour her brother in the gouernment of the lowe Country, in the place Margarite his Aunte, lately deceased. A Comete appeared almost through the whole moneth of August. Loyse mother of the king of Fraunce, and sister to Charles Duke of Sauoy, dyed this yeare.
A warre recommenced betwixt the Swisses, namely they of Zuric and fiue Cantons, but in the end a peace was con∣cluded. The Towne of Munster receiue the Gospell. Christierne King of Denmarke now banished from his Countrey by the space of tenne yeares:The King of Denmarke imprisoned. hoping to recouer his kingdome was taken by sea, and laid in prison. His sonne which the Emperour his vncle entertained, dy∣ed of the age, able to be imployed in warlike affaires. Soliman Emperour of the Turkes came with a great Ar∣mie to Belgrade: and from thence drawing on the left hand, he besieged the Towne and Castle of Giunte: but Nicholas Iurixe being then within made him leaue his siege. Iohn de Leiden a Cutler an Hollander, secretly, and Harman  Staprede Minister, Rotmans companion, publikely beganne to dispearse about the Towne of Munster, the seede of Anabap∣tisme. Rotman after he had resisted him in the beginning, and caused them by the Senate to be driuen out of the Towne, de∣clared himselfe to be an Anabaptist, in a disputation appointed in the Towne house. See the Historie of Anabap. of Munster. Who would not tremble at such a iudgement of God, to see such as lately professed the Gospell of the Lord, to fall into so great wickednes? George Prince of Saxonie,Crueltie of George Duke of Saxonie. for the Gospell banished three score and ten Bourgesses of the Towne of Lipsic, because they would not communicate in the Sacrament of the Supper, vn∣lesse it were vnder both kindes, of bread and wine. The Pope Clement signified the Councell vnto the Duke of Saxonie, that it should be at Plaisance, or else at Boulongne, or at Mantua, Imperiall Townes: The Duke sent his Embassa∣dors towards the Protestants about the last of Iune: who an∣swered by writing, that they woulde haue a Councell free and wel ordeined in Almaine, where the difference in Religiō might be decided by newter and equall Iudges, yea and that by the bookes of holy scriptures. In fauour also of the French King hee made foure French Cardinalls: Odes de Chastillion, Phillip de Bologne, Claude de
Gnyuri, and Iohn the hunter. In the moneth of March the Emperour of Italie sailed in∣to Spaine. There was a marriage at Marceille delt in, betwixt Henry the King of France his sonne, a Prince of the age of fifteene yeares, and Katherine de Mecides Pope Clements Neece, by the King of Fraunce his meanes, and the saide Cle∣ments. During the Emperours absence the Lantgraue passed in∣to Fraunce, and in the name of Ʋlrich Prince of Wirtemberge engaged and pawned vnto the King (borrowing of him readie Siluer) the Earledome of Montbeliard, to the ende to restore the saide Prince his cousin into his Seignories and Coun∣tries: vpon this condition, that if within three yeares it were not redeemed, it should remaine hereditarie vnto the King∣dome of France. Henry King of England, hauing put away the daughter of Ferdinand king of Spaine, the said Henry his brothers wife, tooke Anne Bullen: wherevpon the Pope commaunded him to take againe the said Katherine. See Sleidan. The Pope Clement by the counsell of Curtius his Phisiti∣an,The death of Pope Clemēt. hauing chaunged the Regiment and maner of his liuing, in his age, dyed in the ende of September of a disease of the sto∣macke. Iohn Baptist Folengius in his Commentarie vpon the 105. Psalme, speaking of Pope Clement his death saith thus. Some say that in our time Clement the seuenth Pope of Rome, dyed of so dishonest a death as he was eaten with Lice. Others thinke he was but poysoned. In the moneth of Nouember, at Paris, were many Pla∣carts fixed vnto postes in diuers places against the Masse and other Articles of the Popish Religion: Wherevpon was exer∣cised great crueltie and horrible butchery against such as they called Lutherans. Paul. 3.Paul Pope, third of that name, an auncient man, was cho∣sen the 11. of October, and created Pope of Rome, and crow∣ned the third of Nouember. He raigned 15. yeares, whereof
we will handle hereafter. In the moneth of Ianuary the King of France came to  Paris,A bloodie pro∣cession. ordeined there a generall procession where the Idoll Saint Geneuiefue was carried about in great pompe: there al∣so made hee an Oration to the people against the Lutherans (as they called them). And for a solemne Sacrifice to ap∣pease Gods anger, hee caused sixe poore Christians to be burned, which confessed the name of God in sundrie pla∣ces of the Towne. For this cause was hee ill beloued in Al∣maine. In the moneth of Aprill the Emperour embarking at Bar∣celonne went into Affricke, where he tooke the Towne of Thu∣nis, and the Fort of Golete:Thunis and Golete. hee after made tributarie the king Muleasse. Barbarosse the Turkes Lieutenant, who occupied that kingdoms escaped, and assembled a certaine number of vessels in Argell: And the Emperour retired into Sicilie. In the moneth of Iuly, the King of England beheaded Iohn Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Thomas Moore his Chaun∣cellor, because they would not agree to the Edict and statute made for the abolishment of the Popes authoritie, who chal∣lenged to be head of the English Church. Fisher whilest he was prisoner was chosen Cardinall, which nothing amended his cause with the King, About the ende of the moneth of October, Francis Sforce Prince of Millaine, deceased without any heires. The sixt of December the Protestants assembled at Smalcalde. Guillaume de Bellay, Lord de Langeny Embassador for the king of Fraunce came thither: who the 19. of Decem∣ber excused the king for the executions hee had made of the Lutherans: saying they were seditious people, and held a farre other Religion then that of the Protestants. Moreouer if they thought good of it, hee had a great desire to send Theologians and learned men into Amaigne: or else if they woulde they might sende theyr learned Di∣uines into Fraunce to communicate together of certaine points
of Religion. The Senate of Auspurge receiued the doctrine of the Gos∣pell. The 24. of Iuly the Town of Munster is besieged and by might taken by the Count d'Obersten, Captaine of the Ar∣mie, and by their Bishop. About the end of the moneth of Ianuary, Iohn de Leiden Head of the Anabaptists, Coipperdolin and Chrechring his com∣panions, being tyed to postes were slaine at Munster: the Head alone confessing his fault and something repenting. Henry King of England had by his wife Anne Bullen, a faire daughter called Elizabeth. The Emperour entred into Prouence with his Armie, but wanting victualls for his Campe, he was constrained to retyre to Gene. A great number of his souldiers dyed, and amongst others, his Lieutenant Anthonie de Leue. Francis the King of France his eldest sonne, dyed at Tour∣non vpon Rosne, of the age of 18. yeares. Sebastian de Moncucul, an Italian was drawne with 4. horses: For giuing him poyson (as it is said). Perone besieged by Henry Count de Nassau, and by Adrian d'erouy, Count de Reux. There arose a great sedition in England against the King: For that bee had plucked downe and banished the Popes au∣thoritie. The Emperour by Sea returned from Genes ouer into Spaine. Alexander de Medices Duke of Florence, is slaine by Lawrence his kinsman, promising him the enioying of a Ladie his neighbour of excellent beautie. Iames the fift, King of Scotland, espowsed Magdaline king Francis his eldest daughter. The Emperours Armie in Artois vnder the conduction of Florent de Bure tooke by force S. Paul, besieged Terouanne, but could not winne it. The eleuenth of October was borne Edwarde, King
Henry his sonne of England, of Iane Semer, which he tooke to wife after Anne Bullen. Anne de Mont-mourancy is created Constabled France, which is a soueraigne degree of honour, which office had bene vacant 15. yeares since the reuolt of Charles de Bourbon. The Emperour and the king Francis assembled Nice, where the Pope was to make a peace betwixt them: and al∣though they accorded not in the principall, yet they concluded a truce betwixt them for tenne yearers. Margarite the Emperors bastard-daughter, after the death of the aforesaid Alexander, is married vnto Octauian the Popes sonne in lawe. Henry of England caused the Relickes of S. Thomas of Can∣terburie to be taken out of his Schrine, and made them pub∣likely to be burnt. The Emperour and king Francis met at Aignes mortes in Languedoc, and entertained one an other. Charles d' Egmond Duke de Gueldres, deceased very olde, and William Duke of Cleues possessed his Countrey as well by the dead mans will, as by the Nobilitie of the Countrey. Castelubro a Towne of Illyrica, in the gulfe of Ambracia, is taken from the Turke by the Emperour and the Venetians, allied together. Touching this Pope Paul, amongst a great number of his acts I will recite but this litle following; that the world may know how great their sanctitie is, which the Papists maintaine with an his voyce to be Peters succors, and the Vicars of Iesus Christ. This Paul was an Astrologian, a Magician, and Diuine, and amongst his most familiars, had one called Denis Seuila a Magician, whom therefore afterward hee made a Cardinall, with one named Gaurice of Portugall, Cecius and Marcell Ne∣gromancians and wicked villaines: Of these did hee enquire the fortune of himselfe and his bastards. He got his red hatte in this maner. Hee had a sister called Iulia Farnese, which hee deliuered to Pope Alexander, that hee might be a Cardinall and Bishop of Hostia, and to finde meanes to pay his debts.
For those good Popes commonly are so inflamed with whore∣dome, that they make no difficultie to promise redde hats and Bishopprickes to such as will bring them their sisters, or else that which is more horrible, their young bretheren, to violate. Many by such practises obtaine great riches, & fatte Benifices. And (as Agrippa saith) there is no shorter way then that to come therevnto. This murderer poysoned his mother and a Nephewe, to this end that all the succession of the Farneses, might fall vpon him. Moreouer seeing the other of his sisters (whose carnall company he had sometime had) followed too openly the ma∣ners and conditions of them of the house of Farnese, and that shee loued more the company of others, then his, hee poysoned her also. Beeing a Legate in Marke d'Ancone, in the time of Iu∣lius the second, hee most wickedly abused a maide, issued of a noble house of that Towne. For hee counterfeited and disguised himselfe, feigning to bee one of the Gentlemen of the Legates house, so vnder the colour of a promise to marrie her, deflowred her: Who after shee knew the truth what hee was, and that shee was not his legitimate wife, but his whore (at the least by the Canon lawe) shee became al∣most out of her wittes. And of this marriage came that great Porteenseigne and Captaine of all Buggerers and Sodomites. Peter Lewis. As one Nicholas de Chesme found him one day adulterous∣ly abusing his wife, Laurea Farnese, (who was the saide Pauls Neece,) hee wounded him so well with his dagger, that hee carried the marke thereof all his life. Hee slewe with poy∣son Bosuis Sforza, the husband of his daughter Constance, (whom before hee had often vsed as his whore) to the ende hee might more at his ease, and with greater libertie enioy her. This Dotard very tyrannously oppressed them of Peruse, and droue from the Seignorie Ascanius Columne, a very iust Prince. This detestable Robber and Rouer tooke and vsur∣ped for himselfe the Towne of Camer, after hee had driuen
away the Lady thereof: which was a woman endowed with a rare and singular religion and prudence, and did so much with his practises with Cardinalls, that hee exchaunged the said Ci∣tie of Camer (which was not his owne) with the townes of Parme and Plaisance, to the end to make his sonne Lewis, Lord & mai∣ster of them. Which act afterward by a iust iudgement of God was cause of the death of the said Peter Lewis. He often con∣sulted with his Cardinalls how hee might hinder a Nationall Councell in Almaine: and commaunded his Embassadors that they should enflame the hearts all Princes against the King of England. Anne de Cleues, sister of William Duke of Cleues, is accorded in marriage to the king of England. In the moneth of Maya Comete appeared in the ayre,A Comete. and almost the same day deceased Elizabeth the Emperours wife. In August Castelnouo in Illirica is taken againe vpon the Emperor by Barbarosse the great Turkes Lieftenant,Castelnouo. & almost all the garrison of the Spaniards slaine. The Citizens of Gaunt rose vp against Mary, Regent in the  lowe Contries for the Emperour: for which cause it was need-full for him to haste into Flaunders. He passed then through France from Spaine, with great receiuing and entertainment of the king and his subiects. The Emperor and the King sent their Embassadors to the Venetians, to ioyne with them for making warre vpon the Turke: but without any thing beeing mooued with that Em∣bassage, they incontinently sent towards the Turke to make peace with him. Some say they were behinde counselled here∣vnto by the French Embassador. They of Gaunt are punished by the Emperour: many are beheaded and otherwise punished, and after he had taken their liberties from them, he caused a strong Forte to be there buil∣ded, to bridle them. The French king seeing himselfe out of hope to recouer Millaine, he began to contract with the Duke of Cleues, cōcer∣ning a marriage betwixt him and the Princesse of Nauarre.
Vaiuoda.Iohn de Ʋainoda king of Hungarie died, leauing a little child called Stephen, borne of Elizabeth, daughter of Sigismond king of Polonia. Chabot.Phillip Chabot Admirall of France, is condemned at Mel∣nue  vpon treason, and in seuen hundreth thousand Scutes as a fine, and after banished into the wood of Vincenne: but a litle after hee was againe restored vnto all his goods and estates. The Iouney of RemsbourgThe disputation of Remsbourge, began in Aprill betwixt the Protestants, and them which they called Catholickes. Phil∣lip Melancton, Bucer, Pistorius, & other Theologians were there on the Protestants side, against Eccius, Iulles Pffug, and Iohn Gropper. The seed of warre.Caesar Fregosa and Antonie Rincon (which the French king sent Embassadors to the Turke) as they passed the Pan to drawe towards Venice, they were taken by the Imperialists and put to death. The Marquesse Alphonsus Daual the Emperours Liefte∣nant in Lombardie, is accused of that murder by the Lord de Langeay. The King dispatcheth his Embassadors to the Iour∣ney at Reiusbourge, to complaine of that wicked act: After, hee stayed at Lyons George d'Austriche, bastard sonne of the Empe∣rour Maximilian, Archbishop Ʋalence, as he passed through Fraunce from Spaine vnto the Emperour, who was in the lowe Countries. Francis, sonne of Anthonie Duke of Lorraine, espowsed Christierne, widowe, the daughter of Christierne king of Den∣marke, which displeased the king of France. Ferdinand besieged Bude, a Towne in Hungarie, where the Queene Dowairie was shut vp with her litle sonne:Bude falles to the Turke. but the Turkes comming downe in great numbers in the moneth of Iuly, he was glad to leaue his siege. The Turkes arriuing a litle while after, tooke the Towne of Pest, and discomfited a great part of Ferdinands people. After, whether the said Dowairie would or no, he forced her to appropriate Bude vnto him: vn∣der the colour that shee could not defend it against Ferdi∣nand. So the litle King and his mother were banished into Transiluania.
The Emperour came to Lupues to speake with the Pope:The Iourney Argiere. And to hinder the Turke of an other side, & to withdraw him from Hungarie, hee embarked himselfe with his Armie in the Porte of de Venere, and passing by the Iles of Corseigne, Ma∣ior{que}, and Minor{que}, he made saile to Argiere, where he tooke land the third of October: but there arose a great and horrible tempest of the sea, which scattered and dispearsed a great num∣ber of his sayles: so that hauing lost a good part of his Artillery, and almost all his furniture of warre, he was constrained to re∣tire into Spaine. The French after they vnderstood of this losse, tooke oc∣casion to mooue warre. The principall Lords of Austriche, euen to the number of 24. and with them, tenne Cities, presented a request vnto the King Ferdinand the third of December at Prague: to this end, that according to the decree of the last Iourney at Reiusbourge, they might reforme their Churches. Ferdinand answered, that that that Decree onely appertained vnto the Protestants: ther∣fore he commaunded them to attend the issue of a generall or Nationall Councell of Almaine, promised by the Emperour at the said Reiusbourge. The beginning of the Councell of the Trent. Paul Pope, published the Councell at Trent the first day of  Nouember. Edicts of extreame rigour were published at Paris against such as they called Lutherans: namely,Persecution against the faithfull. to bring vnto certaine deputed Theologians, all such as were any thing spotted there∣with. And that all Stationers and Booke-binders should bring in within a certaine time all suspected bookes. Priests also had set downe a certaine forme of Interrogating such as came to confession, if they knew any Lutherans. A generall Processi∣on on is made, and Geneuiefue, the Parisians Goddesse, trotted through the streetes in great pompe. The French king sent the Lord de Longueuil to the Duke of Cleues, there with Martin de Rossem to leauie people, and to attend occasion to begin their enterprise. After in the mo∣neth of Iuly following, warre is denounced to the Emperour.
Longueuil & Rossem pilled & spoiled in Brabant all the Coun∣trey: but they wanted powder and furniture for Artillery. Rochell.They of Rochel in Xantoinge mutined against the king, for a Garrison placed there against the custome, and for extreame tollages. Gernac is sent thither by the king. Whilest the king goeth vnto Parpignan, Guillame Poyet Chauncellor of Fraunce, is by iustice apprehended in the night time in his bed, and lead to prison: who foreseeing this tempest, made himselfe a Priest a litle before, to shun the punishments which he knew to be due for his deserts. The Papall Priesthood serueth for a good cloake to couer all maner of infection. The Scots about the beginning of December fought ve∣ry vnluckily against the English. The cause of the warre was, because the king of Scotland came to Yorke as he had promised, to end a controuersie which they had together about the limits of their Countries. The Emperour made Crowne his sonne Phillip king of Spaine, and gaue him in marriage Marie the daughter of Iohn king of Pontugall. Sigismond the sonne of Sigismond king of Pologne, tooke in marriage Elizabeth, the daughter of Ferdinand king of the Romanes. Clement Marot retiring to Geneua, set out in French verses, 20. Psalmes of Dauid. He had before published 30. at Paris, wherevpon he was persecuted by the Sorbonists. Landrecy.The Emperor and Henry of England, ioyned themselues to make warre vpon the French king, who tooke Landrecy and fortified it.Nice. The Hauen and Towne of Nice taken, and the Castle be∣sieged by the Prince d' Anguien, after that Barbarossa (conduc∣ted by the Captaine Poidin) had taken land with his Armie by Sea at Tolon. The Duke of Cleues chastised by the Emperor, forsooke the alliance of France. The Princesse of Nauarre, in the way against her will with the Cardinall de Ballay for her conduction vnto Cleues, was stopped with great ioy of the marriage broken.
Trouble in Scotland, by such as demanded that their young Queene might be accorded vnto Edward sonne of king Henry. The king of France did so much, that he pacified the Nobilitie to drawe vnto himselfe that alliance. The Ʋauldois, a people in Prouence, are put to the spoyle  for the Gospell:Vauldois. wherefore the Historie is faithfully de∣scribed, and at large in the booke of Martyrs which I haue set forth. At the Iourney of Carignan in Piemont, nigh Cirisolles, of Cagn. the Emperialists vnder the conduction of Alphonsus Dauall, are dis∣comfited by the Prince d' Anguien. The Emperour taketh againe Luxembourge by compositi∣on, he taketh Ligni and the Castle: after S. Dedier,S. Dedier. where Rene Prince of Aurange was stricken with a bullet and died, to the great griefe of the Emperour. Anthonie Duke of Lorraine, died not so much of age,Lorraine. as of griefe to see the warre so nigh him, yea euen as it were in his Countrey. Francis his sonne succeeded him, who married the Emperours Neece. The King of England laid siege before Bologne,Bologne. and in the end tooke it by composition. The Emperor being incamped vpon the Riuer of Marne, the Count Guillam de Furstemberge was taken by certaine French horsmen as he sounded the Watch. The Emperor being at Soisson made peace with the king of France, the 24. of September. In the moneth of March Lewis Palatin Elector deceased, and had Frederic his brother his successor. Henry de Brunswic, a sworne enemie of all vertue, ma∣king no account of Marie the sister of Ʋlrich Prince of Wit∣temberge his wife, but giuing himselfe to an whore, one of his wiues Damzells, by whome hee had seuen children, was ac∣cused by the Protestants in a full Audience of Estates the fift of Aprill, and to the end the thing should be more secret, they caused to be made an Image like to an whore, by certane Apo∣state women; when this was done, they caused her to bee buried with great pompe and magnificences, after they
had made all the Priests thereabouts say Masses, Vigills, and all the Seruice accustomed to be done by the Papists at the bu∣riall of their dead. To this he had nothing to answere, but re∣mained confounded. The King of France caused a Fort to be built vpon the sea banke nigh Bullen, to hinder the victualling of the Towne, hol∣ding his Armie thereabouts. Charles Duke of Orleance, the king of France his sonne, who should haue bene sonne in lawe or in other alliance of the Emperour, the ninth day of September beeing of the age of 23. yeares, was taken away by a malladie which held him but fewe dayes. Guillam de Fustemberge prisoner at Paris, after he had pay∣ed 30000. Skutes for his raunsome, was set at libertie in the lowe Countrie with the Emperour, who honourably and ami∣ably receiued him. The Sorbonists of Paris were assembled at Mèlun by the Kings commaundement, to determine of Articles to propose at the Councell. After long disputation they thought it best wholy to fol∣lowe them, which they had lately caused to be disputed on at Paris. The Theologians at Louaine, writ 32. Articles of the same subiect that they of Paris. Peter Bridly, minister in the Church of the Straungers at Strasbourge, was secretly called vnto Tornay by such as were there desirous of the Gospell: after hee had some litle while caught there, the 19. of Februarie he was cruelly burnt with a litle fire. See the booke of Martyrs. Francis Duke of Lorraine died leauing a sonne, a litle child. The Bishop of Mets his Vncle, and his mother, were appoin∣ted his Tutors. The daughter of Ferdinand married to the sonne of the king of Poland, dyeth also. This Pope Paul had assigned the Councell of Trent (as is said) not to remedie the euills of Christianitie for the tranqui∣litie of consciences, or to place Religion in a good seate and
estate, to the honor and glory of God: but to tread vnder feet his truth, and to oppresse the Ministers of his word. In which place, seeing that he did not all he would, the yeare 1546. vnder colour that the ayre was there corrupted, he transported himself vnto Boulongne, to the end by that meane hee might the better take away all libertie from Christians to say their opinions, and to hinder the reformation of the Church. This Antichrist rai∣sed horrible and straunge warres against the seruants of God, pursuing them by fire, sword, imprisonments, and all other sorts of punishments. Yea he spared not his Cardinalls, namely, Ful∣ger and Contarien, after they had tasted the sauour of the word of God: nor the Bishop of Pontus, Iohn Baptist: nor his brother Paulus Vergerius, Bishop of Iustinopoli. The chiefe amongst the tormentors were his Nephewes, the Cardinall Farnese, and Octaua Duke of Parma his brother: which beyond all measure glorying therein, the yeare of our Lord Iesus Christ, 1546. as they were vpon their departure frō Italie into Almaine to make warre vpon the Protestants, they vaunted brauely and fiercely that they would make such an ef∣fusion of the Lutherans bloud, that their horses should swim therin. And the meane while that good holy Father Paul tooke his pleasure with his daughter Constance, after the old maner. They say also that that old man stinking as a Goate, sollicited to whoredome an other his Niece, who was a very honest maide, and no lesse laudable for her honestie and chastitie, then for her excellent beautie. This Pope as Baleus saith,A number of whores. had in his Tables the number of 45000. whores, whereof he exacted euery moneth tribute: to the end they might haue libertie to exercise their whoredome: and as saith the booke intituled Eusebius Captiue, they are great∣ly esteemed, they kisse the Popes feete, they talke very famili∣arly with him, they frequent day and night with him: But such as trust onely in Iesus Christ and embrace the true doctrine, are held by the Pope for heretickes, and of him are banished, set in prisons and stockes, and punished by fire, sword, and Gal∣lies. The Elector Palatin reformed in his Countrey the doctrine
and Popish ceremonies, and receiued the Gospell. The Conference of Reiusbourge is held. See Sleidan. The 7. of Ianuary the Councell began at Trent. Alliance a∣gainst the Gospell.Alliance betwixt the Pope and the Emperour, concluded the 26. of Iune, to reduce the Almaines vnto the obedience of the Pantople: The Pope binding himselfe to deliuer 200000. Ducats into the hands of the Venetians: Moreouer to fur∣nish ten thousand footemen Italians, and fiue hundreth light∣horsemen, waged for sixe moneths. Moreouer permitting the Emperour to sell of the reuenew of the Monasteries of Spaine, to the valew of 100000.Crownes. Crownes, and to take the moitie of all Ecclesiasticall liuings. In the end a peace was made betwixt the kings of France and England, vpon conditiō that Bologne should remaine Eng∣lish, vntil the king had payed the siluer by him promised. On Satterday the 7. of August, of this yeare, 1546. the Towne of Maligues was in such sort handled with Thunder and Lightning, that of long time there had not bene seene the like. The Thunderbolt fell vpon a Tower called Saderpoort, that is to say, the gate of Canon powder: where there was more then 800. Barels of Gunpowder, which being on a flame aug∣mented the tempest, and first laid on the earth that which was about it: after, it so embraced the Towne, that without abun∣dance of raine mingled with the thunder, it was thought all should haue bene consumed by fire. The next morning, which was Sunday, there was found so many dead bodies stinking, that in all hast of necessitie a great ditch was made to burie them by Cartfulls. Of wounded, there were found more then an hundreth and fiftie. A woman great with child was found stiffled, who being opened, the childe re∣ceiued baptisme. A damzel casting her selfe out of a bed to open a windowe in the streete, called Blochstranssem, the tem∣pest so cut off her necke, that the head hung at the remaining skinne, a very sad and horrible spectacle. In a corner of a street where is the Pallace Bernard, a Tauerner called Croes, beeing discended into a Seller to drawe Beere for his ghuests, (of which, one company were playing at Cardes) the house
in a moment was throwne on the earth, and the gamesters ouerwhelmed wth their Cardes in their hands: none of that house remained safe but the Host, by meanes of the vaulted Caue or Seller into which he was discended. Three or foure dayes after this accident, there were many found in Caues and Sellers which were dead of hunger, others stiffled, others lay in traunses and swounds, with feare and in∣credible stench of the thunder. There was a man and a woman found, that were carried away and hanged betwixt the braun∣ches of a Tree. The Towne which before was adorned with exquisite buildings, was now altogether disfigured, and as it were rent in peeces. The Suburbes of Neckerfpful was almost all ruinated. The Pallace of Bergues, and that of Madame Margarite, and the Emperours, were cleane ouerthrowne. The house of Lombards (they are they which lend siluer to vsurie) from top to bottome was ruinated. The Hosterie of the Postmaister was destroyed, and the stable with the horses, were all carried away. One part of the Monasterie of the Augustines and of the Temples and Chur∣ches of the Towne were broosed and broken downe: And if the storme had not broken his forces in the ouerthrowe of the house of the Count d'Hostrat, there had beene no likeli∣hood that any house in the Towne, or thereabouts, had remai∣ned whole. There were found many hewen stones, throwne by the Tempest sixe hundreth paces off, to the great damage of the places where they fell. The glasse windowes through all the streetes were broken. The fall of Tyles, and the cry of persons, was horrible and fearefull. Thus the Lord sometimes makes men feele his terrible and fearfull power. In Iune, the Emperour sent the Cardinall of Trent to Rome,The warre in Almaine. to conclude that cōfederacie with the Pope, who had now de∣liuered siluer to the Captaines of warre, for the warre in Al∣maine. On the other side, the Duke of Saxe and the Lantgraue,
leuied people in all haste. The Emperor being demanded the causes of the warre, he answered, it was onely meant against re∣bells culpable of treason. He sent Embassadors to the Swisses, praying them to remaine stil in their auncient amity. And that hee onely determined to chastice certaine mutinous people. The Protestants purposed in August to besiege Seiusbourge, so meaning to fight against the Emperor: but as they passed lei∣surely, ten thousand footmē of Italie came to the Emperors suc∣cours the last of August, and 500. horsmen, whose Captaine was Octauius Farnese, the Popes sonne in lawe. The Count de Bure, who had leuied people in the lowe Countries, passed Phine in the moneth of August nigh Mets, and in September ioyned himselfe to the Emperour. Great troupes of the Popes friends of all estates ranne vn∣to the Councell of Trent: In the number of which, amongst o∣thers were two notable Archbishops, the one of Vspale in the Countrey of the Gothes, called Olaus the great, and the other of Armacane in Ireland: They were poore Archbishops which had litle but winde and smoake of Archbishops, and were en∣tertained of the Pope at fifteene crownes a moneth, and there∣fore thought hee good they should be at this Councell vnder those titles, and to take place amongst others, that the world might beleeue that there were yet found in farre Countries, as Gothia and Ireland, people which reuerence his name, and sub∣mit themselues to his obedience. Herman Archbishop of Colongne, by the counsell and ad∣uice of his Estates, and of his meer will, surrendred and gaue o∣uer his estate of a Prince, and his Electorship: and withall re∣mitted vnto the people, the oath of fidelitie, wherby they were bound vnto him. Adolp Schauembourge is chosen in his place, who straight chaunged Religion through all the Countrey of Colongne. At Genes a sedition rose vp: The Count Fliscan was Cap∣taine of them, who fell into the sea and was drowned, whereby the furie of the seditious was much lessened. Yet the Lord Io∣anuin d' Aure was there cut in peeces. The Emperour laid the cause vpon the Farneses, and
amongst others, vpon Peter Lewis, Duke of Plaisance. Henry king of England, dyed about the end of Ianuarie,The death of Henry the 8. hauing instituted Edward his sonne, of the age of nine yeares: and after him, he substituted Mary his daughter by his first wife, and after her, Elizabeth by his second wife. Vnder this young King Edward, the doctrine of the Pope was driuen out of England, and the Gospell put in the place by the authoritie of the Duke of Sommerset his Tutor, and Vncle by the mothers side, and of Thomas Cranmer Archbi∣shop of Canterburie. The Councell of Trent diuided, some of the venerable Fathers retired to Bolongne, because a Phisitian (who was in the Popes wages) told them that the aire of Trent was not whole∣some. The other Bishops which were vnder the Emperors o∣bedience, remained at Trent. A sedition at Naples of the Bourgesses against the Span∣iards, because that Peter de Tolledo Viceroy, sought to bring in the Spanish Inquisition concerning Religion. The last of March, Francis king of France, after hee had raigned 32. yeares, died at Ramboillet. Henry 2. of that name, his son, succeeded him in this yeare, and the same day he was borne, that is to say, the last of March. Anne de Montmourancie, now hauing bene absent from the Court sixe yearers, was againe called.Constable. Such as before were in honour and credit, some were laid in prison, others were depo∣sed, or lost their credit and honour. Peter Martir a Florentine, professor of Theologie, is cal∣led from Strasbourge into England, and Bernardin Ochinus,P. Martir. a man renowmed in Ilalie for his eloquence. Anne the onely daughter of Vladislaus, the last king of Hun∣garie and Boheme, the wife of Ferdinand king of the Romanes, a fertile mother for children, died about this time. The 24. of Aprill,The taking of the Duke of Saxonie. the Emperor vsing extreame diligence and subtiltie, passed the Riuer of Abis, and suddenly tooke the Duke of Saxonie: who hauing but a weake Armie was discom∣fited: and be himselfe after he had fought all the day, wounded in the left cheeke, was taken and carried away prisoner.
His condem∣nation.The seuenth of May the Emperor condemned him to be beheaded: yet at the earnest intercession of the Elector of Brandebourge, he yeelded him his life: and in the place there∣of, imposed vpon him lawes of extreame rigour: Amongst o∣thers, that hee should subiect himselfe to that which the Pope would ordaine vpon him, touching Religion. The Duke wi∣shed rather to die; whereat the Emperor maruelling, remitted that condition: but yet he tooke from him all his goods sauing 50000. Crownes which the Duke Maurice (vnto whom that spoyle came) should giue him yearely. The 21. of May, Wittemberge yeelded it selfe by that Dukes commaundement: after hee had acquited to his sonne and his subiects, the oath of fidelitie they ought him: and Maurice tooke season there∣of. An example of magnanimitie and constancie, more then He∣roicke, that is, Christiā, which God giueth to his in the middest of the greatest afflictions of this world. The Iourney of Vlme.The estates of the Empire assembled at Vlme. There the Emperours Embassadors purposed to make a league frō thence∣forward to appease all troubles, if any such arise like this last: But the pestilence dissipated this conspiration against the Gos∣pell, and the estates retired to Ausbourge. The Lantgraue of Hesse, to obey the conditions of peace proposed vnto him, came vnto the Emperour at Hale: and after supper as he would haue departed, he was stayed. He complai∣ned that hee was betrayed, and promises not performed vnto him. The Emperour before the estates at Ausbourge, declared the cause wherefore he set him not at libertie to be this: That hee exhibited not the Letters and secrets of the League of Smal∣calde. And taketh witnesse vnto Maurice and Brandebourge, that he neuer meant him lesse then a perpetuall prisoner. The doctrine of the Papists dispenseth herein; namly, that vn∣to Heretickes men should keepe no faith. Peter Lewis, the Popes sonne, was shine at Plaisance in his Castle, by a Band of 36. which had cōspired against him. They hanged his body in a chaine, on the toppe of the Castle walls, a
thing much pleasing the people. He was slaine the 10. of Sep∣tember, on the same day wherevpon his Father Pope Paul be∣ing cunning in Negromancie, had warned him to take heed. The end of tyrants are miserable and horrible, and should put vs in mind of Gods iudgement. Certaine time after he had beene cast into the graues, the Plaisantines themselues massacred him with the stabs of Dag∣gers. After, Dom Ferdinand de Gonsague strengthned the towne with a Garrison. The Masse was abolished in England by a decree & iudge∣ment  of the publike Councell of all the Realme. The Venetians after the Emperours fashion, made a very rigorous Edict against such as are called Lutherans. One cal∣led Francis Spiera, of the Citadelle (a Towne of the Territories of Venice) for that in the said Venice before Iohn Cuse, the Popes Legate, he had renounced the truth of the Gospell which hee knew, fell into dispaire: and of a vehement and great appre∣hension thereof, got a great malladie and sicknesse, wherein hee could no way be comforted: and whatsoeuer any alleadged of Gods promises of his mercie, he would still answere that they nothing appertained vnto him, because he said, hee had sinned against the holy Ghost. And in that dispaire finished he piti∣ously his dayes. This is a great good example, worthy to be ear∣nestly thought on. Maximilian the eldest sonne of Ferdinand, from Trent arri∣ued in Spaine, and in great magnificence espowsed Mary the Emperours eldest daughter, his Cousin-germaine. Iane the onely daughter of the king of Nauarre, who be∣fore was promised vnto the Duke of Cleues, was giuen in mar∣riage vnto the Duke of Vendosme. The Emperour giueth charge to certaine traytors of the truth, namely, Iulles Pflug, Michael Sidonius, and Iohn Islebe A∣gricula, with a Secretarie of Grauiele, to build a booke of Reli∣gion, and called it Interim. This booke shooke Almaine more then all the grieuous persecutions that had bin before. It was called the Emperours booke.
Ellenor the dead king Francis widowe, left France and re∣tired into her brothers lowe Countries. The Bourdelois in Guienne mutined against the King be∣cause of a subsidie or taxation, and slew the kings Lieftenant there, whereof they were by the Constable chastised. He con∣strained themselues to make the fire, and to burne all their pri∣uiledges. He caused a great number of the chiefe of the towne to be put to death. They were constrained to follow the Fune∣ralls of the said Lieftenant slaine, in the habit of Criminalls, car∣rying Torches in their hands, and demaunding mercie. Ambrose Blaurer, Minister of Constance, and with him a great number of the Bourgesses, left the Towne because of Religion. The Princes and Townes of Almain are sollicited and for∣ced by the Emperour to giue answere vnto the approbation of his booke. The Emperor also caused to be set out a forme of Ecclesi∣asticall reformation for an outward shew, which after they had heard recited, they approoued and promised to cause them to be obserued in their Churches, with the Popes good pleasure. The Duke of Wirtemberge at the alone commandement of the Emperour, straightway caused the booke to be read vnto the people, forbidding them to do any thing to the contrary. The Duke of Saxonie being prisoner, was much sollicited to receiue the Emperours booke of reformation, but he still re∣mained constant without bowing or yeelding either by threat∣nings or promises, which was cause that his gardes began to handle him more roughly and rudely. The Preacher, which he alwaies till then had with him, fearing danger, found meanes to escape. A great diuersitie of courage betwixt the two Dukes. The Duke Maurice returning into his Countrey, propo∣sed the Emperours decree, & caused the Diuines of Leipsic and of Wirtemberge, to assemble and determine therevpon. Which after they had two or three times assembled, they ordained of things indifferent,Adiaphores. commonly called Adiaphores.
In the end they set out in writing at Leipsic, a forme of Religi∣on, which all Duke Maurice subiects should follow. The Bishop of Strasbourge, summoned the Ministers and  Regents of the schoole which held the Colledge of S. Thomas, to receiue the Emperours decree. Bucer and Phagius with the Senates leaue, departed the first day of April, to goe into England, whither they were called by Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury. Thus the Lord prouideth for his: After he hath taken his truth from one place, he sendeth them into an other, to doe his worke there. The King of Fesse in Affricke,Fesse in Af∣fricke. being chased by a certaine Zepziphe king his neighbour, who from low estate was growne vnto that greatnesse, implored helpe of the Emperour at Aus∣pourge. Whilst Religion was thus troubled in Almaine, the Pope thought it good to make his profit thereof. Therefore he sent their Legates into Almaine with an Indult: by which power was giuen vnto them, to receiue all such as they would into the bosome of the Church: and to permit by the Popes authoritie to communicate the Supper of the Lord vnder both kinds, and to eate all kinde of meates at all times. The Ministers of the Lantgraues Country refused the Indult. Phillip of Austrich made his entry into Bruxelles where his Father was, and is receiued in great magnificence and pompe, the first day of Aprill. They of Magdebourge opposed themselues with might and maine against them of Wirtemberge and Leipsic, and taxed and reprooued them greatly, for that concerning indifferent things, they had made a way and entry for the Popes doctrine. The 10. of Iune the Queene of France was crowned at Saint Dennis. In the said moneth of Iune, Henry king of France made his entry into Paris, commaunded a generall procession, and dedicated it with the blood of certaine poore Christians, which hee made to be burned for Religion. See the booke of Mar∣tyrs. Le sieur de Ʋeruin, for yeelding Bullen to the English men,
was beheaded at Paris, and le sieur de Biex his Father in lawe, was condemned to perpetuall prison. The Cantons of Basil & Schaffuse in Swissia, made alliance with the King of France, whereof euery one greatly maruelled, because he persecuted their Religion with fire and blood: Zu∣rie and Berne refused that alliance. Sedition in England, partly for the chaunge of Religion, and partly for common grounds occupied by Gentlemen for their priuate vse: there was great bloodshead: In the meane time the King of Fraunce tooke certaine holdes about Bologne, whereby he put the English in great distresse. The fault of all this was laid vpon the Duke of Somerset, and therefore he was imprisoned at London. This Pope Paul of the age of 82. yeares, dyed the 10. of Nouember. On all sides Cardinalls ranne to Rome to elect a new Pope. Iulius. 3.Iulius the third of that name borne at Aretio, called before Iohn Maria de Monte, who was President in the Councell of Trent and Bolongne, was chosen Pope the 10. of February, af∣ter that the Cardinalls, which were in great number had long time debated in the cōclaue. Some say that this Pope promised by oath vnto the Ferneses to leaue Parme to Octauius Bernese. Whilest the Cardinalls were in the Conclaue to chuse the Pope Iulius, certaine Letters came into the handes of some of them, which were written the 26. of Ianuary by an houshold seruant of the Cardinall of Mantoue, called Cornelius Oliue, to a friend of his called Hanniball Contin: and with them certaine verses made in the vulgar Italian language, wherein speaking of his good affection towards him, & the desire he had to see him, he vseth so infamous and dishonest words, that hardly can any recite them without shame & blushing. Hereof came the taunt of such as said it signified that some infamous & dishonest Pope should come out of that Conclaue, from whence such procee∣ded. They which read these Letters saide as well in Italie as in Almaine, they neuer read any more villanous & detestable. Hereby (Reader) maist thou iudge what the spirit is, which the Papists vaunt so much to haue in their Masses & in the elec∣tion of their Popes.
The 22. of Frebury, Iulius is crowned Pope by the Car∣dinall Cibo, two daies after he had opened the gilded gate with a golden key: and celebrated the yeare of Iubile, which his pre∣decessor Paul the third had so much desire to see. And because of an auncient custome,The Popes li∣tle Cardinall. the new Pope might giue his red hat to whom he thought good, he made Cardinall a young boy called Innocent, whom he had sometimes abused whē he was Legate at Bologne, notwithstanding the other Car∣dinalls approoued it not, yea resisted it. Moreouer hee receiued him into his house, & into the number of his Domestickes and familiars. A brute went through the towne of Rome, yea it was divulged by certaine diffamitorie Libells, that Ganymedes was entertained by Iupiter, although he was not faire. This Pope himselfe dissembled it not: but customably in a maner of pa∣stime, would account his follies therein. Paulus Vergerius hath left in writing this Historie. Pope Iulius (saith hee) determined to make a young youth called Innocent a Cardinal, who not on∣ly came frō a father and mother of base condition: but that was of a most wicked and dishonest conuersation. Wherfore as on a certain day he had made this motiō in the presence of the Car∣dinalls, & that there was no man which resisted it not: but that more is, as certaine Cardinalls said freely. I pray you what finde you in this young man who deserueth that we should doo him that honour? Iulius answered. And I pray you what found you in mee to doo mee that honour, as to make mee Pope without any desert? aduance this young man, and hee will merit it. The Masse which had bin banished Strasbourge the space of 21. yeares, was set vp againe in three Churches the first of February. A great number of children ran thither to see so straunge and new a thing. The Priests were affraied at it, and complained vnto the Emperour. The Emperor and the King of France, one after the other, made publish each in their Countries very cruel Edicts against the Lutherans, as they called them. About the ende of May, the Emperour with Phillip his sonne, departed from Bruxelles,The Iourney at Ausbourge to come to the Iourney at
Auspourge, and brought with them the Duke of Baxe captiue, leauing the Lantgraue in prison at Malignes. In the time of this Pope, was Iohn de Case a Florentine, Arch∣bishop of Beneuent, and Legate of the seate in the territorie of Venice. This man who made so magnificall a profession of Po∣pish singlenesse, was not ashamed to make a Booke in Italian Rime, wherein he praiseth and exalteth that horrible and dete∣stable sinne of Sodomitry, yea euen to name it a diuine worke: and affirmeth that he tooke great pleasure therein, and that he knew no other kind of palidiarzing or whoredome. The booke was Imprinted at Venice, by one Traian Naun. Behold notable Archbishops of the Papall seate: with such Iudges doo the Pope and his maister the diuel serue them∣selues in their Consistories, to condemne as heretikes such as teach and write the truth with puritie. In a Catalogue of bookes prohibited which he made whi∣lest he was Legate, he comprehendeth no other therein, but such as make profession of the pure Euangelike doctrine. Francis Spiera as is abouesaid, fearing the tyrannie of tor∣mentors, renied the veritie of Iesus Christ, and dyed in ex∣treame dispaire. Sleidan also makes mention of the Sodomitike booke aboue spoken of. It would be here too long to rehearse the gests and deeds of Iulius the third, concerning the Iubile which was in his time: the Councell of Trent, the confirmation of that Idol de Laure∣to: the debate which he had with the Bishop of Aremin his Ste∣ward for a Peacock, and many such like things. Amongst other viands hee greatly delighted to eate the flesh of Swine & Pea∣cocks. But his Phisitian had aduertised him that hee should take heed that he eate no swines flesh, because it was contrary vnto the Gowt, wherewith hee was often tormented, but yet hee would not abstaine therefrom. The Phisitian secretly aduer∣tised the Clarke of his kitchin that no porke flesh should be serued. As then there was none serued, the Pope perceiuing it, demaunded of his Steward where his dish of porke was: who answered that his Phisitian appointed that none should be ser∣ued. Then cryed he in this manner: Bring me my porke flesh,
Al di spetto di Dio, that is to say, in despight of God. This now is a common ieast, and ordinarie amongst rakehells and ras∣calls, ruffians and bawdes, through Italie, as Also many other speeches as infamous and dishonest. Blasphemies vsed in Italie, authorised by the Popes word. Hauing one day seene a Peacocke at his dinner which he had not touched, keepe said he, this cold Peacocke for my sup∣per, & spread the table in the Garden, for I will then haue com∣pany. As then he sat supper, he saw other hot Peacockes serued vpon the table, and not seeing his colde Peacocke which hee commaunded to be kept, being exceedingly vexed, he disgor∣ged an execrable blasphemie against God. At which, certaine Cardinals that sate with him at the table, said. Let not your ho∣lines be so chollericke for so small a matter. Wherevnto Iulius answered. If God would bee so angry for an Apple, as to cast our first Father Adam out of Paradice; wherefore should it not bee lawfull for mee that am his Vicar, to be angry for a Pea∣cocke, seeing a Peacocke is of much more valewe then an Apple? As hee was about to create Cardinall Peter Betan Bishop of Fano, of the order of the Iacobins, certaine of the Cardinalls resisted him, and amongst other things, alleadged that he was infected with the heresie of the Lutherans. Vnto whom Iulius answered: Although it be so, should it not be wisely done by putting a redde hat on his head to purge him of that euill, and so retaine him one of ours with such a bond, then to suffer him to flie from vs and ioyne with our enemies that we haue in Al∣maine, as Ʋergerius did? The 10. of September, Affrike a Towne of Affrike,Affrike ta∣ken. was ta∣ken by the Emperours Armie, vnder the conduction of the Viceroy of Sicilie. Dracut Lord of the Towne, withdrew to∣wards the Turke his maister, and the warre began againe more sharpe betwixt the Emperour and the Turke. A sedition in Ausbourge, because of certain Spaniards which in the moneth of August made mockes in the Church, at the Sermon.
A woman also of the said Towne mocked a Priest which in his Surplice, walked through the Towne with his hoste. The Emperour had put the said woman to death, had it not bene that Mary the Gouernour of the lowe Country, entreated for her and saued her. Maurice and Albert his cosin the Elector of Brandebourg, and Henry of Brunswic, tooke Armes against them of Magde∣bourge. Nicholas Pernot, sieur de Granuelle, dyed at Ausbourg, about the end of August, to the Emperours great griefe. Anthony Per∣not his sonne, Bishop of Arras, succeeded in his estate. About the beginning of Nouember Virich Prince of Wit∣temberge deceased from this world, and his sonne Christopher was his successour. Stephen Bishop of Winchester was dispossessed of his Bi∣shopprick in England, and put in prison, because he would not submit himselfe vnto the Kings Edicts and lawes touching Re∣ligion. Bucer.The last of February, Bucer dyed at Canterbury, and was very honourably buried, with a great number of Epitaphes, made by learned men lamenting his death. The Councell of Trent was deferred by the Pope from the first of May vntill the first of September. Wonders.In Saxonie diuers prodigious things were seene, as three Sunnes, and three Moones, now pale and bleake, or blew, now red as blood. The king of France caused to be published a very cruell E∣dict against the Lutherans, confirming, yea passing all his for∣mer Edicts, and left nothing behinde that appertained to ex∣treame crueltie. On all sides the Papists assembled at Trent on the Coun∣cell day: likewise from Almaine resorted the Electors Ecclesia∣sticall. The Cardinall of Cressentia was President in the Popes place. The Emperour and the King Ferdinand sent thither also their Embassadors. But the King of France by his Embassadour disavowed the Councell for generall: reputing it but a parti∣cular
congregation to the profit of some. His protestation was held for none, without vouchsafing to record it. Le sieur, d' Brisac, tooke in Piedmont and about Turin, a cer∣taine number of Townes, and amongst others, Cheri, and Saint Damian. The Turks Army after hauing assayed the Fort of Malta, and rushed vpon Tripoly in Affrické and tooke it. The Empe∣rour accused the King of Fraunce to bee the Authour of this losse. An Edict published by the King of Paris, whereby it was forbidden to transport any siluer out of the kingdome to Rome, because of the warre betwixt the King and the Pope. There came a writing from the Emperors Court, whereby was decla∣red the cause and originall of the warre of Parma,The warre of Parma. and where∣fore hee receiued Plaisance into his protection. The fact of Duke Octauius is condemned and detested. The French to the contrary, shewe also by writing the daunger wherein Octauius was at Parma, the iust cause that the King had to succour it, and that wrongfully the Emperour had taken the Towne of Plai∣sance. The Duke of Somerset is againe imprisoned in October, by the meanes of the Duke of Northumberland: vnto whome came the gouernment of the Realme after him. The eleuenth Session of the Councell of Trent was in Oc∣tober: where was confirmed the locall presence, transubstan∣tiation, and all that euer was inuented for the Deification of that faire morsell of bread. George de Martinuse, of Dalmatia,The Monke of Transiluania commonly called the Monke, a man of great authoritie in Hungarie, was made Cardi∣nal, who was after slaine the 18. of December in his own house by certaine Italians, vnder colour that he dealt with the Turke suspitiously: although before he had so wrought with the wife of the deceased Vaiuoda, that she gaue ouer the gouernment of Transiluania to the King Ferdinand. In Nouember the Duke Maurice agreed altogether with them of Magdebourge. The ende of her euils and calamities, was the entry of a
great warre, yea of all ill luck vnto the Emperour. For Maurice hauing practised with Kings and Princes straungers, determi∣ned with himselfe by force to deliuer the Lantgraue his Father in lawe: which notwithstanding hee deferred a certaine time, because first he thought it good to prooue all by loue. The Duke of Somerset the vncle of King Edward, was be∣headed at London: at the instance of the Duke of Northumber∣land. Complaints of Almaine.Maurice by a writing dedicated vnto the states of the Em∣pire, greatly complaineth of the discord of Religion amongst them. Item of the captiuitie of Lantgraue, a prisoner by treason, to the great dishonour of the Emperour. Albert of Brandebourge, complaineth also of the mise∣rable seruitude of Almaine: and hauing expressed the causes thereof, he declareth that he and his companions do iudge the Ecclesiasticall people to be the chiefe authours of all the aboue∣said euils: And Maurice and Albert allyed and ioyned them∣selues together at Rotebourge. Ausbourge besieged by them, is taken. The Fathers of the Councel at Trent being at discord, the Imperialists against the Romanists: after they vnderstood that the Princes marched right to the Alpes to gaine the straights, incontinently left all and tooke them to their feete. Take counsell and it shall be dissipated: speake the word and it shall not be established saith the Lord. Esay. 8. Martin de Rossem conductor of the Emperours Armie in the lowe Countries, pilleth and burneth Picardie & Campagne, and tooke Astenay. The King Henry of France published in writing the causes of the said voyage, and of the warre that he enterprised in Al∣maine: namely to withdraw the Princes out of prison, to bridle the Emperours ambition, and to remit that Countrey into his first libertie.The king him∣selfe Protector of Almaine. He sendeth to them of Mets in Lorraine, to pro∣uide victualls for his armie, which if they did, he promised them fauour & amitie: but after he had takē Toul & Verdun, Townes of the Empire, hee drew right into Lorraine, and the third of May came to Sauernes, Strasbourge sent him victualls.
The Prince of Salerne, about some dissention betweene him and the Viceroy of Naples, withdrewe himselfe from the Emperours seruice, and turned directly vnto the King of France. King Henry his Armie entred Lorraine, they conducted into France the Prince of the Country. The 10 of Aprill the Constable entred Metz, vnder the colour of amitie, and so laid hold of the Towne. The King arriued there certaine time af∣ter, and constrained that people to take of him an oath. The King comming againe into France in May, burnt the Country of Luxembourge, tooke againe Astenay, got also Iouy and Danuiliers. The Sennois chased away the Garrison of the Spaniards, and by the helpe of the King of France, destroyed the Castle which the Emperour built there, and set themselues at libertie. Metz besieged by the Emperour the 2. of October. Albert not agreeing with the king of France for his estate, nor for his companies pay, turned on the Emperours side. The Duke d' Aumaile beeing come into Lorraine with a great company of people, assayling the Marquesse Albert, was vanquished, wounded, and taken prisoner, by the said Marquesse. In December the Emperor was constrained by euill wea∣ther to remoue his Campe from Metz, and to withdraw him∣selfe into the lowe Country, where the third part of his Ar∣mie dyed. In this time the great Turke Sultan Solyman committed a  cruell act on the person of Soltan Mustapha his eldest sonne,Solyman strangleth Mustapha his eldest son. which he had of a Slaue: This man hauing bene sent with his mother from his first youth into the Prouince of Amasia, which had bene giuen him, was so well and carefully nourished, that he acquired and got with his yeares great estimation, not only in the said Countrey, but through all other his Fathers Regi∣ons. This his mother beeing absent, Solyman called to him an other Slaue named Roze, which was endowed with admi∣rable beautie, accompanied with all delicacies and entisements possibly to be in a woman. He had of her foure other sonnes,
Mahomet, Baiazeth, Solim, Grangier with the Wenne, and one daughter which was married vnto Bassa Rostan. The said Roze could so well play her part with Soliman, that hee was excee∣dingly rauished with her that with helpe of Muchly, that is the high Priest of Mahomets lawe, and vnder shadowe of Reli∣gion, shee was not onely made of free condition, but the le∣gitimate and espowsed wife of Soliman, vnto which no other euer came. Beeing lifted vp into such honour, and seeing herselfe entierly beloued and fauoured, shee had no grea∣ter care then to drawe the Empire vnto one of her children after their Fathers decease. For shee knowing that the singu∣lar vertues of Mustapha were so contrary vnto her, and that as long as hee liued shee should neuer haue rest (for that hee had obtained the loue of the people of warre, and that all mens eyes were vppon him, for the great hope they had of his excellent courage and singular dexteritie) therefore sought shee to make him odious vnto Soliman. Wherevnto her sonne in lawe great∣ly aided her, because he gouerned all affaires. Her reason was, that Mustapha trusted so much in the loue and fauour which he had obtained of all men, by a great liberalitie, hardinesse and valiancie, that he burnt with such lust and desire to raigne: that euery one feared that in affecting the Empire, hee would ad∣uance the dayes of Soliman: as Selim had before done to his Fa∣ther. Therefore shee incited Soliman, and besought him with teares and lamentations, to take order and prouide for his safe∣tie. And although that from the beginning she had profited lit∣tle, and that Mustapha had discouered her impoisonments and ambushes which she laid for him ordinarily: yet left she not to continue it, with the helpe of a Iew, a renowmed Enchantresse: who hauing giuen her certaine drugges, shee caused the loue of Soliman towards Roze to redouble: Insomuch that she assured her selfe to end her purposes, though it were long first. Finally, after many practises, she found meanes to suborne Mustapha his gouernor, and caused him to write (though falsly) vnto Soliman, that his said sonne would marry the daughter of the King of Persia. This old man stirred, yea tyred with the continuall complaints of Roze and Rostan, easily beleeued
these newes and aduertisements. Wherfore in the yeare 1552. after hee had spred a brute & fame of the dissent and comming downe of the Persians into Siria, he sent thither Rostan with a puissant Armie, for (vnder the shadow to goe meet his enemies) to seaze vpon Mustapha, and to bring him prisoner to Constanti∣nople: with expresse commaundement to sley him if hee could not take him otherwise. But Mustapha who was aduertised of all, and knewe also that the Persians were not at all in the fielde, met him with seuen thousand of his most experienced Souldiers, which made Rostan returne without dooing any thing. Soliman being more angred, the yeare following made such an other brute of the Persians, and hauing leuied a great Army as if he would haue gone against thē, beeing arriued in Siria, he sent to his son, to will him come to his Camp. Mustapha, know∣ing certainly that it was he alone they would haue, although he was praied and sollicited to withdrawe some other where, and to shunne the furie of his Father: yet hee trusting in his in∣nocencie, and thinking it a thing more commendable and worthie of his greatnesse, to dye in obeying his Father, then liuing to incurre the note of infamie and Treason, yea though hee might haue had the Empire of the whole worlde: thin∣king also that without hauing made any refusall, by his pre∣sence hee might haue appeased his Fathers wrath, he aduen∣tured to goe thither to him: and beeing arriued in Solimans Campe, hee was suddenly taken and strangled in his presence. And at the same instant, the head of Bassa of the Prouince of Amasia, was taken from his bodie. This crueltie assoone as it came to the eares of Grangier, one of the foure brethren, hee manfully reiected the gift and spoyle that his Father gaue him, and greatly lamented the death of his brother; saying. A cruell Traytor,The com∣plaint of Grangier with the wen, ouer Musta∣pha. I say not Fa∣ther. Take to thy selfe now the treasures, the Tapistries, and the Prouince of Mustapha, and gouerne it at thy pleasure. Is it possible I should fall into thy spirit infamous man, with∣out all humanitie, against all right to put to death so valiant a person, as neuer was nor shalbe the like in the house of Ottomās.
Ha, ha, I will take good order that thou shalt not impudenly vaunt & glory that thou hast done the like to me. And straight drew his dagger and strooke it so farre into his owne bodie, that he fell downe dead vpon the earth. Which so soone as his Fa∣ther knew, he made a maruellous mourning, and yet left not to seize vpon all his goods, which caused a tumult in the Campe of Mustapha: but it was nothing in regard of that they did after they knew of his death. In such sort that Solyman to the great danger of his life was constrained to chase away Rostan, and to dispoile him of all his honours and dignities.Rostan spoi∣led of all his honours. This death came wel for the Christians: whose great ene∣my Mustapha was, who tooke great delight in sheading their blood. It brought also such great displeasure vnto the Turkes, that therevpon followed amongst them this prouerbe. Gietti Soltan Mustaphat. That is, all we thought on is ended in Mu∣sthapha. For they thought that he would haue enlarged their Em∣pire, which they looked for at no other hand. The French tooke Verceil in the Countrey of Turin, but seeing they could not keepe it, they spoyled, pilled it, and re∣tyred. Edward. 6.Edward King of England, being in his mortall bed in the moneth of May, Northumberland caused one of his sonnes to espowse Iane Suffolke, the Kings cousin. This King of the age of 16. yeares, dyed the 6. of Iuly, to the great damage of Christian Religion. Marie.So soone as Mary was peacibly Queene of Englande, at her arriuall at London, she caused to be tooke out of prison the Duke of Norfolke, and the Bishop of Winchester, a pernicious man, and made him Chauncellor. The Emperours Hoast after it had raced Terouane, mar∣ched into Artois, and there in the moneth of Iuly forced Hes∣den, which the king of France had a litle before taken. There was slaine Horace Fernese, the husband of the kings bastard daughter, and a great number of Gentlemen prisoners. A battaile in Saxonie vppon the Riuer of Ʋisurge, be∣twixt the Duke Maurice and the Marquesse Albert: where∣in Albert was vanquished, and Maurice victorious, strooken
with a bullet, whereof he dyed two dayes after. A deare victorie bought with death. Michael Seruet de Ville-neuisue, a Spaniard,Seruetus burnt. a pernicious hereticke, hauing of long time written execrable things against the Trinitie, & proudly maintained them at Geneua: after long detention & the participation of the Councell of the Churches and faithfull Common-wealths of Suecia, finally in the ende of October was condemned by the Lordes of the said Towne to be burned aliue. The hardnesse of his heart was such that being vpon the wood hee would neuer confesse Iesus Christ the eter∣nall sonne of God: but only the sonne of Dauid, and the sonne of the eternall God. In England by the decree of all the Bishops of the king∣dome then assembled,The Gospell driuen out of England. the Edicts and statutes of the deceased King Edward concerning Religion, were defaced and made voide, and the Popish doctrine approued and allowed. Albert agreed with Augustus, the brother of Maurice, by meanes of the King of Denmarke, and of the Elector of Bran∣debourge. Iane Suffolke Queene of England, as is said by King Ed∣wards testament, and the three sonnes of the Duke of Nor∣thumberland, were declared culpaple and condemned of Trea∣son. Iohn Alasco, a Polonian Gentleman,Alasco. with a great number of the French and Flemish Churches, flying from England,Dispersion of the faith∣full. did  wander and stray a certaine space of time into Denmarke and Saxonie, seeking a place to dwel in: But they were euery where refused, not only of a place of habitation, but also they were commaunded to get them out, yea in winter time, not suffe∣ring them to remaine in their hauens. The cause of this inhu∣manitie and inhospitalitie was their difference for the doctrine of the Supper of the Lorde: whereof we haue before tou∣ched. Finally, a place was allowed them in East Friseland,Emden. in the Towne Emden, where a Church was open for them, and gran∣ted by the Countesse of the said Emden, a true Christian Prin∣ces.
Ferdinand being at Vienna reiected the supplication of the  Estates of his Countrey, which demaunded to permit the ad∣ministration of the Supper of Iesus Christ whole vnder both kindes. Iohn Fredericke Duke of Saxonie, after his deliuerance from captiuitie, agreed with the Duke Augustus, and he ac∣quited to him and his heire Males the Electorship, the Coun∣try of Misne, and the Townes where the Mines be, yet he held vnto himselfe the name and Armes of the Elector. The 20. of February, Sibille of Cleues, wife of the said Iohn Frederic, dyed at Vinaine. Eleuen dayes after the said Frederic also deceased happily in his Country, amongst his children and other friends, and the same day that he dyed was borne vnto the Elector Augustus, a sonne named Alexander. Conspiracie against the Queene of England.Thomas Wiat an Englishman, conspired and rose vp against the Queene of England: because of the straunge marriage she enterprised with Phillip the Emperours sonne. On an other part of the kingdome, Henry of Suffolke gathered people against her: The one and the other were declared enemies of the Commonwealth, taken, and at diuers times beheaded. Ladie Iane beheaded.The 12. of February Iane Suffolke, King Edwards cousin germaine & instituted heire of the kingdome, by his testament was with her husband beheaded. After them was made a great butchery of heads at London and Westminster, where the Queene then was: Elizabeth also her sister was imprisoned, vpon her suspition. Sienna.Sienna was besieged by the Pope and the Duke of Flo∣rence. Peter Stosze which defended it, made a sallie vpon them, and ouercame a great number of their people. Charles of Sauoy.Charles Duke of Sauoy spoyled of the greatest & best part of his Countrey, dyed, leauing Emanuell Philebert his sonne heire. Renty.King Henry about the end of Iune tooke Bouuines, Dinan, Marienbourge, Bius, and wasted all the Country: besieged Ren∣ty vpon the Marches of Artois: but the Emperour comming and skirmishing together, the king departed in the moneth of August, remouing his siege from thence.
The Kings Armie in Tuscane which Strosze conducted, was surprised by the Imperialists, and for the most part ouer∣throwne. Phillip the Emperours sonne arruied the 19. of Iuly in Eng∣land,K. Phillip his marriage. the 24. following, the marriage was made betweene him and the Queene at Winchester. The Marquis Albert chased from his Country, withdrew into Lorraine, and after to the king of France. The Emperour caused a Fort to be builded nigh the place where Hesden was. Cardinall Poole in a full assembly of all the Estates of the kingdome of England, commenced the 12. of Nouember,Cardinall Paule. was restored into his dignities, goods and honours, of which he was depriued by King Henry the eight. The Historie of the reuoult of England. To the ende the Lord may be knowne in his iudgements which daily happen, and that he which is to day aloft may take heed hee fall not, let vs harken vnto that infamous revoult of England, and see how they returne to their first vomite. The Wednesday the 28. of Nouember of this yeare, the Parliament of England was assembled: and in the presence of King Phillip and Queene Marie, the Cardinall Poole expoun∣pounded his Legation, and exhorted them to the holy seate of the Pope: shewing them how greatly bound they were to God who now enlarged vpon them his diuine grace, prouiding for them such Princes as they had. After he declared vnto them how the holy Father the Pope vsed towards them his benigni∣tie and clemency by him his Legate,Subtilties of the Romane Court.Deceits of the Roman court. greatly thanking them that they had receiued him and placed him in his Country and Nobilitie, whereof he had bene long depriued: and that there∣fore he held himselfe more bound to procure, they might be re∣stored into the Ecclesiasticall Court, as his desire was. This vile Apostate of the truth, calleth that stinking Court of Rome, the celestiall Court. After he had thus spoken be withdrew himselfe, to the end to giue respet vnto the Lords of the Parliamēt to resolue ther∣vpon what to doo. The Chauncellour of England straight
tooke the Cardinalls wordes: and shewed how they had cause to thanke God, who had raised them vp such a Prophet out of their owne seed to procure their saluation, as the reuerend Le∣gate did. Insomuch that all with a common accord concluded to cōsent vnto the vnion & obedience of the Romane church. Notable mi∣steries.The Thursday following they ordained to agree vnto that which the Cardinall had saide: so that vpon a common accord they presented a supplication: wherein they prayed the King and Queenes maiesties as heads of the kingdome, that they would pray the Popes Legate that they might haue absolute remission of their sinnes and errours: promising to make voide all such lawes, as they had before established against the autho∣ritie of the Romane seate: whervnto they would sweare neuer to contradict. The King sent the said supplication to the Legate, and the day after assembled the Parlament in the place where the king and the Queene, with the Cardinall Legate were set. And the Chancelor rose vp, & with great reuerence & an high voice vt∣tered the resolutiō made by the Lords of the Parliament, pray∣ing in the name of all, that they wold accept the supplicatō writ∣ten in Latin tongue, shut & sealed by the said Chancellor. The supplication being opened by the Legate, was deli∣uered vnto the Chancellor to publish: hee red it with an high voice: and that done, demaunded of all them of the Parlament if their wills were according to the tenor thereof: and they all answered yea. Vpon this the King & Queene rose vp and pre∣sented the said supplicatiō to the Legate, who red it: then pre∣sented he the Bulles of his Legation,O true Bulls. which were red also, to make appeare vnto them the authoritie hee had from the holie Father to absolute them. That is to say, to plunge them into the deepe pit of hell. That done (the Reuerend) made them an Oration in their own language: shewing penance which pleased God, and that the Angell of Paradice reioyce more at a sinner repenting his sinnes, then of ninetie nine iust persons, and vpon that brought for his examples, cōtrarily drawne to furnish out his impuden∣cie, falsly abusing the word of God.
After he had ended he rose vp,That is of Sathan. and the King and Queene fell vpon their knees before him, calling vpon God and the ho∣ly Saints, that hee would pardon the penitent people of Eng∣land, the authoritie of whose person he representeth. Then the Legate pronounced a generall absolution: which done, they all departed, with the King, the Queene, and the Legate, towards their Chappell, where was sung (Te Deum) and after the saide Legate had made his triumphant entries, hee yeelded all power and authoritie to the Bishops, the first Sun∣day of Aduent, (as they call it) on which day, the Bishoppe of Winchester, (an other Apostate of the truth) made a Sermon af∣ter a solemne Masse, taking for his Theame (Nunc tēpus adest de somne surgere) that is; It is now time to awake. As if before in the time of the Gospell, vnder the raigne of king Edward of England, they had still slept. But that awaking shall be deare sold vnto all such Organes and Instruments of Sathan, which haue caused so many murders and bloudshead of Gods children since that time in the Realme of England. See the booke of Martyrs. A more horrible vengeance of God cannot come to a Coun∣trey, then when God withdrawes his light therefrom. Ferdinand sent out of their Countrey, 200. Ministers of the  faithfull, in the kingdome of Boheme. Touching the true Martyrs of the Lord, executed this yeare in England vnder the tyranous raigne of Queene Mary, and the disputations held betwixt the Popish Doctors, and them of the true Religion. See the fourth part of the bookes of Martyrs. A Iourney of the Empire was held at Ausbourge, and al∣though fewe Princes came thither, Ferdinand made a long O∣ration the fift of Februarie, of two principall poynts. The first of Religion, by reason whereof he said, all the disorder and de∣struction of Almaine happened, and that it might be remedied by disputations and communications of Theologians, as once had beene begun. The second was to helpe and succour the afflicted estate of the warre past, and punish such as made the troubles.
Melancton and other learned people by their Letters com∣forted the Ministers of the Churches of Boheme, which were dispersed ouer Misnia. Casal, a Towne nigh vnto Po, was taken by the French, vn∣der the conduct of Brisac, the 3. of March. Marcel. 2.Marcel, second of that name, a Tuscan by Nation, called before Marcel Ceruin, succeeded, and was borne in a place cal∣led the Monte Pelicien, in the territories of Florence: Of a Car∣dinall of the title of the holy Crosse in Ierusalem, was created Pope, by the common consent of all the Cardinalls which were in the Conclaue, the 9. day of Aprill, 1555. The day follow∣ing, he receiued the Pontificall ornaments in the Church of Laterane, but he would not change the name that he receiued at his baptisme. The Popes Character is to be an ene∣mie vnto the truth.Being come vnto the Papacie, he was an enemie vnto the Gospell, as before he was Pope, you may see he was euer. In his youth he had some litle profited in humane Letters, and so kept the schooles. Afterward, as Paul the third had created Cardinall Alexander Farnesius, the sonne of Peter Lewis his bastard sonne, hee gaue his, this Marcel for a Schoolemai∣ster. Certaine time after, the Cardinall Alexander leauing there the studie of Letters, applyed himself altogether to handle the affaires: wherein as well he, as also Paul his grandfather, serued themselues with Marcel, who was their Secretary. The Bi∣shoppricke of Nichastre being vacant, hee was made Bishop of that Church: yet he alwaies liued in the Court of Rome, and neuer went to his Church. Pope Paul sent for Legate the afore∣said Cardinall Farnese, towards the Emperour and his brother the king Ferdinand, who were then in Flaunders. But because he was yet young, he gaue him Marcel for his conduction and gouernor in all the affaires of his legation. Amongst all other things, there was a question for setting out an Army against the Turke; which the Emperor and his brother required very instantly. But Marcel Ceruin pulished a writing (which is yet to be seene) wherein he saith it is much better to make war vp∣on the Lutherans, & that they are much worse thē the Turkes.
The Pope Paul made him Cardinal being absent,Marcel In∣quisitor gene∣rall. & a while after caused him to come againe into the Towne, and vsed his counsell in all things of great importance. He gaue him the ty∣tle of the holy Crosse of Ierusalem, and created him generall Inquisitor against all heretikes, therein making him a compa∣nion vnto Cardinall Theatin and Cardinall de Bourgues: which were the rudest and cruellest that euer were. When a Lega∣tion was to be sent vnto the Councell of Trent, the Pope Paul made him Legate, with the Cardinalls Pol and de Monte. Hee created Cardinall de Monte chiefe Legate of the Councel, be∣cause he had knowledge in the Ciuil lawe. Pol or Poole, the se∣cond, as he that seemed to desire that the Church might be re∣formed (although it after appeared that he neuer stirred it in earnest) and Ceruin for the third, as hee in whom the Pope had most trust. And therefore the Pope had giuen him expresse charge that he shuld suffer nothing to be done in the Councell which tended to the detriment of the Romane seat. But that he should driue out all such as enterprised any such like thing. Therfore as one in the said Councel called Iames Nachiantes, Bishop of a place called Fossa Clodia, said that he could not al∣low the Decree, where it was written that traditions ought to be receiued and obserued with like reuerence as the Gospell: Ceruin caused him to be throwne out of the Councell. As al∣so a certaine Iacobin called Guillam de Ʋenice, said that the Councell of Constance was aboue the Pope, Ceruin calling him, reprehended him sharply. And after that the Monke had answered that the thing it selfe yeelded witnesse thereof, be∣cause that Councell deposed the Pope, therefore it was aboue him; It is not so said Ceruin, but that more is, the Pope gaue place willingly: the which I can well prooue by a Bull sealed with leade: and straight commaunded this man to goe out of the Councell. About this time Peter Paul Vergerius, was come from Man∣tua to Trent, who had many times beene an Embassador in Almaine for the Popes affaires: but because men held him suspected in some things to accord with the Almaines: al∣though the two other Legates, namely, Pol and de Monte,
liked well to consent that he should be one at the Councel. Al∣so the Cardinall Paciccus and the Cardinall of Trent; yet Ceruin neuer ceased till he saw him deiected. Many Bishops vnderstanding this of Vergerius, determined to haue written vnto the Pope, to admonish him not to suffer this: because then many would say that that Councel was not free,Ierome Vida Cremona. from which Bishops were put backe. Hierome Vida de Cre∣mona, Bishop of Alba, & an excellēt Poet, had alreadie indigh∣ted Letters, as well in his owne name as others. Which being come vnto the knowledge of Marcel Ceruin, hee very seuerely aduertised Vida, wholy to abstaine from sending Letters vnto the Pope: for it was a thing of euill example, that Bishops as∣sembled at a Councel, should write such Letters vnto the Pope, as though they would impose a lawe vpon him. Which hee said was so great a fault, as a man had need take heed, he fall not into any suspition thereof. Vida being vanquished by his tea∣sons, changed his purpose of sending Letters vnto the Pope. Vergerius being then willing to withdrawe himselfe from the Councell,The cause wherefore Vergerius was put from the Councel. came towards Ceruin, and demaunded of him what the Articles were for which he was deiected from the Coun∣cell and company of other Bishops. Ceruin answered, because I vnderstand thou deniest that the Legends of S. George and of Christopher are true. Is it true said Ʋergerius? I haue, and doo yet denie it: And my opinion is founded vpon Pope Paul the third. For he hath cōmanded that both those Legends should be taken out of the Breuiarie: And in the Preface at the be∣ginning of the booke, he saith that he hath commaunded that all such should be taken out, which were not true. Ceruin see∣ing himselfe surprised, could answere nothing; but that men ought not to hold such for good men, as in any maner whatsoe∣uer, seemed to agree with the Lutherans, and therefore wee withdrawe thee from our Councell. I thought it good to recite this, to the ende it might bee knowne, that there are alwaies some euill affected towards the true doctrine, ignorant of holy Letters, and stubborne to main∣taine and defend all superstitions. Yet as he was a man of singular modestie, and of a life
and conuersation reasonable honest, & likewise endowed with good prudence, so was he in great estimation: In so much that it was verily looked for at his hands, that if euer hee came vnto the Popedome, he would correct many things in the Romane Court; and before all things, that he would shunne all dissolu∣tions and superfluities: but it fell not out so. For after the death of Iulius the third, hauing bene chosen Pope, as alreadie before he was diseased with the Iaundies, it increassed so vpon him, that he died the 22. day after his election, the night before the first of May. A brute ranne that he was poisoned, but it was not so. A feawe dayes before his death, he would needs be crowned, but with small charge, very modestly. The Cardinall Farnese with them of his part, had giuen him his voyce, although be∣fore there had bene great enmities betwixt them: but hee did it because he hoped there was none would be more diligent to bring that to an end, which Paul the third had determined to doo. Namely, that he should do his best to maintaine the house of Farneses, to the end they might not bee depriued of the Du∣chie of Parma and Plaisance. For also the Cardinall Farnese so practised with Iulius the third, that he made him that promise before hee would fauour him for his comming vnto the Pope∣dome. Some said hee did willingly elect the said Ceruin, be∣cause they sawe him already to be sore worne and weakened with diseases, so that there was no hope that hee could liue long. The custome is willingly to choose Popes, such as they hope will not liue long. Hercules de Ferrare, and Vbalde Duke of Vrbin, arriued at Rome to salute Pope Marcel, and to Court him after theyr manner. Paul 4. of that name, a Neapolitane,Paul. 4. called before Iohn Peter Caraphe, was chosen Pope the same yeare, namely, 1555. the 23. day of May, by the consent of all the Cardinalls. This man being in Ʋenice, in his hypocrisie inuented a new Sect of Monkes, called Iesuites: as if our Sauiour Iesus had ingendred such Popish Idolaters. After this, beeing made Cardinall, as he departed from Venice to Rome, he said vnto his
Monkes which asked him whither he went. Whither I go, you cannot come now. Abusing the scripture and prophaning the Lords words, hee meant hereby, that he left them shut vp in a Cloister in po∣uertie and miserie, & that he went vnto Rome, to come vn∣to an high and mightie estate and dignitie, wherevnto they could not come. Theatin be∣fore hee was Pope confes∣sed the truth.He writ a booke sometimes vnto Paul the third, touching reformation of the Church: but being become Pope, he cared neither for Iesus Christ nor his Church. In that booke he con∣firmeth almost all the poynts that we vse to reprehend in the Papists: namely, that the Church is so ruinated in Poperie, that it is no more the Church of Iesus Christ, but of the diuell: For saith he, Popes heape vp Doctors after their owne fancies and desires. That Cardinalls and Bishops are cause that the name of Christ is blasphemed amongst people, which vnder the co∣lour of keyes, gather great summes of money. That wicked people are prouided for. That Symoniacke Marchandices are greatly practised. That Prelates burne with ambition and coue∣tousnesse. That horrible sinnes and iniquities are committed in Monasteries. That the Towne of Rome is full of whoredomes and many such like. More enormious and wicked things are committed at Rome, then that which Theatin rehearseth in that booke: for hee there only toucheth the vices & abuses that are found in their common maner of liuing, without making any mention of the contempt of the doctrine there vsed. A tumult at Geneua.On Thursday the 16. day of May of this yeare, there hap∣ned a tumult at Geneua, about 10. of the clocke in the night,  by the conspiracie of some which had for their stirrers & Cap∣taines, certaine of the petit Councell of the Towne: which not being able to beare so happie a prosperitie of the Gospell, determined to chase away such as into that Towne had come from France, to shun persecutions: And as in the night time they ranne too and fro, they cryed as for a false ensigne and token, that the French were in Armes, and the Towne betray∣ed: but the French men stirred not out of their houses. The
commotion was bridled and stayed by certaine Lords of the Towne. As for the seditious people, some amongst them were executed, others saued themselues by flight. But the cause wherefore they would haue driuen away the French amongst others was, because lately there were many of them receiued for Burgesses, by meanes whereof their faction was weakened, and the other part strengthned, by the number of the new Bur∣gesses which had bene added therevnto. The French at this time raced many Castles by the Count Montferrat, that they might haue victuals in greater assurance: For if the enemie had occupied them,Vlpian victualled. Casal had bene brought into great necessitie. In these parts was there a Towne called Vlpian, which is of great importance. The Spaniards held it then: and it was revictualled at the comming of the Duke of Albe, who had gathered together a great number of people.Mariēbourg Mariembourge also, which the yeare before had beene taken in the lowe Countries from the Emperour, was at the same time againe victualled by the French. In the Countrie of Grisons there is a Towne nigh Italie called Lucarne,The Lucar∣nois deman∣ded the Gos∣pell. which appertaineth vnto the whole commu∣naltie of the Swisses. The Citizens thereof required that they might be permitted to liue according vnto the reformation of the Gospell. But because their Superiours and they, were not of one Religion, there was vpon deliberation, diuers opinions. Some agreed vnto their demaund: others sought to hinder it. So that there appeared towards some intestine and ciuill dis∣sention: yet in the end they of the Towne preuailed, which wished that they should remaine in the Religion of their Aun∣cestors: and that they amongst them which accorded not therevnto, might goe dwell otherwhere. So were there found a great number which forsooke their naturall Countrey, and withdrew vnto Zurich: where they were receiued ioyfully, and much relieued in their pouertie. A great number of Vessels laden with all kindes of Mar∣chandize, came by Sea from Spaine towards Flaunders: but vpon the coast of Normandie they were assailed with all force by the French, which had espied them.
The combat amongst them was horrible: many ships both of the one part and of the other were burnt, and many sunke: ma∣ny a valiant man died there, as wel by the sword, as by burning and drowning. The French in the end carried away some num∣ber of ships which they tooke, into Diepe Hauen, from whence they departed. This happened in the moneth of August: in the end of which moneth, Phillip of Austrich repassed from England into Flaunders, accompanied with a great number of English Gentlemen, to finde the Emperour his father at Bruxels. In September, George Count de Montbellard, the Duke of Wittemberge his Vncle, tooke to wife Barbe, the Lantgraues daughter. Dissention of the Supper re∣newed by thē of Breme & Hambourge.The dissention of the Lords Supper, and the presence of Christs body, which had continued the space of thirtie whole yeares amongst the learned, renewed againe in this time: and there were published by certaine Ministers of Hambourge and Breme, certaine litle bookes, namely, against Caluin and Iohn Alasco. Caluin after answered them in earnest: so did also Bullinger and Alasco: who dedicating his booke to the King of Polongne, greatly complained that without knowledge of the cause, that without any disputation or amiable talke, but onely vpon a certaine preiudice, their doctrine was condemned after the maner of the Papists: who in lieu of arguments from holy scripture proceed not, but by force and commaundement. The Marquesse of Marignan dying at Millaine, the Car∣dinall of Trent was sent into Lombardie by the Emperour and King Phillip, to bee there Gouernour. At Naples the Duke of Albe was constituted. About Christmas day, the Pope according to his custome created new Cardinalls, and amongst others, Iohn Gropper, the Archbishop of Cologne his Councellor. Then also, the Cardi∣nall Poole being made Deacon, Cardinall prest (as they say) be∣gan to say Masse. For by the Popes lawe, Deacons haue not yet that power. In the beginning of Ianuarie happened great stormes and tempests in Saxonie, Misne, and Boheme, Thunders and Light∣nings,
which endaungered many places, especially Churches. In the same moneth at Ʋitodur in Suetia, a litle Towne within two leagues of Zurich, appeared in the night in one of the towers of the Church there, a sparkling fire, making such a noise, as the Burgesses on all sides ran to put it out: being come thither, they found no flame: yet it twise appeared: that is to say, the 4. & 14. of the said moneth. After this, certaine of the Can∣tons of Suetia sollicited by the Pope, got them to Rome, where∣as many maruelled. King Phillip after he had receiued of his father the gouern∣ment of Flaunders, the 18. of Ianuary he made a solemne entry into Antwerpe. In the moneth of February, Henry Duke of Brunswic espow∣sed the sister of Sigismond, king of Pologne. The 26. of the same moneth died at Aitsem,The death of Frederick Palatin. Frederick Count Palatin Elector now very old, and there succeeded him Otto, Henry his brothers sonne, who long time before had recei∣ued the Gospell, and for that cause was in daunger to haue lost all his goods. Shortly after he had receiued his peoples oath of fidelitie, he made an Edict that no person shuld sing any Masse, or exercise any other ceremonies any where in his countries. Mary Queen of Englād, did what she could that church goods and lands might be restored: because Pope greatly vrged her thervnto: But many Princes & great Lords held them, & ther∣fore it could not be done. During this Parliament, many In∣nectiue and biting bookes were dispersed in London, amongst which, some were sufficient to haue stirred the common people to sedition against the Spaniards, and to haue with drawne the Queenes loue frō King Phillip. Search was made for the authors of these libels, but it was not possible to finde them out. Before the Assembly was departed, & affaires dispatched, the Bishop of Winchester the Chauncelor, died of a dropsie. Thomas Heth Archbishop of Yorke, who had sometimes bene in Almaine with him, before of Canterbury, and once had knowledge of the true Religion, was come into his place. About the fift of Nouember died the wife of Duke Iohn Frederic of Saxonie, the Lantgraues daughter.
The Duke of Venice, Francisco Venerio, was deposed from his estate, for ill dealing in the charge of victualls, and hauing much more regard vnto his particular profit, then to the pub∣like weale. A wonder in the Country of Aouste.About the end of February of this yeare, the Morae called Dupetit S. Bernard on the valley side of Aouste, which is in the subiection of the Duke of Sauoy, was seene couered with red snowe: and certaine white snowe fell, but the whitenesse vanished away, and the rednesse remained. This was notori∣ously knowne and seene, and the red snowe touched by many inhabitants of the said Countrey. These prodiges and maruels, admonish vs to beseech the Lord to turne away the tribulations and calamities, which the poore world ceaseth not to draw vpon it selfe by his rebellion. A frost of three weekes was so sharp in December, that Seine was frozen, wherevpon followed great mischiefes. Oziander with his new doctrine of Iustification, had long time stirred trobles in Pruse: but after, as it were, al learned peo∣ple had condemned him by their writings, the Duke of Pruse, Albert,Pruse recei∣ueth the con∣fession of Ausbourge. declared by a publike writing, that therein hee would follow the doctrine of the confession of Ausbourge, and so en∣ioyned the Ministers of the Churches to teach accordingly, and gaue them full licence. And to the end the thing might be so fully and surely accorded, that the wound might no more renew and be worse, Iohn Albert, Duke de Megelbourge, the Duke of Pruse his sonne in lawe (a Prince very well instructed in Letters) went into the said Countrey of Prusia, and by the meanes of certaine learned people whose labour he vsed, hee did so much with Iohn Functius,Iohn Functi∣us. (which was hee that chiefly maintained the opinion of Ozeander) that publikely he confes∣sed his fault, and withall, protested that he would neuer teach but according to the tenor of the confession of Ausbourge. O∣thers did the like. So the Theologians were receiued into fa∣uour and the estate of the Church pacified. Comete.The 4. day of March began to appeare a Comet, which was seene by the space of 12 dayes. There is a litle Towne in Aulsi, three leagues from
Strasbourge, called Oberene,Parracide of three childrē. in that Towne a certaine Gardi∣ner the tenth of Aprill, in the absence of his wife was the mur∣derer of his owne children, of a girle of the age of 7. yeares. of a boy of the age of 4. yeares, and of an other yet in the cradle, not past sixe moneths old. The 10. of may the Duke d' Arscot who was a prisoner in the wood de Ʋincennes nigh Paris, escape and came safe into his Countrey. The Bauarois sollicited their Prince Albert to haue liber∣tie of their religion, as well as they of Austrich, and almost at one time, the Prince seeing that Ferdinand his father in law had permitted to his people the same thing was content to doo the like. And because there was then some question for siluer, he suffered his subiects for a time to receiue the Lords Supper whole, and to eate flesh on dayes prohibited, when necessitie driues them therevnto. Yet he made great protestations that he would not diuide himselfe from the religion of his Aunce∣stors: and that this should onely be, till by publike authoritie it were otherwise ordained. About this time certaine great Lords of Transiluania re∣uolted from Ferdinand. There became also great mutinies in England, where di∣uers Nobles were imprisoned, others beheaded, and some saued themselues in other Countries: As for such as died for the truth of the Gospell, we haue amply deducted their estate, and ex∣tracted their confessions in our bookes of Martyrs. Albert de Bauieres began the Imperiall iourney at Ratis∣bone in the name of king Ferdinand who then was busied in holding the estates in Boheme and Austrich.Iourney at Ratisbone. The Emperor hauing attend  of Septembe and from  Countries ac∣companied  ▪The returne of Charles the fift into Spaine. ior Dowary of France, and Mary Que of Hungary,  ca∣uing al the rule of the lowe Countries to king Phillip his sonne, and the administration of Almaine vnto his brother King Fer∣dinand. Dauid George (who after called himselfe Iohn de Bruck)
borne at Delphes in Holland,The death of Dauid George. a very pernitious seducer, author and Prince of the vilest Sect that euer was, making himselfe king and immortall Christ, died this yeare, 1556. the 24. day of August, his wife being dead a litle before. He retired with his family which was very great into Basill, the yeare 1544. ma∣king himselfe a fugitiue from his owne countrey for the cause of the Gospell. He bought houses in the Towne, and a Castle nigh the Towne called Binningen, with possessions of a great re∣uenew: It was easie for this man being very cautelous and sub∣till, and hauing his eyes looking on all sides, to gaine the hearts of many, and to procure outward reputation: who was greatly sustained and augmented, by that he had great summes of mo∣ney and very pretious moueables daily brought him, from base Almaine and Flaunders. There hapned certaine prodigious signes before his death. One of his houses (he had two in Basill) was burned with fire of lightning: and the other which he had sumptuously builded in the Medowes, was also consumed by fire, and all his pretious moueables which were therin: & soone after, the chamber floores of his house where he made his resi∣dence, fell downe suddenly: yet they say, nothing hapned vn∣to him more intollerable to beare before his death then this, that one of authoritie in base Almaine, came to the Towne of Basill, and Dauid George knew well, that by litle and litle hee should be discouered. His Secretaries and disciples were maruellously astonished at his death, because they were of opinion he should neuer haue died: Although their hope was something maintained, by that he had said (as after was reported) he would againe take life, by the space of three yeares, and bring to passe excellent things. Hee held in his house a state almost royall. And for the go∣uernment of his house and Castle, it was well ruled, euery one had his estate and office in that family, and the labours were so distributed, that he had no need in any thing to em∣ploy others then his owne. In the gouernment of their common good, they very strict∣ly obserued three things, to the end they might more and more conceale their so pernitious a Sect.
First, that none amongst them should publish the name of Dauid George. Secondly, that none should reueale of what state and condition hee had bene: wherevpon many thought hee came of some great nobilitie: others, that he was some great Marchant, hauing many factors both by sea and land. Thirdly, that they should not discouer any one article of their doctrine to any of Basill, no not to any Switzer, neither should they seeke to drawe any to their doctrine. The summe of his accursed doctrine was: That what∣soeuer had hitherto bene giuen of God by Moyses, by the Pro∣phets, by Iesus Chirst himselfe, by his Apostles and Disciples, is imperfect, and vnprofitable to make vs obtaine the true and perfect felicitie: and was onely giuen to this vse, that hitherto their doctrine might represse men, and keepe them vnder as young men and children, and so containe them in their offices. But the Religion of Dauid George is perfect, and hath in it suffi∣cient efficacie and strength, to make happie him that receiueth it, he being the true Christ and Messias, the we beloued of the Father, in whom the Father taketh great pleasure: borne not of the flesh, but of the holy spirit, & of the spirit of Iesus Christ: hauing hitherto beene kept in an vnknowne place, for all his Saints: to restore in spirit the house of Israel, not by the Crosse or tribulations, or death as the other Christ, but for the loue and grace of the holy spirit of Christ. O execrable monster, or horrible efficacie of error & decepti∣on, or plasphemies drawne out of the deepe pit of hell! In the yeare 1557. many good men mooued with affecti∣on  to amplifie the kingdome of the Lord, through many tra∣uels and perills hauing passed the torride Zone, and long time soiourned in the way, they fell to inhabit in a Region on the South coast, vnknowne vnto our fore elders, full of Brasill: which before in the yeare 1500. had bene discouered by the Portugales, and it was called America, of the name of their Cap∣taine and cōducter Americ Vespucius. The Inhabitants the eare very sauage and wilde, without any forme of Religion or ciuili∣tie. There it pleased the Lord in this time to erect a Church of certaine French men, which one Ʋillegagnon had sollicited
and gathered together: He receiued thē also at the beginning with good countenance and outward ioy, seeing his enterprise commended by many notable persons. But in the yeare 1557. and 1558. the said Villegagnon gaue sufficiently to know, that he was neuer touched with any true zeale or feare of God. For after he had persecuted both the Ministers and poore flocke of that Church, by many tyrannies and impudent writings; with seditious practises, he hindred as much as in him lay, the ad∣uancement of the Lords glory: who after raised vp the Portu∣gales to take the Fortresse which he had builded in the Ile, by him called Collignyen Ʋalois: finding no resistance within, be∣cause the said Villegagnon being retired into France (taken with an apprehensiō that the sauage people would eate him) had or∣dained no such company of people as were necessary for the defence of such a place. And although in that number there were some valiant and wel experimented in Armes: yet for as much as they were accompanied with such as had no knowledge therein, and were ill maintained, yea pined away with famine and diseases; be∣fore they would abide the enemies furie, they withdrew them∣selues with the sauage people. Therefore was it easie for the e∣nemies to enioy that Castle which had beene builded at the charges of the king of France, and with the sweat and trauel of many good people: and the Artillery marked with the Armes of France, with certaine munitions of warre transported to Lis∣bone, the principall Towne of Portugall, in a trophee and tri∣umph of the victorie. The French retiring to land, receiued the cruel yoake of that sauage people, liuing without any forme of Religion: a sad and lamentable thing to rehearse. By all Histories, as well auncient as moderne, we my be in∣structed that. Hypocrites and Apostates, haue in all times hin∣dred the course of the Gospell. Charles the 5. Emperour, after he had resigned by expresse Embassage, into the hāds of the Princes Electors, the Romane Empire, hauing held it about 37. yeares, died in his Country of Spaine, the 21. of Septēber, 1558. in a Monastery of S. Iust, of the order of the Hieronymies, nigh to Plascencia, a Towne scituated
betwixt the kingdomes of Castile and Andalonsia.Ferdinād. 1. Ferdinand, 1. of that name, succeeded him, & was cōsecrated Emperor in the towne of Francfort vpon Mein, by the Electors and Princes of Almiane, with the accustomed solemnities. After great and continuall warres by the space of 9. yeares, at the instigation and by the practises and meanes of Popes, Iohn Maria de Monte, surnamed Iulius the third, and his succes∣sors and adherents, as well in Italie, Piemont, Almaine, and France, as in the lowe Countries of Flaunders, Artois, and Lor∣raine, by the Spaniards and French. Finally, there happening great victories and prises one vpon an other, to the ouerthrow and totall oppression of people and subects, the third of Aprill, 1559. after Easter, at a Castle in Cambresis, there was a peace concluded betwixt Henry the second of that name, King of  France, and Phillip King of Spaine: wherein they promised, to yeeld one to an other, the landes that were lately conque∣red. They also compounded and agreed of all other contro∣uersies and differances in regard of the Kingdomes of Naples and Sicilie, and of the Duchie of Millaine: vpon condition of the marriage of the said Phillip, with the eldest daughter of Hen∣ry: which lands should appertaine to the children comming of that marriage. By the same treatie of peace, there was yeelded vnto Ema∣nuel Philibert, Duchie of Sauoy, and the principalitie of Pie∣mont, which the French had held from his father & him, more then 24. yeares, by the meanes of a marriage betwixt him and Dame Margarite, daughter of king Francis, the first of that name, and the alone sister of Henry: reseruing certaine strong places in the said Piemont for a certaine time. The yeare 1559. the fift of March, the sonnes, the sonnes in lawe, and all the family of the dead Dauid George, (of whom we haue spoken before) some also which were not of his fami∣ly, but adherent vnto his Sect, were adioyned before the Se∣nate of Basill: after information taken of the pernitions Sect which the said Dauid George had alwaies held whilest he liued. The Advower declared vnto them, that the Seigniorie was dulye enformed, that they withdrewe themselues into
the Castle of Binningen, not as they which were persecuted for the Gospell, (as they falsly said): but for the Sect of Dauid, wherewith they were alreadie spotted Eleuen were appointed prisoners, out of them to draw the truth. The most part exa∣mined by the straightest Inquisition, confessed the truth of the matter: which finally obtained pardon. The first of May the Ministers Rector, professors and Maisters of the Vniuersitie of Basill, hauing all with one voyce condemned the poynts of doctrine professed by Dauid George: the Senate beeing fully informed of all, proceeded the 13. of May, to the indyting and condemning of Dauid George: that is, that all his writings, as full of impietie and mortall poyson, also his body or his bones, and all that which remained in his graue, should be burnt, with his Image which was found in his house, liuely representing him: and that generally all the goods of so wicked a man, in what place soeuer they were found, should be confiscated and adiudged vnto the Seignorie. This sentence was proclaimed according to the custome of the place: and all the forme of lawe, and of the ordinances of the Towne, was obserued in the execution thereof. The life, maners, and death of such pernicious men, admonish vs to watch diligently, least being deceiued with any beautifull appearance, we allow not euill for good, and contrary: and so fall into the snares of the diuell. A peace (as hath bene said) being concluded betwixt Henry King of France, and Phillip King of Ppaine enemies of the Gospell tooke their opportunitie to persecute such as they called Lutherans. Commissions were dispatched to go through all the Prouinces of France, to attend while the conditions of peace were accomplished. King Henry by his Letters Patents on the second of Iune, sent to all Bailiffes and Stewards, to aide the said Commissio∣ners: with power to assemble (as they call them) ban and arri∣erban: that is as I take it we vse to say, tag & rag: and the Pro∣uost Marshals and their Archers, straightly forbidding the spa∣ring of any, either vsing any dissimulation or winking at any: otherwise that they themselues should be first punished.
The Cardinall of Lorraine charged a great number of the Councellours of the Parliament of Paris to be fauourers of he∣retickes: And this was vpon the occasion of a deliuerance they made of certaine prisoners for the Gospell, by a simple banish∣ment out of the kingdome. And did so much that the Mercu∣riall was held at the instance of the kings Proctor general, wher∣in a great part of the Councellours were of aduise, that by an holy and free Councell all matters of Religion should be reme∣died, rather then by persecutions. The King Henry being at this Parlament, and hauing heard Anne de Bourge Councellour reasoning, caused him to be staied prisoner, with other Councellors: And the 19. of Iune a Con∣iunction was directed to certaine Iudges to make theis proces. During the marriage Feastes of the daughter of Fraunce, and the last of Iune King Henry imploied himselfe all that mor∣ning in the examinations of, as well Presidents as Councellors of the said Parliament, and other prisoners and their compani∣ons which were charged with the like doctrine. When he had dined, because he was one of the sustenants at the solemn Tur∣ney which was made in the streete of Saint Anthonie, he ente∣red into the Listes: And after hee had broken good store of staues as brauely as was possible (as he was cunning, and a vali∣ant man at Armes) running against Montgommery, the sonne of Captaine Lorges, a strong Souldier, they encountred so rude∣ly, that bursting ther Launces, the King was attained with a counter blowe, so right in the vizard, that the shiuers entred in∣to his head: and the blowe was as suddaine as violent, so that his braines were wholly astonished, without finding either suc∣cour or comfort: And whatsoeuer any could doo with sen∣ding Phisitions and Surgions on all sides, yea from Brabant by King Phillip, nothing profited: Insomuch that eleuen dayes after, namely the 10. of Iuly, 1559. he expired and finished his dayes in great dolour, hauing raigned 12. yeares, three mo∣neths, and ten dayes. To the Christian Readers. Hauing gathered from diuers Histories of our time, a sort
of the most memorable things happening about religious mat∣ters, and the state of this world, since the yeare 1559. vntill this present yeare 1581: and perceiuing that this volume handling the Churches affaires was deliuered vnto the Printer: I haue also giuen these my remembrances following to the same Im∣printer to ioine thē vnto the former: that you may haue a whole briefe and summary from that time of Christ, vntil now. There remaineth: that considering the wonders of God, especially in the conduction & gouernment of his Church, we should pray that it would please him to cause vs to see more & more the ef∣fect of that promise so precious: that he wil be with his vntil the consummation of the world, and that we may remaine firme in the profession of his truth vntil the last sigh, maugre all the for∣ces of Sathan, of Antichrist, and of their complices. So be it. Francis the 2. of that name, of the age of 15. yeares & fiue moneths, succeeded his Father Henry. In the beginning of his kingdom the Churches of his realme florished vnder the crosse, hauing the fauour of certain Princes and great Lords: yet in such sort as the faithfull endured much in sundry places that same yeare 1559. The Church of Paris was one of the chiefe: but it was exceedingly molested by slan∣ders and subornations of certaine Iudges, and especially of an Inquisitor called Demochares, they were charged, & the Thurs∣day before Easter they procured a great assembly of men, wo∣men & mayds about midnight, where after they had preached, eaten a cochon in lieu of the paschall Lamb, & the lamp which gaue them light put out, euery one committed wickednes with other. Chals Cardinall of Lorraine gouernour of the king (who had espowsed Mary Steward Queene of Scotland, the said Car∣dinals Niece) impaired & made things worse, by imputing vnto them of the religiō, all the pollutions of the auncient heretikes; Insomuch that during the raigne of Francis, there was nothing but imprisonments, robbing of houses, proclimatiōs for banish∣ments, & executions of them of the religiō, with cruel tormēts: notwithstanding amongst such tempests, they discōtinued not their preachings & other exercises of Religion, although also many were burned at Paris, & executed in other places. Amōgst
which are not to be forgotten, Nicholas Guerin, Marin Marie, Margarite le Riche, called the Lady de la Caille, a yong Carpēter, Adrian Panssi, Marin Roussean, Giles le Gourt, Phillip Parmentier, Peter Millet, Iohn Befferoy, Peter Arondeau, M. Anne du Bourge, a man of great pietie, very learned, & a Councellor in the Parlia∣ment of Paris. The death of this last man, was especially amōgst others noted, because of the qualitie of his person: his constancy astonished also many of his enemies: who notwithstanding left not to cōtinue as wel in Paris, as in other Parliaments of France, in that remainder of the yeare 1559, & in al the yeare following, during which the French Church, before being hid because of persecutions, began to shew it self: Insomuch that in all Prouin∣ces thoughout the kingdom, they of the religion had Sermons openly: the zeale of some, surmounting the crueltie of others. In this same yeare 1559. in the moneth of May, the Lord triumphed ouer Antichrist, in the cōstancy & patience of ma∣ny Christians,Of the Spa∣nish Inquisi∣tion. executed to death for the witnesse of his truth in the kingdome of Spaine, by the practises of the officers of the Inquisition, wherof it shal not be impertinent briefly to touch. About an 100. yeares ago, that Ferdinand and Isabelle, kings of Castile, established that Inquisition against the Iewes, which after baptisme kept their cerimonies. Certaine yeares after, the Monkes assailed by the doctrine of the Gospell, did so much, that it was cōuerted & practised, especially against such as they could discouer to be neuer so litle aduersaries of the Romish tra∣ditions. For the better establishing of this tyrannie, and to lift it vp aboue the King and the Councell of Spaine, the Spanish Theologians made thē belieue that the holy Inquisitiō could not erre: and for the exercise thereof they had Iudges & officers in the most part of the Townes of the realme, which alwaies had a watchful eye to bridle all the world. But ordinarily they espi∣ed the richest, the learnest, & such as of little began to become great: for they desired bootie of some, they feared ye knowledge of others, and the last are odious, least they should make head a∣gainst the Inquisitiō. They espied & marked very nigh these 3. sort of people, that if there came any word out of their mouthes it shuld be noted: & thogh they spake no word, yet would the Inquisitors
finde meanes enough against such as worshipped them not suf∣ficiently: for after they had shut them in prison, they would keep them there a long time without speaking vnto them, and at leisure inuent Rymes against them: In the meane while no man durst sollicite nor speake for the prisoners. If the Father shewed to haue any care of his childe, hee was straight impriso∣ned as a fauourer of heresie. No person could haue accesse to any prisoner which was in any dungeon or other obscure place: neither might hee write: but besides the misery and horror of the prison, the prisoners endured a thousand outrages and me∣naces, and after blowes with whips, and diuers other the grea∣test iniuries that can be imagined. Sometimes they are suffered to escape by infamy, and from some high place they are shew∣ed vnto the people. During their imprisonment, their processes and their Inditements goe not forward in course of lawe: (and for ordinarily a prisoner shall be so kept vp & tormented, two, three, or foure yeares) and if there be any thing done therein, there are none but the Inquisitors, their officers and executio∣ners, that know any newes of them. After one hath tortured and beaten them the space of many moneths, he that will haue his life, he must diuine and gesse at his accusor. If then the ac∣cused can diuine the name of his accusors, and what is the ac∣cusation, in firmely and strongly denying that which is impo∣sed and laid to his charge, and after great protestations, to be an hartie and a very affectioned seruant and subiect of the Pope∣dome, his life being so saued: yet he is not thereby set at liber∣tie, but after hauing endured infinit pouerties & miserie (which they call their penance) they are let goe, but yet in such sort as they make him weare a kinde of coate of yealow colour, called Sambenito, which is a publike infamy vnto him and all his race. But if contrary the prisoner be an ill diuiner, after diuers tor∣tures he is condemned and cruelly burnt. They that constant∣ly maintaine the truth of the Gospell, are so vngently tormen∣ted and cruelly handled, that the punishments of the greatest Tyrants which were in the time of the Primitiue Church, were nothing in comparison vnto these. But then assoone as many persons of high and base condition in sundry places of Spaine
beganne to see the light of the word of God, the Antichrist his subiects straight discouered certaine assemblies, insomuch that the Inquisitors imprisoned a great number of them, whereof some were put to death the 21. of May, in the presence of the kings sister their gouernesse in her brothers absence, of Dom Charles Prince of Spaine, and of many great Lords which deli∣uered their oaths vnto the Inquisition, namely the Gouernesse, and the Prince, to maintaine against all. This done with great solemnities, the faithfull remaining constant were burnt aliue,Martyrs of Spaine. namely Augustine Cacalla late the Emperour Charles the fifts Preacher, Francis de Biuero Priest of Valledolid, the brother of Augustine, Blanche and Cōstance de Biuero their sister, Alphonsus Peres Priest of Valence, Christopher del Campo, Christopher de Padille, Antonio de Huezvelo, Catherine Romaine, Francis Er∣rem, Catherine Ortegne, Isabella de Strade, and Iann Ʋelasque. Many other men and women were then condemned to diuers honourable amends (as they call them) and to remaine priso∣ners a certaine time. In the moneth of September following, the Inquisitors of Siuil caused to be burnt Iohn Ponceus de Leon,Other Marties of Spaine. sonne of the Count de Bailen a Gentleman, amongst all Spaniards commen∣dable, because of his great pietie, constancie and doctrine, Iohn Gonsolue Theologian of Siuile, Isabelle de Ʋacine, Mary de Viroes, Cornelie, Mary and Iane de Bohorques, Ferdinand de Saint Iohn, Iulian Fernand, and others in great number. For three yeares before a goodly Church was raised and set vp at Siuile, which being discouered by the spies of the Inquisition, very nigh eight hundred persons were imprisoned, insomuch that after that the tormentors did no other thing, but hang, strangle and burne men and women: yet notwithstanding ma∣ny verie liuely tasted the doctrine of the Gospell, and forsooke Spaine, the more freely to serue God, some flying into Eng∣land, others into Almaine & to Geneua: Likewise all the Monks of the Couent of Saint Isodore nigh Siuile, forsooke their habit and their Country, and saued themselues at Francford; two of which, namely Iohn Leon, & Iohn Fernand, were taken in a Port of Zeland, brought againe into Spaine, and put to death.
In this same yeare the Estates of the Empire were assembled at Ausbourge, to handle affaires of Religion: and it was agreed that things should remaine peaceable: and the funerall of ob∣sequies of the Emperor Charles the fift were then made. The Embassador of Othon Henry chiefe Elector assisted at that ser∣uice but he refused to kisse the dish or pax, offered by the Car∣dinall of Ausbourge, who sung the Masse: whereat the Cardinall was so despited, that he said vnto him: If thou wilt haue no bles∣sing, receiue a curse euerlasting. Other deputies of the Townes, and Princes of the confession of Ausbourge, entered not into the Church. Certaine time after, Othon Henry Elector Palatin, left his dignitie and estates to Frederick, who reformed his Coun∣trey after the pure doctrine, whereof he shewed himselfe a con∣stant and faithfull protector, with an admirable wisedome and moderation.Diethmarsois brought vn∣der the yoke. The Diethmarsois yeelded themselues vnto Frede∣rick the 2. of that name, king of Denmarke, about the end of the moneth of Iune, after they had couragiously maintained the war, and receiued diuers battailes: before they gouerned them∣selues without yeelding any subiection vnto any person. But now they yeelded to gouernment about 35. yeares after the death of Henry de Supphon minister of the word of God, whom they had cruelly put to death in the Towne of Meldorf: where the truth of the Gospell encreased greatly by the preachings of that man. The first day of Ianuary, that Christian king of Den∣marke, of the age of 56. yeares died, and about three weekes af∣ter, died also Christierne his Cosin and predecessor, who for his vniust & wicked dealings, was driuen away of his subiects, stray∣ing out of his own kingdome the space of 10. yeares, & thinking to come thither again was taken vpon these, and after locked in prison, where he reamined 17. years vntil his death, being vs the age of 78. Laurence Priarli Duke of Venice. & Heroides Duke of Ferrare, died the same year, ye one in, the other in Octo. The death of Paul the 4.Paul. 4. hauing bin Pope 4. yeares, 2. moneths & 27. daies, died the 18 day of August, 1559. of the age of 85. yeares▪ Scant had he yeelded vp his spirit, but the Romane people which wished death vnto him, because of his warres, exactions▪
and , brake the prisons of the Inquisition, deliuered the prisoners, fired the whole building, threw downe the Popes I∣mage cutting off the head and right hand  which were drawne three dayes :  cast  And it was  that the Armes of the family of rffes should be plucked downe from all places of the towne and burst in peeces, which was  the same day: His bo∣dy was in daunger to haue bene handled as his Images, and so had bene, but that they kept certaine dayes  ad and strong hand from the people. He was also very violent in his Popedome, not only toward his enemies, many of which were yet in prison, but also towards his seruants and friends. The 26. day of the said moneth of August, Phillip d' Austrich king of Spaine, hauing set in order his affaires in Flaunders and the lowe Countries, made saile from the Hauen of Flushing in∣to Spaine, pretending to set vpō the Turke, seeing he was agreed with the king of France, Elizabeth the eldest daughter of the dead king Henry, being accorded vnto him for wife, and com∣mitted vnto the king of Nauarre & other, to conuoy her euen vnto the frontiers of Spaine, But being embarked with a great number of ships, and all the riches which his father had heaped vp out of Almain & Italy, with a great quantitie of the rich Ta∣pistry of Flaunders, as he approached the port of S. Iames in Ga∣licie, so great a tempest arose, that of all that magnificall furni∣ture and riches gotten together with so long time and so great trauell, nothing arriued in safetie, but the sea was made heire of those riches, euen in the sight of the Spaniards. As for him, that tempest spared him so litle, that scant could he set foote in any  but the vessel wherein he was, was ready to sinke into the bottome of the sea. This losse chafed him so much the more against them of the Religon, especially of the lowe countries: which were there persecuted with fire and sword before, & af∣ter his depart. In England the Churche got vp vnder the pecble gouernment of Elizabeth. As for Scotland, many came vnto the Gospell and they so multiplied, that soone after they remained maisters. The Papall seate being vacant the space of foure
moneths, by the aduise of the Cardinalls, Iohn Angelus de Me∣dicis, Cardinall, was chosen Pope about the end of December, and was crowned the sixt day of Ianuary, 1560. naming him∣selfe Pius the fourth:Pius the 4. elected Pope. he liued in the throne of error fiue yeares, eleuen moneths, and fifteene dayes. He confirmed the election of the Emperour Ferdinand, which his predecessour would not approue, hee also iustified and set at libertie out of prison, cer∣tiane Cardinalls and Bishops. The marriage of Phillip King of Spaine, with Elizabeth of France. The state of France, An. 1560. vnder Fran∣cis the 2. which died in the moneth of December.At the beginning of this said moneth, Elizabeth of France was brought to the limits of Spaine, & deliuered into the hands of the Cardinall de Burges, of the Duke d'el Infantasque, King Phillip his deputies, vnto whom they brought her: and there was great triumphs in the celebration of the marriage, which they called the firme bond to holde vnited the kingdomes of France and Spaine. Charles Prince of Spaine, receiued the ho∣mages of many Townes, insomuch that for a time there was nothing but reioycings, Iusts, Feasts and Bankets, through all King Phillips Countries: but this mirth endured no long time, as shall be seene hereafter. For the estate of France, the Churches had many troubles this yeare. For the violent and illegitimate domination of the house of Guise, which ruled the king and the kingdome at their pleasure: the recoyling of Princes and great Lords, the despising of the states, and other cōfusions brought in by these new gouernours, stirred a great part of the Nobilitie to ioyne themselues together to get the King out of the hands of such people, and to procure by good order that things might return into their auncient estate: And because this could not be exe∣cuted but by armes, they assembled certaine troupes vnder the conduct of Godfroy de Barry seur de la Renaudie, and other vali∣ant Captains to come vnto Amboise to seaze the Duke of Guise and the Cardinall of Lorraine, to make an account of their ad∣ministration. But hauing bene discouered and betrayed long time before, they came into the field: this enterprise did but uenome & make more cruell the Lords of Guise: Insomuch that they put to death a great number of Lordes, Captaines, Gentlemen, and souldiers, at Amboise. And because the most
part of them professed the true religion then in France, called Lutherisme: the Cardinall charged the Churches that they had made this enterprise: yea they dealt with ye princes of the blood royall, namely with Anthonie de Burbon king of Nauarre, and his brother Lewis de Burbon prince of Conde, after with the houses of Montmorencie, & of Chastillon, determining to roote vp chur∣ches & houses all at once: to effect which, the Lordes of Guise made infinit preparatiues all this yeare, both within & without the realme, they also found meanes to draw the king of Nauarre and the Prince vnto the court, after stared them prisoners, and handled the prince very rigorously. On the other side their for∣ces assembled on all sides to ouerrun the realme. The king of Spain should enter into Bearne to ruinate & destroy the queen of Nauarre, and to solemnise the entry of the Estates, the prince should haue bene publikely beheaded: afterward straigt vp∣on the conclusion of the Estates, the Armies marched to sacke and spoyle such as were suspected, and the people were suffe∣red and countenanced to runne vpon all such as were religious, to dispatch them with out other Inquisition. And to the end to leaue none aliue, the King should cause all the Princes, Lords, and Knights of the order, to sweare and seale all the articles of Sorbone, sending to the fire without longer proces, all such as denied it. The Chancelor did the like with such as were of the order d'la longe robe about the court: The Parliaments & Pre∣lates had charge to do the like with such as belonged to Iustice and to the Cleargie. Likewise Ladies & honorable womē were not forgotten. This being done, the Inquisition of Spain entred into France, to begin new tragidies: But as all things were vpon the point to be executed, God cut the strings thereof, striking the king Francis, with an Apostume in his eare, wherewith after he had languished certain dayes he was finally stifled, and dyed the fift day of December, 1560. hauing only raigned 17. mo∣neths. This death ouerthrew the disseines and purposes of the Duke of Guise, and constrained the aduersaries of the reformed Church to yeeld some reliefe vnto the faithfull, who had that yeare giuen them in mockery the Huguenots, (because of their night assemblies) to muse & deuise new subtilties and persecuti∣ons:
whereof we will (God willing) speake briefly in the years following: but yet the Churches in that yeare prospered in all Prouinces, with infinite witnesses of God his fauour towards his, and of his iudgements vpon his enemies of all estates. Some of the Religion were publikely executed in diuers pla∣ces: but for one which died, there came a thousand to the doctrine of the Gospell: In so much that it was incredible the great number of persons which this yeare and that follow∣ing, forsooke the Romane Religion, to come vnto the Chri∣stian. The estate of Scotland.This yeare Scotland was troubled with a ciuill war, by the practises of some which would needs commaund all ouer, vn∣der the colour of maintaining the Romane Religion: but they frustrated of their hope, and the reformed religion began then to set foote in that kingdome by the fauour and assistance of Elizabeth Queene of England. The Queene, widowe of Iames the fift, died in the moneth of Iune. Martin Bucer and Paul Phagius, whose bodies had bene bu∣ried and burned foure yeares before in England, by the sollici∣tations of Cardinal Poole, were established in their first honor, and their memorie publikely celebrated the 30. of Iuly. The death of Melancton.The 10. day of Aprill before, died that very learned and modest person Phillip Melancton, an excellent ornament of all Almaine: after whose decease, many wicked spirits troubled the Almain Churches, which during his life they durst not haue enterprised: Ioachim Camerarius a man very learned and his great friend, hath described his life. The moneth of Ianuary before, tooke also from this world Iohn Alasco, a Gentleman of Polonia, one very affectionate to the aduancement of the king∣dome of Chist, whose memory is precious in all Churches. Warre in Piemont.About the end of the same yeare, Emanuel Philebert Duke of Sauoy, warred vpon them of the vale of Angrogne, and their neighbours, professing the doctrine of the Gospell: which af∣ter assaying all meanes of peace to conserue it, offering their Prince all that good subiects should do, defended themselues (though fewe in number) so couragiously, and were assisted of God, that after many combats they were left in peace, which at
this present they enioy: the fauour of Margarite of France, Du∣chesse of Sauoy (amongst other humane meanes, seruing them greatly both then and afterwards. In the same Countrey of Piemont, were seene many pro∣digious wonders: the like in France, Austrich, Pologne & Almain. At the begginning, and vntill the end of this yeare, 1561. the French Churches encreased & openly shewed themselues.The begining of troubles in France. Katherine de Medices Queene mother, hauing all affaires in her hand, was counselled by the Princes of the house of Bourbon, by the Admirall and other great Lords of the Religion: by meanes whereof, the greatest of the Romane Religion entred into league with them, and so made priuie preparation for great troubles and vexations after hapning. In the moneth of Ianuary the Princes and great Lords being assembled at S. Germaine in Laye, an Edict was made the seuenteenth of the said moneth: which on the one side gaue some release and libertie vnto them of the Religion, and on an other side curbed and brideled them. After the Councell assigned, on the ninth day of September following, was a con∣ference and disputation at Poissy betwixt the Doctors of the Romane and reformed Churches. In that same moneth the Electors and Princes of Almaine being assembled at Neubourge in Turinge, to take Councell for maintaining the confession of Ausbourge, by them presented vnto the Emperour Charles the 5. Anno, 1530. gaue audience about the beginning of February the Popes Embassadors, which commaunded them to send their Embassadors vnto the Councel assigned at Trent; to effect which, they offred for the Pope their M. such safe conduct as was possible to desire. The 7. of February the Electors and Princes made answer, that they found it strange, that the Pope, being the cause of all the cōfu∣sions then in the Church, should go about to assemble a Coun∣cel, & to assigne it vnto them, whom he had nothing to doo to command, that they did not, neither euer would acknowledge any soueraigntie to belong vnto the Romane seate: yea they were assured that it appertained not vnto the Pope to conuo∣cate or call a Councell. And after they had shewed the orders
and filthinesse of the Romane Church, and that it were good to regard and looke vnto the meanes to procure a generall and free Councel, they sent away their Embassadors, and after they writ vnto the Emperour Ferdinand, that they all with a commō aduise agreed vnto the confessiō of Ausbourge: afterward they published in an Imprinted writing their causes of reculation a∣gainst the Councell of Trent. These Embassadors went into di∣uers other places to the same effect, but they receiued no good answere o any King, Prince, or great Lord, making profession of the Gospell, but especially the Queene of England would not giue leaue to the Abbot Martinengue, who was sent by the Pope vnto her, to passe the sea to come into England. Notable exe∣cutions at Rome.The 5. day of March the Pope caused to bee strangled in the night time in the S. Angelo, the Cardinall Charles Caraffe: he beheaded also in an other prison, the Counte of Palliane, and certaine other Cardinalls: the next day shewing all their bo∣dies vnto the people. King Charls the ninth sa∣cred.The 18. day of May Charles the ninth of that name, sonne of Henry de Ʋalois, and of Catherine de Medicis, was sacred king at Reimes in Campagne, and soone after crowned at S. Denis in France. The Churches of his kingdome to the eye-sight flou∣rished, to the preiudice whereof was made an Edict, called of Iuly: notwithstanding which, they maintained themselues with great testimonies of the blessings of God. In the meane while the king of Nauarre the first Prince of the bloud next vnto the kings brethren, sent for Peter Martyr and Theodore de Beza, to be at the disputation of Poissy, which were sent thither by the Lords of Zurich and Geneua. Reconcilia∣tion of the Prince of Conde and Duke of Guise.The 24. of August the Prince of Conde was recōciled by the King and his Councell, with the Duke of Guise: who vpon the Princes words, which he spake on high. I hold him and them for villaines which haue caused my imprisonment: answered I beleeue so, it nothing toucheth me. Soone after the gouernmēt of the kingdome during the kings minoritie who was then but ten yeares old & an halfe, was cōfirmed to the queene mother. In the meane while the deputies of the Churches and cer∣taine other Ministries with safe conduit arriued at Poissy, pre∣sented
vnto the king a request for the order of the disputati∣on, and also the confession of their faith:A conference at Poissy, a∣bout matters of religion. who with good coun∣tenance receiued thē, promising to communicate their requests vnto his Councell, & make them an answere by his Chancelor. In the beginning of September many requests were pre∣sented to set forward that which was begun: and finally the 9. of the said moneth, in the presence of the King, Prince, Lords, and notable persons of the kingdome of France, as wel of ye one, as the other religion, Theodore de Beza in the name of all the French Churches, after publike inuocatiō of the name of God, made long oration, cōprehending a summary of all the Chri∣stian doctrine, held & preached by the Ministers of the refor∣med Churches: and his oration finished, he presented their cō∣fession of faith: which was receiued & deliuered into the hands of the prelates, to prepare themselues to answer it. But they op∣posed themselues only against two Articles of that oratiō: The one of the Supper, and the other of the Church: and pronoun∣ced their answere by Charles Cardinal of Lorraine, who had for his maister Claude Despence, a Doctor of Sorbone, who once shewed some seed of religion. This answere hauing bene made certain daies after the oration, the Ministers prayed that they might reply straight way: but it was deferred to an other day: and audience was giuen them, but not so notable as the first: thē fel there out a sharp disputation, which began an other time af∣ter a third oration. Then entred into conference fiue of the Ro∣mane Churches side, with fiue of the reformed Churches: who after a long, disputation vpon the matter of the Supper, retired without according any thing assuredly. Frō the end of this mo∣neth vntil the end of this yeare, diuers leagues & factions were made against the Churches, & seditiōs were stirred at Paris and in other places, against the Christians assembling to heare the word of God: the kings councel being occupied to prouide by some Edict, against the mischief to come, & to procure rest for the kingdome. About this yeare died Shuvenckfeld,The death of Shuvenck∣feld. a very per∣nitious heretike, who by his wicked doctrine greatly endama∣ged the Churches of Almaine. The summe of his principall er∣rours, was to reuiue and renew againe the heresie of Eutiches.
For hee maintained that the humaine nature of Iesus Christ ought no more to be called a creature: but we must think that it is at this day swallowed vp by the diuine nature: by that meanes cōfounding the two natures. Vpon this foundation so badly placed, he established other mōstrous opinions: the fault was in not wel cōsidering the vniō of the two natures in Christ, and the communicatiō of the properties. But these opinions are not dead with him: but contrary haue bene renued & promo∣ted by such who will needes at this day haue the the humaine nature of Christ infinit. The state of France.In the moneth of Ianuary which was then 1591. because they then began the yeare at Easter, (and at this present we be∣gin it the first of Ianuary) an assembly was made of the most notable persons of all the Parliaments, and other renowmed people besides the priuie Councellors, which decreed and set foorth that notable Edict, named of Ianuary, which permitted free exercise to them of the Religō through all the kingdome of France, prouiding good securitie for all people, and rest for the Common-wealth. Many thought that hereby the Chur∣ches should haue rest, when soone after newes arriued of the massacre of Vassi,Frances. committed by Francis the Duke of Guise, who in his owne presence caused 42. persons of the Religion to be slaine, and a great number others to be wounded, being all as∣sembled to heare the word of God. This was the beginning of the ciuil warres of France. For the Duke of Guise and his parta∣kers tooke Armes on the one side: The Prince of Conde, the Admirall and others, meaning to maintaine the Royall autho∣authoritie, the Edict of Ianuary, and the Churches that were vnder the protection and defence thereof, opposed themselues against them by Armes also, and the war began through all the kingdome, where infinit cruelties were exercised in diuers pla∣ces against them of the Religion: as the history of our time ma∣keth mention. Many Townes & Fortresses were besieged, car∣ried away by assaults, sacked & spoiled more cruelly, thē by the most barbarous people in the world: diuers encounters & bloo∣die battailes, namely that of Dreux: wherein the two chiefe Captaines of both partes remained prisoners, many of the
Nobilitie and souldiers, as well Straungers as French, were slaine: Churches dissipated and dispersed in most part of the Prouinces, and a maruellous desolation in infinite Families. Maximilian the Emperour Ferdinands sonne,Maximilian crowned king of the Ro∣mans and of Boheme. was declared king of the Romanes the 14. day of Nouember, and sixe daies after he was crowned: two moneths before he was crowned king of Boheme. Peter Martyr, borne at Florence, an excellent Theologian,The death of Peter Mar∣tyr. and professor of Theologie at Zurich, where he writ bookes full of great and sound doctrine, died the 12. day of Nouember, being then of the age of 63. yeares. The ciuill warre continued in France, notwithstanding the  taking of the Prince of Conde, and the Constable.The Duke of Guise slaine, and peace made. The Duke of Guise hauing laid siege before the Towne of Orleance, being kept by them of the Religion, was wounded in the shoulder with a Pistoll shot, the 18. day of February, and died certaine dayes after in great torments. By this meanes Orleance was de∣liuered, & a peace concluded the moneth following, the Edict of Ianuary abolished in the most part of the Articles, to the great disaduantage of them of the Religion: which notwith∣standing tooke hart, and in the quarters maintained themselues in their accustomed order. In the moneth of Iuly, the English men gaue ouer Hance de grace, or New Hauen, vnto the French king. The same time they of Lubec, and the king of Denmarke,The estate of Almaine. made warre vpon the king of Snede. Henry de Brunswic made many courses into Almaine, into the lands of the Bishop of Munster. The eight day of September Maximilian king of the Ro∣manes, was crowned king of Hungary. The 24. of September, Charles the ninth, king of France,The Kings Maioritie. caused his Maioritie to be published, declaring to the Parlia∣ment of Paris, that he would take vpon himselfe the managing of the affaires of the kingdome. The 28. was published and affixed at Rome on the part of the Cardinals Inquisitors,A citation frō Rome against the Queene of Nauarre. a monitorie & personal adiourna∣ment against Iane d' Albret, Queene of Nauarre: who because
of the profession of the Gospell, was cited to Rome, to answere in the Popes consistory therefore, and for want of appearance, within sixe moneths, her Countrey to be giuen vnto the first conquerer thereof, and her vassalls and subiects absolued from their oath of fidelitie. This was but a subtill deuice tending to an other end: and the king of France tooke into his hand the cause of this Princesse: so that for that time the Popes thun∣derclaps turned into smoake. The Bishop of Wirtzbourge slaine.The second day. of October the Bishop of Wirtzbourge was slaine, his Towne occupied and raunsomed, wherevpon followed great troubles in Almaine: and at that time of Au∣tomne, the pestilence was vehement in the quarters about Francfort, Nuremberge, and in the coastes about the Balthique Sea, which carried away nigh three hundreth thousand per∣sons. Battaile be∣tweene the Danes.The ninth day of Nouember the Armies of Denmarke and Snede encountred together and had a bloudie battaile, wherein were slaine 3000. Snedes, with great losse of their Artillery and baggage. The end of the Councel of Trent.The fourth day of December was ended the Councell of Trent: Betwixt the first and last session whereof, were eight∣teene yeares. In it all the Articles of the Popish doctrine were confirmed. There was a great strife betwixt the Embassadors of France and of Spaine, for the primer seat, but he of Spaine got it at that time. The death of Musculus.In the same yeare, and the 13. day of August, died Wolfan∣gus Musculus, Doctor in Theologie at Berne, a man who by his writings greatly serued, and yet doth the Churches of God. He was then of the age of 66. yeares. The 26. of Ianuary, 1564. the Lithuaniens got a great victorie vpon the Muscouites, which lost nine thousand men vpon the field with their baggage, and many flying, perished in pooles and Isy Marishes. The death of Hiperius.The first day of February died at Marpurge, a Towne of Hesse, Andrew Hiperius, a very learned Theologian amongst thē of our time, who left many profitable bookes to the edificati∣on of the Churches of God. He was then of the age of 53. yeares.
In the moneth of April, Frederick Elector, & Count Palatin, came with Christopher Duke of Wirtemberge, into the Abbey of Malbrun nigh to Spire, where by the space of 7. daies their Diuines disputed, some against others, of two Articles in the doctrine of the holy Supper; that is to say, of the vbiquitie or presence of the body of Christ Iesus in all places, and the inter∣pretation of the words of the holy Supper; This is my body. Af∣ter long contestations and strifes, they departed without accor∣ding any thing: and after that, their debate waxed hotter, to the ruine of Churches, and to the great contentment of the Pope and his adherents. The 27. of May, about eight of the clocke at night,The death of Caluin. dyed Iohn Caluin, a professor in Theologie, & a Minister of the word of God in Geneua a person of singular pietie, memorie, viuaci∣tie of iudgement, and admirable diligence, of a solide doctrine, wherin he hath comprehended the pure Theologie: as his wri∣tings read without preiudice or sinister affection, do apparantly shewe. He was moreouer endowed with incredible zeale and prudencie in all the course of his Ministery, hauing serued to the aduancement of the doctrine of the Gospel, and to the edi∣fication of the Churches, amongst all the excellent persons rai∣sed vp in our time, to ruinate the tyrannie of Antichrist, and to establish the throne of the celestial veritie He was of the age of 55. yeares, saue one moneth and 13. daies: he was buried with∣out pompe, hauing left many bookes very profitable for such as would seeke to aduance and goe forward earnestly in the in∣telligence of the holy scripture, and an honorable memorie vn∣to all reformed Churches. About this time the Maritimal and Sea Armies of the kings of Denmarke and Snede,A battaile be∣twixt ye Danes and Snedes. encountred vpon Balthique Sea in bat∣taile, wherein the Snedes remained victors, and carried away three great ships of warre, with a number of prisoners, which the king of Snede caused afterward to be cruelly handled. But about the end of Iune, they of Denmarke and Lubec had their reuenge, and ouercame the Snedes vpon the Sea, conquering one ship, though inexpugnable vntill then, after hauing sunke many moe.
Maximilian.The death of Ferdinand.The Emperour Ferdinand, a gentle and peaceable Prince, died the 25. day Iuly at Ʋienna in Austrich, hauing liued 61. yeares, foure moneths, and an halfe, leauing for successor to the Empire, his sonne Maximilian, who soone after was elected and crowned. The beginning of his yeare, 1565. was very sharpe and colde in many Countries of Europe, and there fel an extraordi∣nary quantitie of snowe, which beeing frozen, and after mel∣ted, in the spting time there followed great Invndations. The Churches of France maintained themselues in some estate, whilest the young King, guided by his Councell, made his voyage of Bayonne. A warre in Hungary against the Turkes, with losses and ruines on both parts. The estate of the Flemish Churches.The Churches in the lowe Countries began also to lift vp their heads, especially vnder Charles the fift. The encrease of the French Churches encouraged them: they also published their confession of faith. The Ecclesiasticke Romanes that which afterward came to pass;e, amongst other practises, sought to establish the Spanish Inquisition, and certaine yeares before made new Bishops, to the end more easily to maintaine the Popes authoritie. After this erection, by the space of foure or fiue yeares, whilest Margarite Dutches of Parma, gouerned the lowe Countries for her brother the king of Spaine, some ceased not to cōtend against others, by remonstrances, bookes, and diuers practises, some to abolish, others to giue entry and authoritie vnto the Inquisition. War at Malte.The Ile and Towne of Malte, was furiously assailed by the Turkes in the moneth of May, but they were Iustained and pushed backe by the knights of Malta, being assisted with the succors which were sent from many places. Deluges.In the monethes of Iune and Iuly, were great deluges and ouerflowings of waters in diuers quarters of Almaine, especial∣ly in Thuringe. Warre in Hungary.A very sharpe warre was in Hungarie betwixt the Turkes and the Almaines, with diuers accidents that befell on both sides.
The eight of December, the Pope Pius the fourth,The death of Pope Pius. 4. died of the age of 66. yeares, and 8. moneths, hauing bene Pope about six moneth. Conrad Gesner of Zurich a Phisitian,The death of Conrad Gesner. learned in the tongues and humane sciences, laborious and painfull amongst others, and who very diligently writ a perfect and full historie of all beastes, foules, fishes, and creeping things, died also in the mo∣neth of December, leauing infinite other writings in all sorts of litterature, alreadie Imprinted, and others to Imprint. About the end of this yeare,An Edict a∣gainst the Religion in the lowe Countries. the King Phillip sent from Spaine into the lowe Countries, an Edict, wherby he ordained that the auncient and new placarts against them of the Religi∣on should be executed: that the Inquisition shuld be through∣ly established, and the Inquisitors fauoured in the exercise of their charge: that the decrees of the Councell of Trent should be receiued and obserued from point to point. These Letters Patents were the cause of all the troubles following, and not yet ended. The 7. day of Ianuary, 1566. Michael Gillier a Monke  of Lombardie, being come from one degree to an other,Pius. 5. till he was Cardinall, finally was chosen Pope, and called himselfe Pius the fift. The 21. day of the said moneth, the Emperour Maximi∣lian second of that name, held his first Imperiall Iourney at Ausbourge, where the affaires of Religion was handled. Frede∣rick Count Palatin de Rhene, and chiefe Elector of the Empire, a Christian and magnanimous Prince, constantly maintained the pure doctrine and the true reformation established in his Countrey: by meanes whereof, he made himselfe redoughted of all such is resisted him, either openly or secretly, and was well beloued of the Emperour, and of the greatest in Almaine. He was then accompanied with the Prince Cassimere his sonne, who kept him good company, and a great company of the Nobilitie. In the moneth of March, and in the other following,The violent death of the king of Scot∣land. hap∣ned great troubles in Scotland, and finally the King himselfe was strangled in the night, and the chamber wherein hee was,
ouerthrowne with Cannon powder. An Earle of that Realme espowsed his widow, but being ouerthrowne in battaile by the Nobilitie, he fled out of the Realme. The Queene thingking to saue her selfe in France, was stayed prisoner in England. Iames the sixt, the sonne of her, and her slaine husband, at this present King of Scotland, of the age of fifteene or sixteene yeares, is a Prince of great hope. In the same moneth of March, at the Imperiall Iourney at Ausbourge, the Emperour there assisting it, was decreed that the affaires of Religion should remaine in their present estate, but for the affaires of the Empire they prouided, especially for the warre against the Turkes. A league in Flaunders a∣gainst the In∣quisition.In the beginning of Aprill certaine great Lords and Gen∣tlemen of the low Countries, leagued themselues in good num∣ber against the Inquisition: pretending the same to be contrary to the liberties of the lowe Countrie. The people banded themselues, and the Assemblies of them of the Religion began to encrease. In so much that the fourth of May there was pub∣like preaching at Antwerpe without the Towne, & fiue weekes after within the said Towne. At the same time, such as were leagued against the Inquisition, were surnamed les Gueux. The cause hereof was, for that some of the principalls going to pre∣sent a request to the Councell of the estate, the Sieur de Barlai∣mont their aduersary, said to an other Councellor that sate nigh him: Ʋoici mes Gueux. Great and litle after that, tooke a deuise, wearing apparell of gray cloath, and peeces of money about their necke, hauing on the one side the kings Image, and on the other side a beg∣gers dish, with this Inscription; Faithfull to the king, euen to the begers dish. War in Hun∣gary.In the moneth of Iune, Iuly, and the other following, fell a sharpe warre in Hungary against the Turkes, but the end was not very good, for the Hungarians and Almaines lost many men in diuers encounters, also many strong holdes, especially at Zigeth, which was besieged by Soliman himselfe, who dyed a fewe dayes before the taking thereof.
Selim the second of that name,Selim suc∣ceeded So∣liman. succeeded his father Soli∣man, was acknowledged and crowned Emperour of the Turkes in the moneth of September, and soone after transported him∣self into Hungarie, to prouide for the affaires of that warre, and then straight departed towards Constantinople, leauing one of his Bsses called Pertaw, to continew, who with a puissant Armie of Turkes and Tartarians, forraged Hungarie and Transyluania, committing very straunge saccagements and cruelties. The Ʋainoda of Transyluania, called this Bassa to his suc∣cours, to recouer certaine places occupied by the Hungarians, but perceiuing such succours did wholly ruinate & ouerthrow himself, he sound means to surprize the Tartarians, cut them all in peeces, and so dissipated all that Turkish Armie: first him∣selfe beeing well chastifed for drawing such people into his Countrey. Iohn Functius a learned Chronographer amongst all them of our time. Matthias Horst, and Iohn Shnell,Iohn Functi∣us & others beheaded. Ministers of the Gospell at Conigsprucke in Pruse, were beheaded the 28. of October, for the crime of conspiracie against the Prince Albert, who had established the Osiandrisme, that is to say, the dreames and errors of one Andrew Osiander, concerning Christian righ∣teousnesse, and other points of Diuinitie: which errour these three maintained, and would haue reuenged themselues of Albert, who had purged his Countrey of that infection. The death of Soliman, the great whip of Christendome, gaue some release vnto Almaine. Selim preparing himselfe to make warre vpon Vene∣tians:War against Iohn Frede∣rick of Sax∣onie. but the Emperour decreed a new warre within Almaine it selfe, against Frederick of Saxonie, sonne of the dead Elector, taken in battaile by Charles the fift. The cause heereof was, that Iohn Frederick supported and gaue refuge vnto William Grembach and other Gentlemen which were banished out of the Empire, because of the murder of Melchior Zobel, Bishop of Wirthbourge. Augustus Elector, & Duke of Saxony, the Cosin-germaine of
Iohn Frederick, had the charge of this warre, whervnto he pre∣pared himselfe in the moneths of October and Nouember, and about the end of the yeare he laid siege before the Towne of Goth, where there was a Citadell or Castle, one of the stran∣gest in Almaine. Iohn Frederick, Grombach and others, were there, which sustained the siege certaine moneths. Images burst in the lowe Countries.They of the Religion encreased maruellously in Flaun∣ders, Brabant, and in many other Prouinces of the lowe Coun∣tries, and their affaires got so forward, that the 20. day of Au∣gust the Images in the Churches of Antwerpe, were broken in peeces. The Images of other Townes were vsed incontinently after the like handling, euen with an incredible swiftnesse by the simple people: with such an astonishment of euery one, that none of the Magistrates opposed themselues against them. William de Nassau, Prince of Orange, Gouernour of Antwerpe, hauing done what he could to hold things in an euennesse, and considering that it should be impossible for him to withstand the tempest which he sawe comming, gaue place to the time, and resolued to retire himselfe into Almaine, admonishing o∣ther Lords to do the like, seeing men made account to think vpon meanes to conserue the priuiledges of the Countrey, but rather to yeeld themselues vnto the yoake of the Inqui∣sition. In the moneth of Ianuary, the subiects of Iohn Frederick were absolued by the Imperiall authoritie, of their oath fi∣delitie due to their Lord, and were cōstrained to promise their obedience vnto Iohn William, brother of the said Frederick. This done, the siege of Gothe continued. Troubles in the lowe Countries.About the ende of the moneth troubles began to arise in the lowe Countrey; Valencienne was besieged, beaten, taken, and rudely handled by the Sieur de Moircarmes because of Religion. The Ministers of the word of God, and certaine of the chiefe of the Towne were imprisoned, and after put to death. Continuation of troubles, & beginning of warre in the lowe Countries.The 25. of Feebruary Henry de Bredenrode a Lord of great authoritie in the lowe Countries, and very affectionate vnto Religion, seeing the peoples heartie desires to haue pub∣like
exercise thereof, presented a request vnto the Gouernesse in the name of him and his Associates, that she might quickly puruey for the affaires as they presented themselues. She made such answere, as they might perceiue well, that things tooke a way vnto troubles and confusions. Indeed after certaine go∣ings and commings, from words they fell vnto Armes: In so much, that in the moneth of March there hapned encounters and combats betwixt them, of the one and the other party. The Towne of Antwerpe sawe it selfe in a maruellous diuision, and vpon the point of her ruine, but by the prudence of the Prince of Orange, who yet was not departed the affaires, it remained peaceable for certaine monethes. In the meane while the king of Spaine aduertised of those chaunges, gaue commission to the Duke of Ala, an olde and subtill Captaine, to tame the Flem∣mings, and chastice their heads and principall rulers: that ther∣by he might bridle the lowe Countries, appointing for him a strong Army of Spaniards, which about this time departed by sea, and so came into Italy, obtaining there a further strength of people which attended them with a good minde to gather booties in the lowe Contries. The last day of March, Phillip Lantgraue of Hesse, a Chri∣stian Prince, sage, valiant, and endowed with all the goodly parts required in a great Lord, hauing in his life time executed many valiant and memorable exployts, and especially for Re∣ligion, died at Cassel, of the age about 63. yeares, leauing foure sonnes, William, Lewis, Phillip, and George, and foure daughters, Agnes first married to Maurice. Elector and Duke of Saxonie, after in her second marriage, to Iohn Frederick, Anne married to Wolfgang, Count Palatin de Rhene. Barbara to George Count de Montheliard: and Christine to Adolpe Duke of Holsac. Two daies after, Ernest Duke of Brunswick,The death of the Duke of Brunswick a Prince fea∣ring God, wise, couragious, and constant, and who bore him∣selfe well in the Protestants warre, dyed in his Castle of Hertaberge. The fourth of Aprill they of Gothe beeing besieged by the Elector of Saxonie, laid hold of the proscripts banished men, and the 13. of the said moneth, yeelded the towne & the
Citadell: Iohn Frederick was deliuered prisoner vnto the Em∣perours deputies, which hapned the same day, and 20. yeares after that, his father Elector of the Empire, was taken prisoner in battaile nigh Mulberge, by the Emperour Charles the fift. The Citadell of Gothe was destroyed, Grombach and certaine of his complices executed to death, and the Elect or Augustus being deliuered from great trouble, caused to coine Dollers of siluer, with this inscription on the one side: Tandem bona causa triumphat. At the beginning of May, the Duke of Alua arriuing from Barcelone at Genes, to goe into Flaunders, began to giue order for the passage of his Army. Certaine Bay∣liwickes yeel∣ded to the Duke of Sa∣uoy.About the same time, Emanuel Philebert Duke of Sauoy, the Bernois, to yeeld him certaine lands by them conquered vpon the dead Duke Charles his father, after certaine con∣ferences betwixt them, they yeelded him three Bailiwickes, namely, Gez, Ternier, and Chablais, which enuiron Geneua, with certaine conditions; whereof the chiefe was, that the said Bailiwicke▪ should remain in the state they then were in name∣ly with profession and publike exercise of the only Religion, reformed certaine moneths after the Duke was put in reall pos∣session of the said Bailiwickes. The Duke of Alua commeth in∣to the lowe Country, and his first ex∣ployts.About the beginning of Iuly the Duke of Alua departed Italy with a good armie of foote men, Spaniards & Piemontois: Being entred Sauoy, he made a countenance to stay before Ge∣neua: but fearing to receiue some shame, he entred into le Fran∣che Comte: where he ioyned himselfe with certain new troupes conducted by the Court de Lodron, and straight marched right vnto Bruxelles in Brabant. At his arriual, he published the Edict of the Inquisition, established the bloodie Councell, cut off-infinit heads, confiscated the goods of all sorts of people, about the end of the moneth of August: And in September he sent prisoners into the Castle of Gaunt, the Countes of Aigremont, and of Horne: and to found his bloudie executiōs, that request presented by the principall of the Country to the Duchesse of Parma, was declared to be but a coniuration against the Kings maiestie. The Prince of Orange, the Count Ludouic, le Countes
de Berge, de Hochstrate, de Culembourge, le fieur de Brede▪ many other Lordes, Gentlemen, guests and marchants, which had signed or assisted the preachings, or carried armes, were ad∣iourned to appeare in person before the Duke of Alua, within sixe weeks, and their goods noted. The moneth of September following they were improied in taking prisoners, the best they could lay handes on: And then began confusion on all sides in the lowe Country. About the end of October he begunne the Citadell of Antwerpe. In the said time,The second ciuil warre in France. the second ciuil warre for matters of Reli∣gion lighted in France, and a battaile was giuen betwixt Paris and S. Denis the tenth day of Nouember, wherein the Constable was wounded to death, and deceased soone after. Many Lords, Gentlemen, and valiant souldiers remained in the field. The ar∣mie of the Religion drew into Lorraine, to gather the succours which the Duke Cassimere led. A great deluges of waters was at Verone the two last dayes of October, where there were 200 persons drowned,Great deluges in Italie. and infinite goods wasted and destroyed. Likewise certaine other places of Italie were in like maner so destroyed. About the end of the yeare,Cassimere bringeth suc∣cours to them of the Religi∣on. the Duke Cassimere with his Armie of 7500. horses, and 3000. footemen, ioyned himselfe vnto the troupes of the Prince of Conde at Pontamonsson in Lor∣raine: and there was some conference about a peace, which suc∣ceeded not. In the month of Ianuary the Duke Cassimere made many  remonstrances in writing to the King and his Councell,Reisters in France. for the pacifications of troubles in the kingdome of France. This ser∣uing for nothing, his army set forward: whilest the warre waxed hotte in diuers prouinces. On the other side Iohn Guillaume Duke of Saxonie, brought 4000. Reisters to the succors of the Catholicke Romanes in France. The 18. day of the said moneth, Phillip king of Spaine cau∣sed the Prince Charles his only sonne, to be kept in a Chamber as prisoner. The Flemings in a certaine request presented vnto the Emperour and the states of Almaine assembled at Spire, de∣clared that that imprisonment was practised by the Inquisitors
of Spaine, because the Prince condemned the dealings of the Duke of Alua, and the rigor of the Inquisition, and bore great a∣mitie vnto them of the low Countries, against which they pro∣ceeded with a straunge violence, which cōtinued more & more. Siluer stayed.In the month of February the Elector Palatin, stayed in his hands a great sum of money descried in the country of the Em∣pire, which was going vnto the Duke of Alua into Flaunders, by reason whereof there was great notice & threatnings, but in the end the marchants were faine to pacifie and content him. The sixt day of March the Prince of Conde & Cassimere be∣sieged and assaulted the town of Chartres, so that their troupes made ready to goe to the breach, the king sent to offer a peace, which was incontinently accepted, and the second Edict of pa∣cification published in the Campe the 30. day of the same mo∣neth, of the same tenor as the first. But this accord endured not, for so soone as the Duke Cassimere was retired, they of the Re∣ligiō were assailed as they went homeward, and in their houses: and people were dispatched on all sides to seaze and take dead or a liue, the Prince of Conde, the Admirall, the Lords, Gentle∣men, and Captaines, professing the Religion: so that in a mo∣ment appeared the third ciuill warre on all sides, what remon∣strances soeuer the Prince could make to cause the conten∣tions against the Edict to cease. The death of the Duke of Pruse.The 20. day of March, died Albert Marquesse of Brande∣bourge, Duke of Pruse, of the age of 78. yeares: a Prince right noble, vertuous, learned, wise, and fearing God. He repurged his Countrey of the errors of Andrew Osiander. Anne Mary of Brouswic, his wife by his second marriage, deceased the same day, and left a sonne called Albert Frederick, then of the age of 15. yeares. The Prince of Orange, and the Count of Hochstrate iustifie them∣selues.The 25. day of Aprill, William de Nassau, Prince of Orange, and Anthony de Ludain, Count Hochstrate, published their de∣fences and iustification, against the personall adiornament de∣creed vpon them by the Duke of Alua, at the instance of the Proctor generall, and shewed in their writings, vnto whom the cause of all the troubles of the lowe Countries ought to be im∣puted, and that they were nothing culpable of these stirres.
In the moneth of May,Open warres in the lowe Countries. certaine people being chased from diuers Prouinces, gathered themselues together, attending the Count de Hochstrate, and other Captaines: but they were ouer∣throwne, and the most part cut in peeces, by the troupes of the Duke of Alua. In the same time, the Count Lodowick tooke Armes, and seazed vpon many places in Frise. The Duke of Alua sent incontinently an Army of Spaniards, vnder the con∣duct of the Count d' Aremberge. They encountred the 24. of May, where the Spaniards were ouerthrowne, their Captaine slaine in the field: the Count Adolphe, Lodowicks brother, was also slaine as hee pursued the victorie. But because the Prince of Orange and others that were adiourned, appeared not at the day assigned, they were declared criminalls of treason. The first of Iune,The Counts d' Aigmont, and d' Horne beheaded. the Duke of Alua greatly stirred with the death of the Count d' Aremberge, caused to bee beheaded at Bruxells, many Gentlemen, amongst others, the two Barons of Battembourge: and foure daies after, the Counts d' Aigment and de Horne, which had done great seruice vnto the Emperor Charles and King Phillip. The same day, the house of the Count de Curembourge, where the Lords of the League assembled when they made their request, was sacked and destroyed, and a piller placed in the middest thereof, with a writing, that it was raced for the execrable coniuration made therein a∣gainst the Catholicke Romane Religion, the Kings maiestie, nor the estate of the Countrey. At the same time the Count de Bure, the onely sonne of the first marriage of the Prince of Orange, a Student at Louaine. was taken, & carried into Spaine, against the priuiledges o Brabant, and of the Vniuersitie of Louaine. After, there was an Edict published, forbidding pon concie  any way,The Count Lodowick ouerthrowne. or  doe with  the Count Lodowick was alwaies in the field the Duke of  nt an Army to ouerthro him, who attended  resolutely. But at the ioyning his souldiers refused to fight, so that hee was constrai∣ned to saue himselfe by swimming ou a Riuer nigh vnto that place, had leauing many of his people there, the 21. day of Iuly.
The Prince of Orange ta∣keth Armes.The Prince of Orange seeing that the Duke of Alua conti∣nued in his strange and bloudie actions, after diuers sorrowful cōplaints vnto the king of Spaine, wherof there was no account made, published his iustifications, and tooke Armes, and con∣ducted his Army with such speed, that quickly he passed Meu∣se, resolued to giue battaile to his enemie: But vpon the point to fight, his souldiers demaunded siluer, which the Prince not able to do, ledde a part of his troupes through Brabant and Hai∣naut, and entred France, where the Princes and Lords of the Religion called him to their succours. The miserable estate of the Churches.Then the Churches of France and the lowe Countries were very desolate. As for the lowe Countries, the Duke of Alua and the bloudie Councell sought by all meanes to roote out Religion, to plant the Inquisition, and to ruinate all the Coun∣trey, killing publikely, and secretly, an infinit number of inno∣cent persons. The affaires of France were in no better case: For from the peace made, vntill the ende of August, there were slaine in diuers fortes, more people of the Religion, in Townes and the fieldes, without any distinction of Sexe, age, or estates, then there died in all the second warre. The death of the Prince of Spaine.The 23. of Iuly, died in prison Charles Prince of Spaine, hauing attained the age of 23. yeares. Certaine daies after de∣ceased Elizabeth Queene of Spaine. The king of Snede.The 28. of the same moneth, Iohn Duke of Einland, was chosen king of Snede, in the place of his brother Henry, who for his demerites was deposed. Three Moones at one instant.Three Moones were seene at one instant in heauen, in egall and sufficient distance one from an other especially in , the ninth day of August. Treuers be∣sieged.The Towne of Treuers long  before besieged,  Archbishop thereof  bgt to  by the mediation of the Emperour and . Exercise of Religion in Austrich.In the same mth, the Emp  many times bene desired, at last permitted the Lords  Gen∣tlemen of Austrich, profess the Gospell to  in their Castles, , and hoss  doctrine contained in the confession of Ausbourge.
The 23. of the said moneth,The third ci∣uill warre in France. the Prince of Conde being vpon the point to fall into the power of his enemies, saued himselfe with his wife and children, and departing from Noyers in Bour∣gongne, accompanied with the Admirall of Sieur d' Andelot, and of their traine, passed the Riuer of Loire at a Forde, and were constrained to saue themselues at Rochell. Then began the third ciuill warre in France, wherevnto both parties prepared themselues. Iane d' Albert Queene of Nauarre, an excellent Princesse, came thither to find her brother in lawe, the Prince of Conde, & brought with her, her son Henry, then very young. From that time, that campe of the Religion, was called the Army of the Princesse. They presented and published many Remonstrances which serued for nothing, and Churches were dissipated and dispersed in the most part of Prouinces, and ve∣ry rigorous Edicts published against them of the Religion. Hen∣ry Duke of Aniou, and brother of King Charles the ninth, being then chiefe of the Army of the Catholicke Romanes. The Chauncelor d'l'Hospitall, perswading to peace, was sent to his house and his Seales giuen to an other. The Almaines and o∣ther Straungers were sollicited on both sides to come to their succours. The Emperour behaued himselfe very wisely in this behalfe. The 21. day of October,A conference at Aldebourg. sixe Theologians of the part of Augustus Elector of Saxonie, and as many on the side of Iohn William Duke of Saxonie, were assembled at Aldenbourge, to a∣gree the controuersies hapning amongst these Theologians vpon certaine points of Christian doctrine. The Duke Iohn William assisted there personally, & that conference and dispu∣tation continued vntill the beginning of March in the yeare following, and there was at large disputed vpon Iustification, and many Articles depending thereon. As the acts of the dis∣putation do shewe. The 25. of this moneth, Paul de Ridnend sieur de Mou∣uans, a braue and valiant souldier amongst the French Cap∣taines, & much affectioned towards Religiō, was ouerthrowne, with his footmen of Prouence and Daulphine, by the companies of horsemen of the Duke Montpensier, of the Count de Brissa,
and other Catholicke Romanes, were slaine in the field, with a great number of souldiers, and losse of many Ensigne. Such as escaped, ioyned themselues to the Princes Army. The 12. of Nouember, the Captaine la Coche, a Gentleman of Dauphine, was ouerthrowne with his troupes, by the Duke d' Aumale, be∣twixt Metz and Sauerne. He was taken, and after put to death. About the ende of Nouember, the Prince of Orange not bee∣ing able to take order in the affaires of the lowe Countries, withdrew into Almaine, with certaine warriours, attending the departure of the Duke de Deux Ponts, who prepared to giue succours to the Princes. In the meane while, the French Armies besieged and tooke diuers places, remaining in the field not∣withstanding the rigour of winter, which killed a great num∣ber of souldiers. Christopher, Duke of Wittemberge, and Count de Montbel∣liard, died the 28. of December. Reisters in France.About the same time, 5500. Reisters, conducted by Phi∣libert, Marquesse de Bade, and other great Lords of Almain, pas∣sed Rhene and soone after they entred. The Queene of England tooke three Spanish ships.The Queene of England about the 23. of Nouember, tooke three Spanish ships, laden with great riches. The sixt of Ianuary she made a reason of her action, in an Imprinted wri∣ting. Wherein she shewed how litle the Duke of Alua his me∣naces astonished her. The Duke de Deux Ponts lea∣deth an Ar∣mie into France.During the moneths of Ianuary and February, the next Countrie to Strasbourge was seene full of people of warre, Al∣maines, readie to enter France. The Prince of Orange was in great distresse, about pleasing of the Reistres: but in the end he appeased them, and ioyned himselfe to the Duke de Deux Ponts, who before he departed, wrote largely vnto the King, the reasons that mooued him to succour the Princes, and them of the Religion: and the next morning mounted on horsback, and the 12. of March he mustered, where there were found se∣uen thousand and sixe hundreth Reistres well mounted, be∣sides the troupes of the Prince of Orange, and of certaine French Lords and Gentlemen, and certaine Lansquenets footemen.
The last day of February, the Duke of Alua adiourned by publike Edict, all fugitiues of the lowe Countries,Confiscations in the lowe Countries. to appeare in person within six weekes after, vpon paine of confiscation of their goods. They doubting his crueltie, thought it better to loose the sleeue, then the arme: In so much that no person re∣turned: therfore the Duke fatted himselfe with confiscations, and continued also to feede himselfe with the bloud of such faithfull as he could catch. The thirteenth day of March, Lewis de Bourbon,The Prince of Conde slaine. Prince of Conde, fighting valerously in the battaile fought nigh to Coignac in Poictu, amongst the troupes and Army of the Ca∣tholickes, was ouerthrowne from his horse to the ground, ta∣ken prisoner vpon his faith, and against all right, diuine, and hu∣mane, slaine with a Pistoll behinde on his head, by one called Montesquian. The Catholicke Romanes made great reioycings at that death, thinking to haue gained as much, as if they of the Reli∣gion had now no helpe at all. There were also great triumphes made at Rome. Many Gentlemen and valiant Captaines were slaine with the Prince. The Admirall de Chastillon hauing ga∣thered together his troupes vnder the authoritie of Henry de Bourbon, Prince of Nauarre, and of Henry de Bourbon, Prince of Conde, sonne and successor of Lewis, both of them as yet ve∣ry young, hartned so euery one, that the Catholicke Romanes willing to pursue their victory, with an inconsiderate boldnesse, were beaten downe before Coignac, & had other notable great losses after that. The Princes, the Admirall, the Lords, & Gen∣tlemen, Captaines and souldiers of the Army, renewed their former oath to do their duties in opposing themselues against the violence of the enemies, to procure a good peace to the glory of God, to the rest of the churches, & of al the kingdome. The Queene of Nauarre brought the Prince her sonne into the Armie: and after hauing made many good remonstrances and reasons to encourage and stirre him to the performance of his dutie towards God and his Country, she retired into Rochell. Then waxed the warre hotter then before, with diuers exploits and chaunces on both sides.
An Imperiall Iourney.The estates of the Empire were assembled at Francford the 14. day of Aprill, to prouide for the affaires of Almaine. The Popes present to the Duke of Alua.In the same moneth the Pope sent vnto the Duke of Alua as a recompence of so great paines as he had taken to maintaine the Popedome, an helme, and a paire of gloues, blessed with great ceremonies on Christmas day. Paul the third sent the like present vnto the Emperour Charles the fift, after he ouercame the Protestant Princes. The death of the Sieur de Andelot.The seuenth day of May, Francis de Colligni, Sieur d' An∣delot, Colonell of the French footemen, very affectionate to∣wards the maintaining of the true Religion, a Knight without all feare, and greatly dreaded of the Gospells enemies, di∣ed of poison in the Towne of Saintes. Many other great Lords and Gentlemen of the Religion, died in the same manner be∣fore and after, by the cunning art of certaine poysoners sent through Fraunce, and better recompenced for such execrable acts, then the wisest, valiantest, and faithfullest seruants of the Crowne. The Duke de dreux Ponts being entred into France mau∣gre the hinderance of Claude d'Lorraine, Duke d' Aumale, besie∣ged and tooke Charite, a Towne placed vpō the Riuer of Loire, and passing forward to ioyne himselfe to the Princes Army, arriued vpon the marches of Limosin, where an hotte feauer tooke him, and carried him out of the world, the 11. day of Iune, leauing for Commander of his troupes, Wolrad Count de Mas∣feld, who brought his Army nigh to the Princes foure daies af∣ter this accident, and performed greatly his due, with the other Lords that accompanied him in all the rest of this warre: here∣of is a witnesse that which happened in the encounter which was the 25. of that moneth: at what time, if a great ruine had not come, the Army of the Catholicke Romanes had bene o∣uerthrowne: yet they loft a great number of their auantgard, and afterward the Princes got many places in Poictou: Al∣though the Princes were strong, yet they neuer ceased to de∣maund peace: but their Herauld was not suffred to carrie their request vnto the king: so warre was continued, and the Prin∣ces besieged Poiters, where they lost time and many people, by
diseases happening in their Campe. Whilest things were thus confused in Fraunce and Flaun∣ders, the Emperour Maximilian, the 18. day of August,Exercise of Religion in Austriche. suffe∣red the Lords and Gentlemen of the Archduche of Austrich, to enioy a free exercise of Religion, in their Townes, Villages, and Castles, after the doctrine of the confession of Ausbourge. The 27. of the same moneth,Great Duke of Thuscane. Cosme de Medices Duke of Florence, was created, and after solemnly proclaimed at Rome, great Duke of Thuscane, by the declaration of the Pope Pius the fift. The Parliament of Paris condemned the Admirall as guiltie of treason,An arrest a∣gainst the Admirall. who notwithstanding was of great authoritie in the Princes Army, couragiously acquiting himselfe of the charge he carried, without any apprehension of the daungers wherevnto he was still subiect, by murderers and poisoners, which were daily sent to sley him. One of which (who had once bene his chamberlaine) was put to death for the like attempt, by the sentence of the Princes, Lords, and Captains of the Ar∣my, the 21. of September. After the one Army had long time sought the other,The battle of Montcōtour final∣ly they encountred in the plaine of Montcontour the third of October, and there was a generall battaile, wherein after great losse of both sides, but more of the Princes, especially of their Lansquenets, and a part of their French footemen, the field re∣mained vnto the Catholicke Romanes: which made great tri∣umphes thereof through Europe. But in lieu of following their victory, they stayed vpon the siege of the Towne of S. Iohn d' Angeli, which was yeelded to them by composition at the end of certaine weekes: during which time, the besieged occupied themselues so well, that the Catholickes lost many thousands of men, and that of the most resolute of their troupes, by meanes whereof, the Princes had meanes to reassure theyr people, to gather in their forces, and to prouide for the affaires of warre, so that the Catholickes found themselues againe to begin. The sixteenth of Nouember,Pardon of the Duke of Alua. the Duke of Alua caused to bee published in the lowe Countries certaine Letters of
absolution and pardon of the king of Spaine, for such as were absent and would returne into their houses but this deceit ser∣ued for nothing but to bring in birdes too much alreadie ta∣med with the too much violence of so bloudie a Fowler. A coniuration in England.The 24. there was discouered in England, a coniuration or rebellion of certaine Earles, which would haue planted Po∣perie in that Kingdome: But the Queene prouided there so well for all things, that their forces remained wholy vnpro∣fitable. A continuati∣on of warre in France.The third of December, S. Iohn d' Angeli was yeelded by composition. Sansac & other Catholick Romanes, were shame∣fully chased from before the Towne of Vezelay in Bourgongne, after great losse of his brauest souldiers, to the number of 150. The rest of the yeare passed in diuers exployts of warre, heere and there, to the great hurt of both parts, and to the ruine of the kingdome. In the beginning of the yeare, 1570. the Princes and Lords of the Religiō of the kingdome of France, desiring peace, had diuers negotiations about it: but at that time nothing was concluded, but warre continued, the Churches then being ve∣ry desolate. Troubles for matters of Religion in Almaine.The Theologians of the Countrey of Saxony being then in great contention for the intelligence of certaine Articles of Christian doctrine namely of Iustification of free will, of good workes, of things indifferent, and of the presence of the body and bloud of Iesus Christ in the Supper. By occasion whereof, they assembled themselues in a Towne of the Duchie d' Au∣male, called Zeruest: where by the stepping in of a certaine Doctor of Tubingue, called Iames Andrew (a man then very re∣nowmed in all Almaine: through the Prouinces whereof hee had not ceased certain yeares to runne to cause that monstrous opinion of the vbiquitie of Christs body to be receiued: by the meanes whereof, the errors of Nestorius and of Eutiches auntient heretikes, and their complices, are againe renewed) there was made a certaine agreement, which after was reiected and controwled by diuers Theologians. Heerevpon after∣ward happened greater troubles, which euen at this day
doo endure, by the practises and slaunders of that vbiquitarie Doctor. Whilest the Christians contended with their voyces, with their writings, and blowes of sworde in diuers places of Europe, and that the Westerne Antichrist sought by all meanes to maintaine his tyrannie, the Antichrist of the East did what hee could by meanes of Selim Soliman his successor, the Turke, to encrease his domination. For Selim sent his Embassador,The Turkes denounce war to the Vene∣tians. who arriued the 27. of March at Venice, and denounced warre a∣gainst the Venetians, if they refused to yeeld him the Ile of Cyprus. Which they refusing, there was preparation for warre on both sides. The 4. of Aprill the Ministers of the Churches of Lithua∣nia and Sathogitia, comprehended in the kingdome of Polongne,A Sinode in Polongne. held a Sinode in the Towne of Sendomire: where they agreed vpon certaine Articles touching the Mediatorship of Iesus Christ, and the holy Supper, to the end they might all agree in one concordance of doctrine. During this time, the troubles of France continued.Exhortation vnto pacifica∣tion. The Electors Palatin and of Saxonie, assembled at Heidelberge, with certaine Princes and great Lords of Almaine, for to honour the marriage of Duke Cassimere, who espowsed Elizabeth daugh∣ter of the Duke of Saxonie, sent large Letters to the king, to ex∣hort and induce him to enter into a pacification. About the end of Iune, the king of Polongne and the Mus∣couite, made a truce for three yeares.A truce. The Muscouite was then sore troubled with extreame famine. In the moneth of Iuly,An Imperiall Iourney. the estates of the Empire were as∣sembled at Spire, to prouide for the affaires & quietnesse of Al∣maine. The Emperor was there in person, with his two daugh∣ters, Marie, and Elizabeth, which were affianced vnto the kings of Spaine and France, vnto which they were sent. In the moneth of August the Duke of Alua put to death in the Towne of Antwerpe a great number of souldiers of the garrison of Valenciennes,Executions to death. for a mutinie against the Count de Lodron theyr Captaine. After by the space of certaine moneths, hee remained peaceable in his gouernment of the
lowe Countries, which he forraged at his pleasure, heaping vp a maruellous bootie to himselfe. The 3. Edict of pacificatiō.The third ciuill warre tooke an end in France, and the E∣dict of pacification was published in the Parliament of Paris, the 11. day of August. The death of Iohn Bren∣cius the fa∣ther of vbi∣quitie.Iohn Brencius, a Minister in the Duchie of Witemberge, of the age of 69. yeares, and who had begun to preach & write after the first Doctors of our time, died the 11. day of Septem∣ber. Certaine yeares before his death, he had published by di∣uers Imprinted bookes, a new opinion to maintaine the carnall presence of Iesus Christ in his holy Supper. The summe of this opinion (willing to attribute to the flesh of Iesus Christ a presence in all places, as well as to his diuine nature) was, that the humane and diuine nature being inseperably vnited in one alone person, the humane is in each place, as well as the diuine. But in the explication of this mysterie, he maintained that the personall vnion of these two natures in Iesus Christ, doo onely signifie that they are together, & not otherwise in Iesus Christ, then in S. Peter and other seruants of God, according to the essence: But as to the efficacie, that all the properties of the di∣uine nature, are really, and indeed dispersed and communica∣ted to the humane nature, so that thereby hauing egall maie∣stie and power with the diuine, the said diuine nature worketh and doth nothing without it. Although the authoritie of this person serued to the increase of this dangerous errour, yet there wanted not for many learned men which opposed themselues betimes against this errour, and prooued euen to Brencius him∣selfe (without that either he or any of his Disciples could an∣swer pertinently therevnto) that if such an opinion of the vbi∣quitie of the flesh of Iesus Christ, and of the personall vnion of the two natures, according to the definition of Brencius, were true, the two natures of Iesus Christ should be seperated euen according to the essence, as well in Iesus Christ, as in S. Peter, and other the faithfull: and Christ should be God after the flesh. Behold a blasphemie which establisheth the heresie of Nestorius, seperating the two natures of Christ, and which on the other side confoundeth the properties of those two
natures, as did the heretike Eutiches. Notwithstanding that they discouered to Brencius, the absurdities and blasphemies rising vpon his opinion: yet left not he to maintaine it, hauing a Disciple called Iames Andreas, who with certaine other that after rose vp, added errors vnto errors. And which is worse, Brencius in the end of his life, in the place to humble himselfe before God, for so molesting the Churches, in the making of his testament, thundred against the Churches which approo∣ued not his vbiquitie, being so farre audacious, euen he alone, who could not vnto the purpose reply to the arguments of cer∣taine Doctors which liuely refuted him, as to condemne all the Churches of France, England, Scotland, Suetia, and others. This testament was maintained by his Disciples, and from that time, till this instant, hath caused great euils, and kindled a fire which cannot be extinguished, if God set not too his hand in some especiall maner. The last day of October, East and West, Friseland, Holland,Deluges in Friseland, France, and other Coun∣tries. Zeland, Brabant, and other places thereabouts, were sore tor∣mented and beaten with a straunge tempest of windes: and two dayes after, the Sea swelled, and hauing broken and ouer∣throwne her dikes and leuies, drowned many Countries and infinite people and cattaile, with such an astonishment of all, that it was feared all the lowe Countries would haue bene swal∣lowed vp. There happened as much in the Balthike sea, especial∣ly at Hambourge. There was also great ouerflowings of waters in France, about the end of this yeare. About this time the Turke made quicke warre vpon the Venetians in the Ile of Cyprus with a puissant Army,Nicosia taken which by assault tooke Nicosia, one of the greatest Townes thereof, wherein there was made a cruell and bloudie butcherie of the besieged in the moneth of September. The fourteenth day of Nouember,Marriage of the King of Spaine Phillip King of Spaine espowsed his Nieco Mario, the daughter of the Emperor Maxi∣milian. The 17. of Nouember,Earthquakes. a great Earthquake hapned at Ve∣nice, Ferrara, and other places of Italy, whervpon followed mar∣uellous tuines and desolations especially at Ferrara.
Marriage of the King of France. Deluges in France.The 26. and others following, Charles King of Fraunce, espowsed at Mezieres, Elizabeth the daughter of the Emperor Maximilian. The 16. of December, the Riuer of Rhene so ouerflowed, that in 80. yeares had not beene seene the like: wherevpon many discourses published, remembring the miseries passed, and the wonders happening, teach vs euery one to feare and preuent the euils to come. An Imperiall Iourney.The 11. of the same moneth, the Emperor assembled the estates at Spire, to prouide for the affaires of Almaine, and to giue audience vnto straunge Embassadors. Peace betwixt Denmarke and Snede.The Kings of Denmarke and Snede, made peace together the 13. of the same moneth, hauing bene at warre together 10. yeares, or there abouts. The 20. of that moneth, the Embassadors of the Prote∣stant Princes, made a long oration to the King of France, bee∣ing then at Ʋillers, to exhort him aboue all things to keepe his Edict of pacification: which he promised to doo. The French Churches lifted vp their heads after many stormes. Ieachim, Elector of Brandebourge, died the second day of Ianuary, and 11. dayes after, deceased also his brother Iohn, Marquesse of Brandebourge. Vaiuoda of Transiluania.The 13. day of March, Iohn Vaiuoda of Transiluania, suffe∣ring himselfe to be gouerned by a pernitious heretike, called Blandrata, one that counterfeited himself a Phisitian, was slaine by the drugges of the said Blandrata, and died without heires, by meanes whereof, Stephen Bathory was chosen Ʋaiuoda in his roome. A disputation against the Anabaptists.The 28. day of May, began a disputation betwixt Peter Datherius, Minister of the Gospell, and 15. Preachers, Ana∣baptists, in the presence of Frederick Elector Palatin, who had giuen them safe conduct. The Articles in the disputation, to the number of 13. touched that which is in chiefe debate at this day, betwixt them and the reformed Churches: namely of the authoritie of Canonicke bookes of the old and new Testa∣ment, of the vnitie of the diuine essence, and of the destination of the three persons subsisting therein: of the one flesh and
humane nature of Iesus Christ, borne of the Virgin Mary: of the Israelitike and Christian Church: of originall sinne of little children: of iustification: of the resurrection of the flesh: of excommunication and diuorce: of the proprietie and possessi∣on of goods: of the Magistrate, and of criminall iustice: of an oath: of the Baptisme of litle children: and of the communion of the body and bloud of Iesus Christ in the Supper. This dis∣putation was set downe in writing, and continued from the 28. of May, vntil the 19. of Iune, without any fruite, because of the obstinacie of the Anabaptists, which the Elector sent away safe, forbidding them to maintain opiniōs, or teach in his countries. The 25. of May, the Pope, the King of Spaine,A league a∣gainst the Turke. Raining of corne. and the Ve∣netians, made a league against the Turke. The fourth day of Iune, it rayned great abundance of Turnep-rootes, Peas, and other kinde of corne, at Goldtberge, Lemberge, and Lauben, in Solesia: whereof the peisants and poore Countrey people made bread, and were nourished in a great famine which afflicted the Countrey. On the other side in base Saxonie, in a litle Towne called Leubourge, nie to Lune∣bourge and Hambourge, two Vsurers and sellers of corne were destroyed through a maruellous iudgement of God. The one fell dead suddenly as he opened his barne doore, the corne whereof also was eaten and carried away with vermine: And the other Corne-seller, as he was going to drowne himself, was taken and carried to prison, where he hanged himselfe the night following. About the same time,Rodes of the Muscouites. the Muscouites made courses and strange forragings vppon the frontiers of the Kingdome of Snede, and meaning to enter further, they were constrained to retire to goe to defend their owne countrie, which the Tarta∣rians put to fire and sword. The first day of August,Famagoste yeelded. Famagoste a capitall Towne in the Ile of Cyprus, hauing sustained a long siege, and diuers furi∣ous assaults, was yeelded by composition, to Mahomet Bassa, who in the place to keepe his promise, caused to be slaine all the Christian Captains and souldiers which came towards him, and certaine daies after, caused one Mark Anthony Bragandin, a Venetian Gentleman, Gouernour of Famagoste, to bee
scorched and broyled aliue, and so got all the whole Ile for Selim, whose successors are at this day peaceable possessors thereof. A strange Sun.The 29. of September, almost through all Almaine the Sun was seene of the colour of bloud. The same day the Towne of Reuel, the chiefe Towne of Liuonia, was sucked and spoyled by the Muscouites. A Nauall bat∣taile at Le∣pante.The seuenth of October, the memorable Nauall battaille in the gulfe of Lepante, in the Mediterrane Sea, betwixt the Army of the League, and that of the Turkes: Selim lost there 15. thousand men, and the most part of his Vessels. The Chri∣stians tooke a great number of prisoners. This victorie greatly abated the pride of the Turkes: yet the Venetians certain time after, perceiuing the estate of their affaires required peace, they sought, and obtained it of Selim. A conference at Dresde.The tenth day of October, the Theologians and Ministers of the Electorship of Saxonie, assembled at Dresde to prouide for troubles alreadie come, for matters of Religion, and they a∣greed to publish a confession of the person and incarnation of Iesus Christ, of his maiestie, ascention, and sitting on the right hand of God: also of the Supper of the Lord. The other Theo∣logians of Saxonie, opposed themselues by writings Imprin∣ted, against the said confession: wherevpon many debates fol∣lowed. The Duke of Nothfolke beheaded.A coniuration against the Queene of England, was miracu∣lously discouered, and the Duke of Northfolke Captaine of that coniuration, arrested and condemned vpon Letters, and after executed to death. Almaine was greatly afflicted in many places with daun∣gerous diseases, and with extreame famine in Snabie, and in Bauiere. The Churches of France were a good quietnesse, because of the good countenance that the King shewed vnto them of the Religion. The sixt day of Ianuary, The Riuer of Ʋistule passing in the Duchie of Pruse,Strange won∣ders in Pruse. nigh vnto Thorne, was conuerted into bloud the space of three dayes, to the great feare of all the
people: hauing againe taken his ordinary colour, about nine of the clocke at night, there was a straunge Earth-quake, two cloudes rent and let fal their waters, with so great a force, that fortie houses were carried away by the furie of the Riuer, sixe Arches of Thornebridge ouerthrowne, and 300. persons drow∣ned. There fell also from heauen, stones of ten pound waight, wherewith many people were slaine. The 22. of the same mo∣neth, the Towne of Inspruck was troubled with so terrible an Earthquake, which endured three dayes, that the most part of the houses, the Pallace of the Arch-duke of Austriche, the Church and the Printing-house went downe: by meanes wher∣of, the Arch-duke was constrained to retire into a great Parke, where were nourished diuers sorts of sauage and wilde beastes, euery man iudging the world should haue ended. Munchen in Bauiere and Ausbourge, had their part of this feare. The Castle of Wirtzbourge was burnt the 29. of that mo∣neth, so suddenly,Fire in Wirtz∣bourge. that the Bishop had no leisure to carrie any thing away but his shert. He lost by that fire, all his Registers, titles, and papers. The winter hauing bene very sharpe,A sharp winter this moneth conti∣nued all Ianuarie and Februarie exceeding sharpe, and extra∣ordinarie. In the moneth of February the Duke of Alua thinking to haue come to the vpper hand of all his purposes,Exactions of the Duke of Alua, and re∣solutions in Flaunders. laid vpon the Flemmings great exactions: and amongst other, the tenth pen∣ney perpetual. And notwithstanding remonstrances vnto him of the impossibilitie thereof: and that without the aduise of the Estates of the country he could not charge nor taxe them, yet resolued he to put it in execution. But the people, especial∣ly of Bruxelles, sought all means to exempt themselues from it. Such as were absent, beholding this ouerture thus made, gathe∣red in companies here and there to busie the Spaniard: as they did soone after. For the first day of Aprill the Count de la Marche, sieur de Lumey, arriuing secretly frō England, surprised the Ile & the Towne of Brielle in Holland, & straight Flusshing, a notable hauen of Zeland and Emchuse, forsooke the Duke of Alua his part, who to remedie it, sent the Count de Bossu with
an Army of Spaniards into Holland, who the ninth of the same moneth sacked Roterdam, and slew a great number of the Bur∣gesses. The Count Lodowick, the Prince of Orange his brother, hauing obtained a new Army in France, with certain Lords of the Religion, by the Kings consent suprised Monts in Hainaut, the 24. of May, where shortly after hee was enclosed by the Duke of Alua his troupes, houering thereabouts and stopping the passages. Valenciennes was also take, but straight againe reco∣uered by the Spaniards.Appearance of rest in France. Then also it seemed that France should haue bin peaceable for a long time, & that the reformed Chur∣ches should no more be disquieted in time to come: namely, in regard of a marriage concluded of Henry Prince of Nauarre, with Margarite the kings sister, as also that then the Admirall seemed in great credit in the Court, by means wherof the most part of men, especially they of the Religion, imagined already a Gospell without the Crosse, and a worldly Christ. The death of Pope Pius the 5. and election of Gregory, 13.Pope Pius the fift died the first day of May, and the 13. after his obsequies ended, the Cardinalls elected for Pope, a Boulognois, Doctor of the Canon lawe, called Iaques Boncom∣pagne, against the purpose of diuers competitors. He called him∣selfe Gregorie 13. and for his entry gaue order for warre against the Turkes, confirmed the decrees of the Councell of Trent, made great a sonne and two nephewes of his, ratified the pro∣mises of marriage of the Prince of Nauarre, with Margarite of France, whereof his predecessor made difficultie, and carefully and readily prouided for the good assurance of his temporall greatnesse. The death of the Queene of Nauarre.The ninth day of Iune, Iane d' Albert, Queene of Nauarre, an excellent Princesse amongst all them of her time, daughter of Henry d' Albert, and of Margarite d' Valois, sister of king Fran∣cis the first, going to Paris to giue order for diuers things re∣quisit for the honor of the Prince her sonnes marriage, fell sud∣denly sicke and died, to the great griefe of them of the Religi∣on, and of all persons that loued the rest of France, which this Princesse had procured by all meanes.The ouer∣throw of the Duke de Medina Coeli. The 12. of Iune, the Duke de Medina Coeli, being sent from Spaine into Flaunders, to gouerne in the Duke of Alua his
place, was shamefully ouerthrowne by them of Flushing, lost 12. hundreth Spaniards, 16. ships, and foure of them were burnt in his presence, hee sauing himselfe by flight. The bootie was very great, and almost inestimable. On the 15. day, an alliance was confirmed at Paris betwixt the King of France, and the Queene of England,Alliance. who sent thi∣ther the Lord Clinton her Admirall. The 16. the Prince of Orange published the causes where∣fore hee againe tooke Armes against the Spaniards and their adherents, in the lowe Countries. The 25. certaine Gentlemen of Frise, with good troupes, holding the Prince of Orange his part, seized vpō Dordrec and other places of Holland, which ioyned themselues on that side. The exercise of Religion was again set vp, to the great despite of the Duke of Alua and the Spaniards. Three dayes after,The Prince of Orange iusti∣fied himselfe to the Empe∣rour. the Prince of Orange writ at large vnto the Emperor, shewing him the causes of that warre. In the mean while, certain Almain Lords leuied Reiters to succour the Duke of Alua. Sigismond August, king of Polongne,The death of the King of Polongne. died the first of Iuly without heire-males, which gaue occasion vnto Katherine de Medices, Queene mother and Regent in France, to send Em∣bassadors into Polongne, to the end to obtaine the Crowne for Henry Duke d' Antou, her second sonne then liuing. The 19. of Iuly,War in ye lowe Countrie. the Emperour put the Prince of Orange to banishment from the Empire, and pronounced him acqui∣ted from all priuiledges and rights, and all his goods confis∣cated, if he continued with strong hand to enter into the lowe Countries. This notwithstanding, the Prince pursued that which he had begun. But in this moneth of Iuly, 7. or 8. thou∣sand French men marching to the succours of the besieged at Monts in Hainaut, before they came there, were defeated, their chieftaines taken, and they of Monts straighter kept in. The Prince passed Rhene & tooke Ruremond, the 4. of August. Louaine yeelded. Maligues, and certain other Townes were sur∣prised. After he drew towards Monts to succor his brother. But the news of the pitious estate of Frāce, brought such a change,
that the Prince was constrained to cut off his way, to enter his troupes, and retier himselfe into Holland, whether he was called by the estates of the Countrey, being accompanied with a small number of people. This retrait so encouraged the Duke of Alua, hauing now nothing to hinder him, that the 21. of September, he made himselfe maister of Monts by composi∣tion, and kept promise with the Count Lodowick, causing him safely to be conducted vnto the lands of the Empire. After this, Maligues was abandoned by them, which the Prince left there, and all other places before taken, were taken againe into the hands of the Spaniards. From Monts the Duke went to∣wards Malines the first day of October. Certaine Burgesses and all the Cleargie met him with Crosses and Banners, but it serued for nothing, for as much as they had receiued the Prince into their Towne, he gaue the pillage and spoile of the Towne to the souldiers, which tooke their pleasure there three daies, slew many men, and violated many women and maidens. Horrible mur∣ders in Frāce.Whilest the lowe Countrie Churches sobbed thus vnder such tempests, they of France which were thought should haue enioyed some long rest, were rudely beaten, and as it were, flat∣ly ouerthrowne by a maruellous straunge accident. Wee haue before spoken of the death of the Queene of Nauarre, as she came to Paris, about the marriage of the Prince her son. This Prince, afterward called the King of Nauarre, Henry de Bour∣bon his Cousin Prince of Conde, Gaspar de Coligni, great Admi∣ral of France, le Count de la Rochefoucand, the Marquesse de Rei∣nel, many Lords, Gentlemen and Captaines, which had alwaies borne Armes against the Catholike Romanes, came to the Court about that marriage, at the kings request. This marriage hauing bin solemnized vpon Monday, the 18. of August, the Friday following the Admirall was grieuously wounded with the blowe of an Hargabush, shot out of a certaine window, by a man then not sufficiently knowne, called Maureuel, a wa∣ged murderer, yea one of the most execrablest manquellers of the world: who afterward by the iust iudgement of God, lost the same arme with which he gaue that detestable blowe. The Sunday following, the Admirall was most traitorously
slaine in his chamber, and cast dead out of the windowes vpon the pauement: where he was knowne of Henry Duke of Guise. After, they rushed vpon the other Lords, Gentlemen & Cap∣taines, which were slaine also: some within the Castle de Lou∣uine, others without. This was done betimes in the morning. All that day and morning was employed by such as they call Catholicke Romanes, in sleying men and women of the Reli∣gion, many, not sparing women bigge with childe, no nor litle children. They continued this the dayes following, but not in so great number, because the murderers found not any more to sley. The day of the wounding, and the Sunday, the King dispatched Letters expresly vnto the Gouernours of the Pro∣uinces, whereby he aduertised them, that that disorder hapned besides his knowledge, and to his great griefe, by the practises and enmities of the house of Guise, and that he determined to take good order therefore; in the meane time, hee would that his Edict of pacification should in each point be maintained: Briefly, he imputed the Admiralls wounding and death (whom in the said Letters he called his Cousin) to the particular qua∣rels of the houses of Chastillon, and Guise. But meer contrary, on thursday the 28. hee declared and caused to be published, that that massacre and horrible murder had beene done by his expresse commaundement, and to preuent a conspiration of the Admirall and his partakers: wherof notwithstanding nei∣ther he nor his Councellors made it appeare, nor could pro∣duce any profit, although it was much prooued and desired of many. Whilest great and litle were thus hungring and thir∣sting after innocent bloud, the same Sunday the 24. of August, certain Priests by Art made a great Thorn-tree in the church-yard of S. Innocent, flourish at noone time of the day, and cryed, a myracle, a myracle. This encreated the rage of the people a∣gainst them of the Religion. And although the Priests in the meane while filled well their powches by such an inuention, making the people beleeue that the Catholicke Romane Re∣ligion began now to flourish againe in Fraunce: yet their de∣uise was soone after discouered, and the tree remained destroy∣ed: but euen then when it flourished, some said that God had
shewed to all mens eyes the innocencie of such as were slaine, and that by such a token hee assured his Church that it should not perish as the persecutors pretended, but that it should flo∣rish vnder the crosse against all hope of men, as that Tree flo∣rished extraordinarily. Moreouer certain weekes after le Sieurs de Briquemald & de Caragues, excellent men, & which had done great seruices to the Crowne, the one by Armes, and the other in affaires of iustice, were (in hatred of the Admirall and of Religion) hanged & strangled within Paris, in the presence of the king himself, his mother & his brethren. They maintained euen to the last sigh the innocency of the dead Admiral, and of them of the religiō, shewing a singular cōstancy in their deaths. Certaine yeares after they were iustified by the Edict of Henry the third the next king, and their names declared honorable: as also the before mentioned massacre was cōdemned & disa∣vowed. But men cōtented not themselues thus to haue imbru∣ed the towne of Paris with blood, but in like sort were all of the Religion handled at Meaux in Brie, at Troys in Champagne, at Rouen, at Orleans, at le Charite, at Burges, at Lyons, at Romains in Dauphine, at Thoulouse, at Bourdeaux, with so barbarous disloy∣alties and cruelties that scarce our posteritie will beleeue it. In few dayes with them of Paris were slain more then thirty thou∣sand persons, olde and yong, of all quallities, men, women and children, as bookes in Print do shewe euery day. The King of Nauarre and the Prince of Conde, were constrained to abiure Religion. The Parliament of Paris published a diffamatorie arrest and iudgement against the Admirall, whose bodie was taken from the gibet, and so secretly buried that his enemies could not finde it out. Many persons forsooke Religion, some vpon infirmitie, others vpon despight: so that so hard a proofe discerned the false from the true Christians. Rochell, Sancerre, Nismes in Languedoc, Montaubon in Querci, and a fewe other Townes in the kingdome, after diuers consultations maintai∣ned themselues and kept the exercise of Religion, which put the authors of the murthers and confusions into a new paine, as shall be touched hereafter. Amongst so many troubles & commencements of grea∣ter
sorrowes,A new starre. a new Starre appeared in heauen as great as the day Starre, nigh the Starre Cassiopec, of the figure of a Lo∣zenge. This beganne the ninth day of Nouember at night. It stirred not from the place the space of three weekes. It was thought to be like the Starre which appeared to the wise men which came from the East, to worship Iesus Christ in Bethle∣hem, straight after his birth. This Starre appeared in seuen, the space of nine moneths or thereabouts. Hereof were ma∣ny discourses made by diuers learned men. Concerning the lowe Countries▪ after the Princes retrait aboue mentioned,Exploits of warre in Hol∣land and Ze∣land. the waight of the warre fell vpon Holland and Zeland, whither the Duke of Alua sent the Captaine Montdragon with twentie Ensignes of Wallons, which to the great astonishment of euery one got the Ile of Suitbeuerland, and constrained the Princes troupes to leuie the siege before a Towne called Tergoes. In the meane while the Duke mar∣ched with his Armie, and the 21. of Nouember tooke and spoyled Zutphen, a Towne in Holland. And to feare others and drawe them to yeeld the sooner, without delay all manner of cruelties were executed by the Spaniards and Wallons in that Towne. Frideric de Toledo the Dukes sonne and Lieutenant, mar∣ched from Zutphen to Narden, which is an other litle Towne, wherof the Inhabitants at the yeelding of themselues the 30. day of Nouember, were so cruelly handled against the rights of reddition and of war, amongst people of any humanitie, that men might iudge that this sacking and spoyle with that of Ro∣terdam, were the onely motiue and cause of the rising of o∣ther Townes which then were vpon the point to returne vn∣der the yoake. After the taking of this Towne the Army drew straight to Harlem, the Inhabitants whereof determined to defend it, rather then submit it selfe vnto the mercy of people without mercy. Indeed they bore themselues valiantly, and sustained diuers assaultes with the aide of certaine souldiers which were sent them by the Prince, and kept good defence vntill the 13. of Iuly the yeare following. In the yeare 1573. the Townes of Rochel & Sancerre were
cruelly handled,Sieges of Ro∣chel and San∣cerre. assailed and bearen by the Catholick Romans, but with a diuerse issue. As for Rochel being well garded and defended, the newes also of the report that the Duke of Anion should be king of Polongne, were cause that Rochel was deliue∣red, and obtained peace: yea and remained with her priuiled∣ges. They of Sancerre hauing beene troubled with an hor∣rible and grieuous famine the space of certaine moneths, re∣ceiued some fauourable dealing by the comming of the Po∣lonian Embassadors, which then came into Fraunce to con∣duct away their new king. These things ended in the moneth of Iuly, to the confusion of the Catholicke Romanes, which lost more then twentie thousand men before Rochel. Some Churches then began to respire, and many tooke againe good courage to redresse some portion of so many ruines. The siege and losse of Harlē.Warre was also kindled in Holland, especially at the siege of Harlem, where the besieged men and women, executed maruellously their duties: but not being able to be succoured, oppressed also with famine: finally they yeelded themselues the 13. of Iuly at the discretion of Frederick de Toledo, who drowned, hanged, & beheaded, more then two thousand soul∣diers. The Burgesses escaped death by the payment of a great summe of money, which they straight disbursed. In the moneth of April before, they of Flushing obtained a memorable victory ouer the Army of the Duke of Alua, and cast into the sea a great number of Spaniards. After the taking of Harlem, Frederic besieged Alemar, a Towne nigh therevn∣to, resoluing with himselfe to make a goodly butchery of the Burgesses, if they could obtaine it. But he was constrained to leaue his siege after great losse. The Prince on the other side found meanes to obtaine the strong Castle of Rameken, and the Towne of S. Gertrudenberghe. They of Linchuse ouercame the Nauall Army of the Count de Bossu, and tooke him prisoner the 12. day of October, whilest Leiden was besieged of the Spaniards. The second day of September, the Duke of Alua forsooke the lowe Countries, making his iourney through the Franche Counte, Sauoy and Piemont, to embarke himselfe at Genes, and
so to saile into Spaine, carrying with him an infinit bootie from the lowe Countries, which he left in great heate of warre be∣twixt the hands of Lewis Requescens, great commaunder of Ca∣stile, a man in appearance of soft condition, but no lesse felloni∣ous and cruell, then his predecessor in that gouernment. Iohn de Austriche made warre in Barbarie about the ende of this yeare, and got Tunes,Warre in Bar∣bary. builded a strong Citadell betwixt Tunes and the Goulette, to resist the Turkes: after hee withdrew into Sicilie. The great Commander meaning to driue away the Prince  of Orange, incamped before Middelbourge in Zeland,Requescens ouerthrowne, and Middle∣bourg yeelded armed a puissant Fleete, about 80. vessels, and the 24. of Ianuary, 1574. made saile towards Zeland, but his Army encountred the Prin∣ces Army: In so much that after a long combat, where that Commaunder commaunded not, but looking ouer the Dikes, to iudge of the blowes with more assurance, he sawe the Span∣iards ouerthrown with his Wallons, wherof some were drow∣ned, others carried away prisoners, and almost all their vessels lost. They of Middelbourg wayed with the siege, and all hope which they had of succours, turned into dispaire: they yeelded themselues a moneth after. In the beginning of February, the warre waxed hotte in Barbary, betwixt the Spaniards, Moores, and Turkes. The 18. of the same moneth, Henry Duke of Aniou,Henry de Valois king of Polongne. arri∣uing from France in Polongne, made his entrie into Cracouia, and was crowned three dayes after, with accustomed solem∣nities. About this time, the Venetians beeing tyred with warre,Peace betwixt the Venetians & the Turke. entred an accord with Selym, whereat the Pope and the King of Spaine were not content. Fraunce entred into new troubles.Troubles in France. They tooke them to Arms in Normandie and Poictou. The king in great hast retired himselfe from S. Germaines to Paris. From that time followed great chaunges in France, there then seeming to be no more a∣ny question of Religion, but of the estate: a thing notwith∣standing of longer discourse then I need now set down, seeing it i handled in particular bookes depending vpon the history of this time.
The ouer∣throw of the Duke Christopher, and of the Count Lodowick.The warre continued in Holland, and the Spaniards en∣camped before Leyden: but they were constrained to leaue their siege the 23. day of March to goe meete the Duke Chri∣stopher, son of the Elector Palatin, & the Counties Lodowick and Henry de Nassan brethren, which came downe in the strength of winter towards Mastriche, with a good number of footmen and horsemen. These Lords being aduertised that the Span∣iards came to finde them, aduanced themselues, and encoun∣tred in a field of thornes called Morkerheide, where the Lans∣quenets crying after siluer, refused the combat: insomuch that the Lords were vanquished and slaine all three, vpon the fourth day of April. The death of Camerarius.Ioachim Camerarius, a learned man amongst all the Al∣maine, an inward and familiar friend of Phillip Melancton, dyed at Leipsic, beeing of the age of 74. yeares, the 17. day of Aprill. The death of Cosme de Medices.The 21. day, died Cosme de Medices Duke of Florence, and great Duke of Thuscane, leauing a sonne, vnto whom the state and tytle of great Duke, was confirmed by the Pope. Antwerpe pil∣led by the Spaniards.The great Commaunder thinking to haue gained all, by the ouerthrowe of the Count Lodowick, caused a generall par∣don to bee published in the Towne of Antwerpe, the 23 of A∣prill, but none came for it, so that the war continued. Yet three daies after this publication, the Spanish souldiers kindling a mutinie for want of their pay, entred into the Towne of Ant∣werpe by the fauour of the Castle, constraining the Burgesses to furnish them the summe of foure thousand Florents: to bring this to passe, they vsed great insolencies. They constrained al∣so the Gouernor and the Wallon souldiers to auoyd the towne, with intent to gorge themselues the more at their ease. They also set farther off, the ships which had the guard of the Hauen. The Princes Nauie hauing discouered these Ships, got quick∣ly hold of them, and carried them away in the Commaunders view, whilest he and his souldiers tooke their pastime in sacking of Antwerpe. The second besieging of Leiden.The Spaniards prceiuing that during their absence Leiden was not againe victualled, returned to besiege it the second day
of May, and held it closer then before, for in diuers places they made Forts, to the number of 22. vpon large and deep dikes, the most part invnited and strengthned with 2. or 3. Canons. A fire at Ve∣nice & Brux∣elles. The eleuen day of May a great part of S. Markes Pallace at Venice was burned, and two daies after a great number of hou∣ses at Venice with a notable losse for many Marchants. There happened as much at Bruxels in Brabant, the 24. of the same month, and the fire tooke hold of certaine Gunpowder which was in a Tower, which by the ruine thereof greatly endama∣ged all the Towne, and slew 15. persons. A great warre was then in France, especially in Poictou,The taking and death of Montgom∣mery. and in Normandie. Gabriel Counte de Montgommeri, hauing with a fewe men sustained the siege and diuers assaultes in the Castle of Danfronc, yeelded it by composition: but he was re∣serued and carried prisoner vnto Paris, where not long after by decree of the Parliament his head was cut off. In the meane while the Duke of Alencon the kings yongest brother, and the king of Nauarre, were as prisoners in the Court: and the Chur∣ches languished vnder so many confusions. The last day of May, Charles the ninth King of France,The death of Charles 9. dyed of the age of 34. yeares, in the wood of Ʋincennes, lea∣uing his kingdome much indebted, and maruellously full of broyles. Henry of Ʋalois, the third sonne of Henry the second, born in the yeare 1551. the 21. of September, beeing in Pologne when his brother Charles dyed, and vnderstanding the newes of his death, departed secretly that kingdome, and tooke pos∣session of that his mother had kept for him. He passed through Ʋenice, so into Piedmont, where he visited Margarite the Du∣chesse, his Aunt, who dyed soone after, and arriuing at Lyons in the beginning of September, hee caused certaine Edicts to be published against them of the Religion, who stood vpon their gard, seeing their new Prince threatned them so openly. A litle before his comming, Henry Montmorency Marshal de Danuile, and gouernor of Languedoc, entred in cōference with the prin∣cipals of the Religion, least that prouince & other nigh there∣vnto might come to ruine and destruction by ciuill warres, and to procure some rest for France.
The Prince of Conde retired into Almaine. The king descen∣ded into Languedoc, hauing failed to take Liuron, a smal Towne of Dauphine. About the end of this yeare, died Charles Cardi∣nall of Lorraine, one of the chiefe instruments of the troubles and confusions of France. Leyden deli∣uered.To come vnto the affaires of the low Countries. The siege of Leiden hauing continued all the Sommer, with appearance of extreame confusion for the besieged, the third day of Octo∣ber following, it was refreshed and victualled by the prowesse of a fewe souldiers, conducted by Boisot Admirall of Holland, beeing helped with the Sea-floud, which the Prince, by the meanes of pearcing of certaine Dikes, and sluces opening, had caused it to come farre, euen nigh vnto the Towne. The Span∣iards after they had fought a litle, seeing the water began to enclose them, abandoned their Forts, left their siege, and reti∣red away shamefully. The death of Selym.Selym Emperour of the Turkes, dyed about the 15. of De∣cember, after hee had ended the warre against the Walaques: wherin he lost an infinit number of men, and tooke peace with the Venetians. His sonne and successor Amurath, at his com∣ming in, caused fiue of his bretheren to be put to death, and two wiues of Selym, the one of which, who was great with childe, seeing the death of her children, threw her selfe to the ground out of an high windowe. Hauing thus prouided for his estate, hee prepared to make warre vpon the Polonians, some of which, called Kosaques, had succoured the Vayuoda of Wa∣tachia. The aftaires of France.The 12. of Ianuary, 1575. they of the Religion found meanes to get Arguesmortes, a strong Towne, and of great im∣portance in Languedoc, especially for Salt that comes from thence, and greatly furnisheth the Prouinces. The same day the Marshall d' Danuile made a league with them of the Religi∣on, and a publike and large declaration, containing the causes of his doings. The Duke de Montpensier tooke Fonte∣nay in Poictou, and Lusignen yeelded vpon composition. This notwithstanding the Churches of that Prouince, and other nigh vnto it, in some sort maintained themselues euen in the
middest of Armes. The Duke d' Ʋzes, sometimes affectioned vnto Religion, tooke Armes against it, but hee prospered not much therein. The Churches of Languedoc and Dauphine re∣dressed themselues after the King was retyred from Auignon: but their vnion with the Politikes or Malcontents, destroyed them within by the wicked liues of many of those Politikes bad∣ly aduised. King Henry the third was sacred at Reimes the fif∣teenth day of February, and espowsed soone after Louyse, the daughter of Nicholas Count de Ʋandemont in Lorraine: So that then and after, there was nothing in the Court of France but pastimes, such, as there is lesse euil to conceale, then profit to describe. In the mean while warre continued in Languedoc, well for the aduantage of them of the Religiō, being assisted of the Marshall de Danuille their confederate, vnto which part many enclined and ioyned themselues daily. In the moneth of April a negotiation and parley was made at Paris, betwixt the Kings Councell and the Deputies of Churches & the Politikes, with∣out any conclusion. But contrary the warre waxed hot in Dau∣phine & Languedoc with losse on both sides: but they of the re∣ligion were the stronger. And since we are vpon that point, we will set downe in this present Article that which was done in France during this yeare 1575. worthy of note, in few words. About the end of April the Duke d'Vzes besieged Bais, a litle Towne vpon Rhosne, and got the Towne: but they of the Re∣ligion which held the two Castles, constrained him to forsake it after he had lost many of his people. To reuenge himselfe he burnt a part of the Towne, and continued after such sackings and destructions, that he became very odious. In the month of May sell a tumult at Marseillis, and in certaine other places of Prouince, against gatherers & Farmers of the kings demeasnes which were chased away. And therevpon arose a band of Poli∣tike malcontents, which they called les Raises, shauen: because they caused their beards to be shauen, or some part of them, to be knowne by that signe: and in Prouence they of the Religion held certaine places, as Riez, Lourmarin, Siena, and others, some of which soone after were taken out of their hands. The 17. day of Iune le Sieur de Monbrun, a Daulphenois Gentleman, a wife
and valiant Captaine of warre, ouerthrew le Sieur de Gordes Gouernour of Daulphine, who saued himselfe by flight within Gap, and left 22. companies of Swisses in the field, which were broken, and nine hundred cut in peeces straight with Frenlich their Colonell, and sixteen Captaines, with 18. Ensignes car∣ried away by Monbrun and his people, which had a great boo∣tie of Armes especially, and lost on their part but sixe men. Le Sieur de Gordes after that, gathered great Forces, and againe meeting in the field he ouerthrew Monbrun, who meaning to leape a ditch to obtaine a meet passage for his retrait, his horse fell, and he vnder him, whereby his thigh was broken, and so remained prisoner, hauing only lost twentie two men, and thirtie eight were taken prisoners. This happened the ninth of Iuly, and soone after by decree of a Parliament at Grenople, Monbrun had his head cut off. On the other side, the Duke of Ʋzes, destroyed and burnt all the flat Countrey of Lan∣guedoc, with the losse of infinite Corne. Le sieur de Lodignie∣res ordained Chieftain of the troupes of Dauphine, in the place of Monbrun, gaue order for the affaires at the beginning of August, and tooke many places. Vpon these actions, and the sixteenth day of September, Francis Duke d' Alencon, and brother vnto the King, conueyed himselfe secretly in the night from the Court then at Paris, wherevpon came brutes and discourses maruellous straunge and diuers. Two dayes after his retraite, hee published by writing the causes thereof, declaring that hee meant to pro∣cure a good peace and reformation in France. Hee writ vnto the Princes and Lordes of the Religion, to the Churches, to the Marshall Danuile, and to the Politikes, vnto the same end; Insomuch that each one assured himselfe soone to see goodly things, and there remained but verie fewe which feared any hid euill, as discourses after published doo shewe. In the meane time the Prince of Conde tooke order Almaine to leuie an Army to enter into Fraunce, and by Armes to obtaine some rest for them of the Religion, and for the whole estate: hee dealt fully with Duke Cassimere, of all things requisite for such a good.
The King, the Queene mother, and their Councell, were greatly troubled, as if all had beene lost by the retrait of the Duke d' Alenson, writing to all places, calling as (they say, tag and rag) they made leuies and brought troupes into the field, and yet without any exployt of warre. They made flie a re∣port of souldiers from Almaine and Sueuia, yet none entred France during that fourth warre to do seruice vnto the King, who in the meane while demaunded siluer of his Townes, and for the rest hee bore himselfe, as if there had beene no appea∣rance of warre. His mother in the meane time got her towards the Duke d' Alenson, (as some said) to make peace betwixt the two brethren, and for the quiet of the kingdome. In the meane while the King forbad all the nobilitie to come nigh the Duke of Alenson; hee sent also certaine troupes, to hinder not onely that, but the comming of certaine Almaines which le Sieurs de Thore and de Cleruant ledde, which were ouerthrowne by the Duke of Guise, and Cleruant was taken prisoner, with certaine others, the tenth of October. Soone after was there a truce made betwixt the Queene mother and the Duke of Alenson, for sixe moneths, wherewith each one was miscontented, but the King accorded them: whilest the Prince of Conde leuied people in Suifferland, and the Armie of Almaine whereof was the Captaine the Duke Cassimere, marched, composed of ten thousand horsemen, sixe thousand Suissers, two thousande Lansquenets, three thousand French men and Wallons, sixe great battering peeces, and sixteene field peeces. The 22. of December the Prince of Conde published in writing the cau∣ses wherefore hee brought that Armie into France, in diuers places whereof in the meane while were courses and taking of Townes, with notable happes and chaunges, reserued vnto the generall Historie of our time. To be briefe, the confusi∣on was extreame throughout all the kingdome, and so much the more as almost all were blinded, the Churches became ve∣ry desolate, and such as feared God and were of some iudge∣ment did foresee nothing but new calamities. Thus in fewe words was the estate of France this yeare 1575.
The estate of the lowe Countries.The estate also of the low Countries was as followeth. In the moneth of February by the aduise of the King of Spaine, the Emperour sent into Brabant towards the Commaunder, and from thence towards the Prince of Orange and the Estates of Holland, the Count Schuartembourg, to cōsider of the meanes for peace. The said Count tooke so much paines therein, that hostages were sent to the Prince for suerties of the Hollanders, because assembly was made at Brede in Brabant, where the Counte remained. But because the Prince and the Hollanders persisted in their exercise of Religion, the Commaunder vnwilling to consent therevnto, the said negotiation came to no effect. Incontinently that Towne and Castle de Bure ap∣pertaining to the Princes sonne, being besieged by the Spani∣ards, was yeelded by the cowardise of the Gouernour. In the moneth of August following, the Towne of Onde Water was besieged by the Spaniards, by meanes wherof the Prince trans∣ported himself to Gonde, to cause the dikes to be cut out, wher∣of the Spaniards aduertised, furiously beat the Towne, and af∣ter a breach made gaue two assaults, but receiued liuely repul∣ses, so that they returned the third time, and then becomming maisters thereof, they slew all the souldiers and Burgesses, and burnt the most part of the Towne. Amongst those souldi∣ers there were two companies of Scots, which not beeing able any more to stand vpon the breach because of the Canon and the violence of the assailants, retyred into the Towne nigh the great Church, where they fought the space of certaine houres very couragiously, and they all dyed their weapons in their hands, and neuer would yeeld themselues. Foure dayes af∣ter the Spaniards besieged an other Towne called Schoonhouē. The Prince quickly sent thither le Sieur de la Garde, Colonell of the French companies in Holland, who so wisely behaued himselfe that by capitulation he was licenced to go out with all his, and their Armes and Iewels saued. In the meane while the Commander practised so with certain Hollanders that he drew some to his part, so, that to the great astonishment of all he pas∣sed his Army through the straites of the Iles of S. Anne. Phillip Lanat and Bunenlant, got by assault the Fortresse of Bommene,
the twentie eight of September, after incontinently besieged Ziriczeo, one of the principallest Townes in Zeland. The King of France was sommoned and required by the Estates of Poland, to appeare in the Towne of Steczise,The king of Poland lost his kingdome. the 12. day of May: which he not performing, they caused to be publi∣shed that he was falne from his kingdome, and from that time was there adiudged an interreigne, as in the case of death, which was published the 15. day of Iuly following at Cracouia, and af∣ter in the principal Townes of the kingdome, and an other day appointed for the Estates to prouide for a new election. Henry Bullenger, Minister in the Church of Zurich,The death of Bullenger. a lear∣ned Theologian of our time, who with his writings hath great∣ly serued the Church of God, hauing attained the age of 76. yeares, dyed the 17. of September. Rodolphe the eldest soone of the Emperour Maximilian,Rodolphe crowned king of Hungarie, Boheme, and of the Romans hauing beene a yeare before crowned King of Hungarie, was crowned King of Boheme, in the great Church of Prage, the 22. of September. By the consent also of the Princes of the Empire he was elected King of Romanes, and crowned at Ratisbone, the first day of Nouember, being then of the age of 24. yeares. The estate of France in the yeare 1576. was such as follow∣eth.The estate of France. The 9. day of Ianuary the Duke of Alenson wrote vnto the Parliament of Paris the causes wherefore an army of Almanes for him entered into France, and by them mightily threatned his enemies. They ment to astonish the Parisians, to the ende more easily to emptie their purses. In the meane time there was sent messages vppon messages to the Prince of Conde and the Duke Cassimere, to keep them from further entrance with their troupes, but they aduanced into the kingdom, & tooke certain litle things of small importance. The K. of Nuarre withdrew from the Court the 8. of February, which the more augmented the hope of many touching the repose of the affaires of France. But all things was so confused & mingled together, as it was no maruell if yet at this present things so wrinckled and knot∣tedtogether, bee impossible (in regard of men) to bee vn∣tied and loosed. The men of Warre were greatly outray∣ed. Therefore they of Ʋuerettes by a common accorde
leagued themselues notwithstāding the diuersitie of their reli∣gion, to hold their Prouince in peace, against all such as would enter with Armes. The Duke of Alenson seeing nigh him the Almaine Armie, demaunded siluer of the Churches in Lan∣guedoc, but they were sucked by other horsleaches, so that hee obtained nothing there, nor other where: but that he was aided by the King his brother. Vpon these stirres the deputies of the Churches assembled at Paris, vnder safe conduct, to aduise vp∣on meanes of pacification: And on the other side the Duke of Alenson ioyned himselfe vnto the Armie that Cassimere & the Prince put in his hands the thirteenth day of March. Inconti∣nently a peace was a making to cause to vanish in the aire all the strengths of them of the Religion, and after many goings and commings it was accorded, and so was made the fift Edict of pa∣cification, in the beginning of May, agreeing vpō many things to the aduantage of them of the Religiō: but they gained no∣thing therby, but rather found themselues new to begin again. The Almain Army retired without any memorable exployt. The Duke of Alenson obteined much for himself. Others were contented with promises, and the Reisters in some sort were sa∣tisfied. One of the principall articles of the Edict concerned the assembly of the States of the kingdome, to take order for all affaires. But it came otherwise to passe. For that was the meanes which the enemies of the publike state vsed to make their leagues, to breake the Edict for a newe commencement of warres, and so to leaue the kingdome in more confusion then euer it was, as appeared by the yeare following. Yet notwith∣standing the Churches were redressed and encreased in diuers places, maugre the rage & deuices of Sathan, whilest the king called the Estates to Blois, where he made his entry the 18. day of Nouember, and all the remainder of the yeare after was imployed vpon diuers conferences amongst the De∣puties. The estate of low Coun∣try.The affaires of the lowe Country bore themselues as fol∣loweth. In the moneth of February 1576. the Prince of O∣range obtained a Fortresse of great importance, called Crimpen in Holland, whereby hee warranted Suindree, and all other
places thereabouts. During the siege of Ziriczee, the Com∣mander died of the pestilence at Bruxelles, the 5. day of March. Then the gouernment of the lowe Countries was by the king remitted into the hands of the Councell of the Estate. In the moneth of May following, Ziriczee being not able to hold out any lōger was yeelded to the Spaniards, who straight after be∣gan to mutenie, vnder colour of paiments due vnto them, and determined to haue surprised Bruxelles, & so to pay themselues. The Inhabitants hereof aduertised, prouided so well for theyr assurance, that the Spaniards found the gates shut: wherat they were so despited, that without any resistance about the ende of Iuly entring Alost, a Towne situate betwixt Gaunt, Malines, and Bruxelles, they vsed there the inhabitants as in a place takē by assault. And bicause they continued their disorders by the win∣king of certaine of the Councell of estate, In the beginning of September the Captaine of Bruxelles well accompanied entred into the Pallace, and in the name of the Estates of Brabant, cō∣stituted prisoners, amongst others the Counties of Mansfield, and de Barlaiment, Assonuile Councellor, Barti, & Scharemberg, Secretaries. Soone after the Spaniards were declared Rebels, e∣nemies to the King & his country, by an Edict of the Councell of Estate, published the 22. of September. For all this the Spa∣niards left not running hither and thither, putting to flight all such as in the field made head against them, and by the intelli∣gence they had with the Lansquenets they entered into the towne of Mastricht, which they pilled. This done they ioyned themselues together & marched towards Antwerpe, & arriuing there they got in at the Citadel or Castle, the 4. of Nouember, and sodenly assailed the companies of souldiers, and all the in∣habitants of the Towne, with a maruellous fiercenes & resolu∣tion, during many daies, pilling, sacking, & spoyling the towne, one of richest & fullest of marchandise in all Europe, they mas∣sacred & slew many thousands of persons, of all ages, sexes, E∣states, and of diuers Countries, burnt one of the richest quarters of the Towne, with the magnificall and most sumptuous house thereof: briefly they committed there all maner of wickednes. The Estates of the fifteene Prouinces which till then had bene
Spanish, hauing learned to their cost, that they which thus handled them, looked for nothing so much as wholly to ruinat and destroy them, made a peace with the Princes & the States of Holland & Zeland, the 8. day of Nouember, in the Towne of Gaunt. During all those tempests God conserued the reformed Church of Antwerpe, and certaine others also, as sometimes in Babilon he conserued the companions of Daniel in the middest of the burning Fornace, and Daniel himselfe in the Lyons den. Incontinently after the spoyling of Antwerpe, the Almaines would needs remooue their goods to Ʋalenciennes, but they were preuented by the Inhabitants, and driuen away out of the Towne the 10. day of Nouember. They of Groninghe in Friseland maintained themselues in the like sort, and arrested prisoner their Gouernour, who meant to haue spoyled theyr Towne. And at this time all the lowe countries were in armes, readie to runne vpon the Spaniards, extreamly hated of them all. The death of Sinder.Iosias Sinder, an execellent Theologian & professor of holy letters at Zurich, dyed the second day of Iuly, in his age of 45. yeares. He left some bookes which were full of solide doctrine, and especially exceellently refuting the Antitrinitaries and Vbiquitaries. A new king of Poland.Stephen Bathori, Vaiuoda of Transiluania, hauing beene crowned King of Polonia the first day of May, tooke order for the affaires of his kingdome, and prepared himselfe for the war against the Moscouite. He left the churches of Poland in peace∣able estate. The death of Maximilian.The Emperour Maximilian hauing held his last Imperiall Iourney at Ratisbone, dyed the 12. day of October, beeing about the age of 55. yeares. Rodolph. 2.Rodolphus his eldest sonne King of the Romanes, of Hun∣garie, and of Boheme, succeeded his Father Maximilian in the Imperiall dignitie, being the second of that name. Assoone as he was proclaimed Emperor, he caused the Embassadors of Po∣land, to be released and sent to Amurath, to demaund truce, which was without any difficultie graunted, because that the Turke hauing had aduertisement of the warre, which the king
of Persia prepared against him,Rodolph. 2. could not any way assure him∣self, to make resistance in so many places; his Empire elsewhere, being sorely weakened, by the iust punishment of God, with plague and famine. Ieronimo Conestagio. Frederic, Elector Palatine of Rhene, a Prince fearing God,The death of Fr. Palatine of Khene. greatly affectionating true Religion, the ornament & true Iosias of all Almaine, died the 22. of October, being 26. years of age. His eldest sonne Lewes succeeded him, in the dignity of prince∣ly Electorship, who chaunged the doctrine & discipline which his father had happily established in the Countie Palatine. In the moneth of Ianuary, February, and March,The estate of France. the E∣states  of France were at Blois, where the last Edict of pacificati∣on on was reuoked after infinit practises, and the Duke Alenson forsooke the part of Polititians and of them of Religion. From thence followed in sommer next a new warre against them of the Religion, which lost the Townes de la Charite vpon Loire, Issoire in Auuerne, Melle, and Brouage in Guien, with great desolations, especially at Issoire. The Marshall also Danuile forsooke his confederates, and did the worst he could vnto the Churches of Languedoc; finally a sixt Edict of pacification was treated of at Bergerac, and agreed on at Poitiers, in the moneth of September, by the meanes whereof the former was aboli∣shed, and the Churches more troubled then euer they were; in∣somuch, that after that they had nothing assured; yet notwith∣standing God maintained them in many places, against the opinion of great and title. In old Saxonie which we now call Westphalia,Salentinus. Salentinus Bi∣shop of Padeborne, and Archbishop of Coloine, being the last of the honourable house of Eisenberge, voluntarily resigned both his Bishopprickes, and tooke to wife Antouia, Witelma, the daughter of Iohn Counte of Arenberge, and sister to Charles Arenberge. Whom in the Diocesse of Padeborne, Hen∣ry Duke of Saxonie Archbishop of Breme succeeded, and in the Electoriship Gebardus Truchesses, the sonne of William Lord of Walnogh. Dauid Chytreus. Iohn de Austrich,Iohn de Au∣strich. the bastard sonne of the Emperor Charles the fift, was sent as Gouernor into the lowe Countries. He be∣fore
hee entered into Brabant, confirmed the pacification of Gaunt, and made an accord with the Estates the 12. day of Fe∣bruary. The next morning the Spaniards forsooke the Castle of Ʋtrich, according to the accord, and the 20 of March folow∣ing, they which were in the Townes and Citadell of Antwerpe came out with their bootie. The Almaines remained in the towne vnder the Colonels Foncquer and Fronsperge, attending paiment: the 2. of April, the Spaniards came out of Mastricht. Iohn de Austria made his entry into Bruxells by the 1. of May, and tooke his oath according to the statutes of the Countries; the eleuenth of Iune, hee went to Malignes, where hauing performed that he came for, hee retyred vnto Namur, and laide hold of the Castle the 24. of Iuly: the Estates hauing discoue∣red the drifts and practises of Iohn de Austria, stood vpon their guardes, and discouering what hee went about against them, got the Castle of Antwerpe, and constrained the Al∣maines quickly to dislodge, seazing diuers places, and disman∣teling the Citadell or Castle of Antwerpe, ioyned it to the Citie of Antwerpe the 28. of August, and in the moneth fol∣lowing, caused their iustification to be published, taking armes for theyr defence, calling the Prince of Orange to their suc∣cours. Who arriued in Antwerpe the eighteenth day of Sep∣tember, and fiue dayes after at Bruxells, being of all recei∣ued with great ioy: hee was after the 22. of October chosen Gouernour of Brabant. About the same time was there trou∣ble at Gaunt and Groine, which after was appeased. Gene∣brardus. Mathias Archduke of Austria.Mathias Archduke of Austria, the Emperours brother, being called to be Gouernour of the lowe Countries, made his entry into the Towne of Antwerpe the 21. of Nouember, and the 17. of December, he accepted the gouerment of the coun∣tries, vpon the conditions proposed vnto him by the Deputies of the Estates. The Churches of Holland and Zeland florish, they of other Prouinces of the low countries begin to hope well. Stephen Bathori King of Poland this yeare made warre vp∣on the Dantzick, but after certaine encounters a peace was ac∣corded vpon conditions.
Sebastian King of Portugall, sent Peter d'Alascoua,Sebastian King of Portugall. Embas∣sador to Phillip King of Spaine, with commaundement to treat of three point, that is, for aide in the action of Affricke, for the marriage of his daughter, and for enterview. The Embassa∣dor obtained all three, the promise of marriage, with one of his daughters, when she should come to yeares, that the Catholick king should goe to Gradalupa to meet with K. Sebastian: and as for succours, he should furnish men & gallies to vndertake the enterprise of Alarache, the which was spoken very coldly. Philip confirmed the succors of men & gallies, so as the Turke should send no mē into Italy, and that they should vntertake Alarache in this yeare, the whole being referred vnto their enterview at Gradalupa. In the Parliament held at Blois,The Parlia∣ment at Blois. Pierre d' Epinac Archbishop of Lyons rose vp, and before them all, declared his reasons tou∣ching the Cleargie, the Lord of Senscey spake for the nobilitie, and Versoris for the common. The two first by a multitude of reasons & wonderfull speeches, concluded that it was most fit and conuenient, that there should be but one Religion in the realme. The third shewed, that the people wholly desired the revnion thereof, so it might be done by peaceable and quiet meanes without warres. But the Cleargie and Nobilitie after many difficulties, caused the Parliament to breake vp, so that vnder the ashes of the last warres, which as yet were hot, there might be found the sparkes of a great fire. For after many mes∣sages (although in vaine) sent by the King to the Protestant Princes, the warre began again, for the Prince of Conde rose vp in arms, and swore not to leaue them (vnder whose protestation was placed, Deo & victricibus armis) vntil he had brought the realme into her former splendor & dignity. But the reasons that perswaded peace to the King, got the vpper hand of those that desired warre, and therevpon an Edict of peace was made at Poitiers, with great contentment on both parts, and the Prince of Conde the same night he receiued it, caused it to be published by torch-light, although with lesse aduantage on his side then the first, for it restored the exercise of the Catholicke religi∣on in the places, where it had beene prohibited, it suffered
mens consciences to be free, yet without publike exercise, but onely in the Townes and places, whereas then it was openly preached, and to Gentlemen of qualitie and degree, in their owne houses: yet there was some difficultie in the execution and obseruation of this peace, which the conference at Nerae betweene the Queene mother and the King of Nauarre soone auoyded; but the wound not well healed, did still bleede, by means of the furious disorders of those that were his chiefe do∣ers: but the yeare one thousand fiue hundred eightie one, it was wholly ioyned and drawne into a scarre. See the Historie of France. Syr Martin Forbisher.Syr Martyn Forbisher tooke his voyage by sea about the the end of May, towards the North and West, discouering vn∣knowne Countries, and came againe rich laden into England, about the end of September following. The Pope forasmuch as this intended warre by Sebastian was attempted against Infidels, opened his spirituall treasures, graunting the Bull of the Croisada,Croisada. which till that time was not brought into the Realme. A Comet.The ninth of Nouember there appeared in the Zodiaque, in the signe of Libra, neare vnto the station of Mars, the good∣liest and greatest Comet, that hath bene seene in many ages, the which hapning in the progresse of this warre, amazed many, who looking to examples past, said it was a signe of vnhappie successe, and that comming frō a corrupt aire, it did endamage the delicate bodies of Princes. And for as much as the aun∣cient Captaines with their diuines, did interpret it to good, not for that they beleeued it, but to incourage the souldiers: the Portugall likewise taking it for a fauour, said, that this Comet spake vnto the King, saying, Accometa: which is to say in the Portugall tongue; Let him assayle them, not hauing any such beliefe, but for flattery, fearing more the Kings choler, by reason of his rough inclination, then the heauens. Ieronimo Conestaggio. After the sixt Edict of pacification in France, the King ha∣uing published certaine ordinances in regard of policie, solli∣cited much the Prouinces of his Country to get mony of them,
wherevpon followed great discontentment. In the meane while the souldiers being dispersed in many places, and yet ha∣uing weapons in their hands, gaue them of the Religion to thinke they could not long continue in quietnesse; yet the Churches maintained themselues in diuers places. About the end of March the Towne of Geneua had great alarums, many troupes appearing in diuers places, to haue sur∣prised it: but their comming being discouered, and the towne holding her selfe vpon her guards, there followed no exployts of warre. The Queene mother made diuers progresses through the Realme of France, to maintaine (said she) the publike repose: and so all that yeare passed in doubtfulnesse, in regard of the Churches and the estate of France. Warre began in Flaunders in Brabant,Warre and o∣ther acccidēts in the lowe Countries. betwixt Iohn de Au∣stria, and the Estates: he gained a battaile the last day of Ianua∣ry, and after he got Giblon, Louaine, Arcscod, Tiltmond, Diest, and Sichem, and in this last, handled most discourteously the offi∣cers of the place. The 8. of February, the Towne of Amster∣dem by capitulation, with the Prince & the estates of Holland, revnited themselues with the other Townes of the Countrie vnder the Princes gouernment. The estates at the same time sent their Embassador to the Imperiall iourney, where they shewed the iustice of their cause, and demaunded succours. The Duke Cassimire prepared himselfe with an Army, the Queene of England also promised to furnish them with men and money. Cassamire (by the counsell of Imbysa,Cassamire. Consull of Gaunt and Borhutus, was requested by those of Flaunders to take the Earl∣dome vpon him) came to Gaunt, where he found Petrus Dathe∣nus and others, the chiefe of the congregation: by whom the Citizens being stirred vp, thrust out all the Masse Priests and Monkes out of the Citie, and put their goods into their trea∣surie, to serue afterwards for the necessary vse of the Common∣wealth: and by a booke set forth by them, they drew others to the free libertie, not onely ciuill, but also to a libertie of consci∣ence and religion. From thence Cassamire in the beginning of
the next yeare, came to the Queene of England for money to pay his souldiers. The Prince of Parma crea∣ted Duke.Alexander Farnese Prince of Parma, the sonne of Octauius, the Nephewe of Peter and Pope Paulus the 3. his Nephewes sonne, was created Duke of Parma by the King of Spaine, D. Chytraeus. The Iesuites and certaine Friars were thrust out of Ant∣werpe in the moneth of May, & as then, Phillits a Towne, yeel∣ded it selfe by composition to the Spaniard. Kempens was besie∣ged & taken by the estates. A noble encounter hapned betwixt thē and Iohn de Austria, who had the worst, the first of August. Free exercise of the refor∣med religion.In the moneth of August, a free exercise of the reformed Religion was permitted in Antwerpe by Mathias Arch-duke, chiefe Generall and Lieftenant of the Prince of Orange, and the authoritie of the estates. So the libertie of Religion was proclaimed, vpon these conditions, that the reformed should not hinder or trouble, either by themselues or others, the rights and exercises of the olde Religion, nor should offer any in∣iurie, reproach, or violence to any one, for the diuersitie in Re∣ligion, that they should obey the political Magistrates, & beare the like taxes & impositiōs with other Citizens, that they shuld haue no Sermons▪ but in such places as the Magistrates appoin∣ted, that the Ministers should swear to preach nothing scanda∣lous or seditious in their Sermons: that no man shuld spoile any holy place, or breake any Images, nor should sell any ballads or libels reproachful to the other religiō, &c. These the Gouernor, the Deputie of Brabant, the Praetor, & Senate of Antwerpe, pro∣mised to receiue into their charge and patronage. This libertie of religion, they of Gaunt with the Hollanders and Zelanders, embraced. To the which a litle after, the States of Geldria con∣discended. But the Hannonians & Artesians taking in very ill part that the Catholick Roman religion (which they professed at Bruxelles, they would constantly retaine, before the Emper∣ror, the King of Spaine, and other Princes) should now be left and abolished of thē of Gaunt; in whose Citie their protestation was made; seperated themselues frō the other estates, who had changed their religion, & by bookes published, accused them of
their inconstancie and periurie. And therein protest that they wil be faithful maintainers & defenders of the Catholick Ro∣mane faith, and true liegemen to the king, if he would conserue their priuiledges. These were presently called Malcontents,Malcontents who forthwith made war vpon them of Gaunt, deadly hating them for this change. They of the reformed religion at Antwerpe,The reformed Church at Antwerpe. desired to haue their religious exercise, which they obtained with fewe Chur∣ches; namely, the Chappell of the Castle, the Temple of the Ie∣suits, of the Iacobins, S. Andrewes, and halfe of the Friars. Cer∣tain daies after, the Protestants of Ausbourge obtained also cer∣tain tēples. The Emperor & the King of France, sought to make some agreement betwixt the parties, but it came to nothing. On the other side, Cassimere hauing soiourned in the Countrey of Zutphen certaine time for the muster of his people, being in number 4000. footmen, & 6000. horsmen, came into Brabant, and ioyned with the Estates the 26. of August. Iohn de Austria died of the pestilence in his campe nigh Nance, the 21. of Octob. Alexander Prince of Parma, succeeded him in his charge.Prince of Parma. The Malcontents, made war vpō the Gauntois, vnder the conduct of Sieur de Montignie, the Cardinall of Granuell his brother. This league did after maruellously hinder the proceedings of States affaires, and vnder that ouerture, the Spaniards who could not long haue stood, do hitherto maintaine themselues. The 20. of Nouember, the Towne of Deuentry yeelded it selfe by composition vnto the Estates. Mathew Hamond, by his trade a ploughwright,An heretike burnt at Norwiche. three miles frō Norwich, was conuented before the Bishop therof, for that he denied Christ to be our Sauiour. For this and many other heresies he was condemned in the Consistorie, and burned in the Castle ditch of Norwiche. About the end of the yeare, they of Alenson forsooke the Estates, to draw into France. The Prince of Orange appeased the troubles which hap∣ned at Gaunt. Almaine was then in quiet, in regard of ciuill affaires:The estate of Almaine. but greatly troubled by the practises and factions of certaine
Disciples of Brencius, the father of the Vbiquitaries, whereof, after followed many disputations, without any conclusion of the mater. They which desired a truce of peace in the Church, attended no other thing by the sollicitation of so many wan∣dering spirits, but some great troubles in both the politicke and Ecclesiasticall estates, if God be times remedie not the same by the wisedome of the Princes and States of the Em∣pire. Irish rebellionAt this time, the Irish men rebelled in diuers parts of that kingdome, pretending the libertie of Religion, and complained to the Pope, taking for their leader the Earle of Desmond, Onrake, and some other of the sauage Irish, affirming that if they were aided, they would easily drawe the whole Coun∣trey from the Queenes obedience. The Pope did communi∣cate this with the Catholicke King, exhorting him to vn∣dertake this action, as most godly, and to succour this people, the which they resolued to do. But for as much as the Queene of England did seeme in words friend vnto the King, and did as the Spaniards supposed, couertly vnderhand assist the Prince of Orange in Flaunders against him,Thomas Stukely. the King would likewise walke in the same path, and make a couert warre against her. They concluded to assist this people in the Popes name, but secretly at the Kings charge. To this effect they leuied cer∣taine footemen in the Territories of the Church; whereof, sixe hundred were vnder the conduct of Thomas Stukely, an English man, who fled out of England for treason: (who a litle before had obtained the title of a Marquesse from the Pope) were embarked at Ciuitauechia, in a ship of Genua, to be transported into Ireland, the which arriued at Lisbone, in the time that they made preparation for the warre of Affrike. The King hearing of their arriuall, and that for want of money he could haue no Italians out of Tuscane, desired to see them, with intent to re∣taine them, and vse them in the warre of Affricke, and hauing caused them to disimbarke, and to lodge at Oeicas, neare to the mouth of Tagus, hee went one day to view them, and hauing had some conference with Stukely, hee perswaded him to pro∣mise to goe with him into Affrike. The Catholicke king, be∣cause
he would not shewe himselfe a partie, would not contra∣dict it. The Pope was so farre of, that before the newes could come vnto him, he gaue them impresse, and they remained for his seruice. The 24. of Iune, beeing Midsommer day,The 2. voyage of Sebastian with his Army into Affrike. Sebastian hauing a prosperous winde, the whole Army set saile, to his great plea∣sure and contentment, who young and vnskilfull, guided by some sinister starre, or by that diuine permission, which would punish this people, went into Affricke, to a dangerous (although a glorious) enterprise, leaning the Realme emptied of money, naked of Nobilitie, without heires, and in the hands of ill affec∣ted gouernours. In this most fierce and bloudie battaile between the Por∣tugalls and the Moores, three kings died.The death of Sebastian. The king Sebastian the 4. of August, when both the battailes were ioyned, fought so valiantly, that those which saw his valour wondred at it: for although they slew three horses vnder him, without any whit daunting him, yet was he neuer wearie to change, strike, & suc∣cour all parts of the Army, where was greatest daunger: Ma∣ny of his Nobilitie which remained yet on horsback, seeing the Army in rout, sought the King in all parts to saue him: but the Standard which was carried before him as a marke to knowe him, was now taken, and the bearer slaine; and being deceiued with an other some what like vnto that, which Edward de Mo∣neses carried, they followed the one instead of the other; so as the king remained as a mā lost, with some of his most trustie ser∣uants about him, and one Renegado, who laboured to saue him: hauing in vaine sought to flie, being aduised to yeeled with his Armes, he would by no means agree vnto it. One amongst thē, holding vpon the point of his foote a white Napkin in signe of peace, went towards the Moores, as an Embassador for the rest to yeeld: but they either barbarous or wilfull, tooke the mes∣senger prisoner, and charged the rest, who being fewe in num∣ber, wearied, and without courage, they were all slaine. Some say there grew a controuersie amongst them about the Kings owne person, and for that occasion they slew him. They sent afterward to seeke his body, and by a notable
example of the inconstancie of this world, they carried it na∣ked vpon a saddle pomell, into the royall Tent of Moluc, where letting it fall to the ground, it was carefully viewed by the Nobilitie who were there present, and a publike certifi∣cate that it was he, keeping it after at Alcazar-Quiuer. Iero∣nimo Conestaggio. Mulei Moluc seeing his men at the first to flie, (although he were sicke vnto the death) mounted to horse in choller, going towards them that ranne away, to stay them and encou∣rage them: the shot of the Christians drawing neare, he made shewe to match himselfe foremost: but his fauourites came a∣bout him, entreating him not to hazard himselfe. But he per∣sisting his resolution, and they to stay him, he grew in choller, laying hold on his sword to disperse them, at what time being seazed with a deadly fit of an Apoplexie, he swowned, and fell from his horse: but being taken downe by them about him, hee was laid in his Litter,Molucs death. where putting his finger into his mouth in signe of silence, suddenly, or (as some report) before he was laid downe, gaue vp the ghost. Mulei Ma∣hamet drow∣nedMulei Mahamet escaped his enemies hands, but his too great haste to passe Mucazez, and to recouer Azzill, was the cause he was drowned in his passage, Those whom Idlenesse had made curious, did note the diuersitie of these Princes deaths, for being all lost in one battaile, within the space of sixe houres, the one died of his naturall death, the second by the sword, the third was drowned. Hamet pro∣claimed king.Hamet was proclaimed King of the Moores. Hee caused the body of Mulei Mahamet to be found out, and causing it to be fleied, filled the skinne with straw, and carried it in triumph, to the end to take from the Moores all the hope they had con∣ceiued in him. Monsieurs voyage into Flaunders.Monsieurs the king of France his brother, after the exam∣ple of the Arch-duke Mathias, went into Flaunders, there to make worke for the king of Spaine, where he made a goodly  entrie, but an euill retreit. Institution of the order of ye holy Ghost.Henry the third, this yeare by the example of Lois the ele∣uenth, to vnite great persons in concord and inuiolable amitie,
both for the benefite of the estate and countrie: he instituted the order of the holy Ghost. D. Chytraeus. Of him this Anagrame was made. Henricus Tertius: In te verè Christus. In this yeare and the next, the estate of France and of the lowe Countries, and of Almaine, remained as before. In France the Prince of Conde retiring vnto Fere, a Towne vnder his go∣uernment of Picardie, warre flamed, which continued in diuers places by the taking holds on either part, but more slowly then in former yeares. The strongest was in Dauphine and in Guienne, Fere, Mo∣uire, and other places, hauing bene yeelded by composition. These tempests ended by a negotiation of peace. In the Augustine Friars at Paris, this also was done in re∣membrance of his birth day, and the two Kingdomes of Po∣land and Fraunce, falling to him as vpon that day, expecting as then the third Crowne in heauen, of which this Symbole was made: Manet vltima coelo. He made 26. Knights of the order before spoken of, and gaue them yearely pensions out of Abbies, and Ecclesiasticall liuings, in despight of the Pope. This yeare, Iohn Fox, William Wickney, and Robert More, English men, hauing bene prisoners in Turkie about the space of 13. or 14. yeares, with more then two hundred and sixtie other Christians of diuers Nations, by killing their keeper, maruellously escaped, and returned to their natiue Countries. I. Stowe. The Towne of Maistricht was taken by force of the Span∣iards, the 29. of Iune,Maistricht taken. where they slew a great number of peo∣ple. After the estates sought a protector, and addressed them∣selues in the yeare, 1580. to the Duke of Alenson, who dealt with them. The Turkes leauing Europe in quietnesse,The Turkes. after peace made with the Venetians, waged warre against the Persians, and af∣ter many battailes lost, especially for the Turkes, they fell to a peace about the end of this yeare. The Cardinall Don Henry, brother of King Don Iohn the  third, grandfather of Don Sebastian, was by a generall consent
of the Nobles and Gouernours, chosen and sworne king of Portugall, who like an other Anius, was made king of a preist, of whom Virgill saith in the 3. of his Aeneiads, Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum, Phaebi{que} Sacerdos. Of this Cardinal say the Portugalls that he was borne in the Eclips of the Moone, and in the Eclips of the Moone he died. M. Cyprian. Val. Almaine.Almaine was troubled by the cries and factions of the Vbi∣quitaries, against whom, certain Princes, common-weales, and learned mē, opposed thēselues, both with liuely voice & writing The faith and obedience of the king of France his subiects began to decline. The death of Henry King of Protugall.Vpon the 31. of Ianuary, Henry Cardinall King of Por∣tugall, departed this life: he began to die in the Eclips of the Moone, and died with the end thereof, as if that the celestiall signe had wrought that effect in him (being a man of a weake body) which it doth not in strength, or at the least not so sud∣denly, as Astrologians do write: neither is the houre to bee neglected, being the same wherein he was borne, 68. yeares before. This was the last King of Portugall, in whom ended the right Masculine line. And as the first Lord of Portugall, al∣though vnder the title of an Earle, was called Henry, so doth it seeme the last should be so termed. He was Bishop, Gouer∣nour of the Realme, Inquisitor, Maior, Legate Apostolicke, and King. An Earth∣quake.On the sixt of Aprill, being wednesday in Easter weeke, about sixe of the clocke towards euening, a certain Earthquake happening in London, and almost generally throughout Eng∣land, so amazed the people as was wonderfull, for the time. This Earthquake endured in or about London, not passing one minute of an houre, but in Kent, and on the Sea coasts it was felt three times, as at Sandwich at sixe of the clocke, at Douer at the same houre. These and many other places in East Kent, the same Earthquake was felt three times to mooue, at sixe, at nine, and eleuen. Hollenshead. The first of May, after 12 of the clocke in the night, was an other Earthquake felt in diuers places in East Kent, namely at Ashford, and great Chard.
King Phillip performed the funerall obsequies of Sebastian, in the Church of S. Ierome at Madrill, although it was secretly muttered, that the Duke of Alua should say, the King should haue performed it in Potugall, in our Ladies Church of Belem, where the other kings are accustomed to be interred, inferring it may bee, that Phillippe was successor vnto Sebastian, or at the least should assure himselfe by force, of the succession after Henry, causing himselfe to be sworne Prince. Ieronimo Conestaggio. In the beginning of Iune, the Frislanders passing Rhene, returned into their Countrie, and meeting the Count Hollocke with 22. Auncients, and two thousand horsmen, gaue him an ouerthrow, in which were slaine of the Counts part, one thou∣sand and fiftie, and on their owne side, but fiftie and fiue, by this encounter the siege was raised at the Groine, and many Townes, Hauens, and holdes of Friseland were redeemed. Genebrard. After K. Henries death, whē Katherine Duchesse of Brabant,K. Phillip. Anthony the bastard sonne of King Lewis, and others had promised themselues the next succession, at the last Phillip king of Spaine, (who was for that named of the dying Cardinall) was inuested by the consent of the Lords, spirituall and temporall. Others, chiefly they of Lisbone, did sweare to Don Antonio, but Phillip with a great power both by sea and land (of the which he made the Duke of Alua Generall) came to Lisbone and expulsed Don Antonio, and recouered the Citie. Who beeing hotly pursued by Sanches d' Auila, was constrained to flie into France and England for succour. Chytreus. In the moneth of Iuly, Stephen king of Poland comming out of Luchem in Moschouie, tooke by force two Fortresses, Ʋua∣lisium, and Ʋsuum, and after that Vuielukim: but hauing lost many of his men, at the end of the yeare hee returned. Gene∣brard. On the nineteenth day of August, the king of Spaines prescription was published against the Prince of Orange at Namours. In these monethes of Iuly and August, Fera a Citie in
Picardie, was deliuered to the Huguenots. The death of the Duke of Sauoy.Emanuel Philebert Duke of Sauoy, died this moneth, a Prince most famous for his courage, wisedome, and religion, leauing his sonne and heire, and sucessor Charles. The first day of September of this present yeare, the Gre∣cians and Muschouites began to recken the yeare from the worlds creation, 7089. Certain Spaniards and Italians confederate with the Earle of Desmond, and some of the Cleargie of Ireland landed there, and tooke certaine holds and Castles, but they were soone dis∣comfited and chased away. The tyrannie of the Duke Alua.Ferdinand Duke of Alua, began to exercise his tyrannie at Aquisgrane, a chiefe Citie of the Empire, vpon certaine Citizens and others that came from Antwerpe and the lowe Countries, such as were of the reformed religion: by whose conference and conuersation, very many of Aquisgrane when they had embraced their profession, desired of the Senate that they might vse a publike exercise of their Religion: which when it was denied, neuerthelesse they met openly at Ser∣mons and the celebration of the Sacramens. Which beeing shewed vnto the Emperour, certaine Commissioners were appointed, to roote out the religious, and onely to establish the doctrine and rites of the Pope. The Emperour himselfe wrote also vnto the Senate, that they should banish those Preachers forth with, and that they should iustly keepe the old lawe, which was, that none should be admitted of the Senate vnlesse they were altogether Ca∣tholicke. D. Chytraeus. A blazing StarThe eight day of October, immediately after the new Moone there appeared a blazing Starre in the South, bushing towards the East, which was nightly seene the aire being cleare, more then two moneths. In this yeare there was great abundance of corne, wine, and all maner of fruite, and in Autumne in many places Roses did bud againe. A great sicknesse did followe, spreading it selfe throughout all Europe. This is the yeare which the Grecians holde for the
seuen thousand yeare from the beginning of the world. Gene∣brardus. Iohannes Martianus, a Millanois, Embassador for Spaine to the Turke, hauing obtained a truce for three yeares, retur∣ned from Constantinople into Spaine, but so, as neither desired others friendship; but that the Turke molested by the Soul∣dan, feared the Christians, and the Spaniard hauing enough to do at home, was constrained by warre to seeke repossession of his owne. Idem. In Ianuary,A Proclama∣tion against Iesuites. Proclamation was published at London for the reuocation of sundry the Queenes Maiesties subiects re∣maining beyond the Seas, vnder colour of studie, and yet liuing contrary vnto the lawes of God, and of the Realme. And also against retaining of Iesuites and Massing Priests, sowers of se∣dition, and other treasonable attempts. I. S. Queene Anne, the wife of King Phillip,The death of Q. Anne. fell sicke of a fea∣uer, the which in fewe dayes brought her to an other life, wher∣with the King was much grieued, beeing a Lady wholy con∣formable to his humour, and endued with singular beautie. This was the yeare, where in the ships from the Indies, Bra∣zill, S. Thomas Cape, Ʋerde, and all other new found lands were expected, the which staied somewhat long, & put then in some feare, being looked for with greater desire then euer any were: they were wished, both for the riches they carried, as to vnder∣stand by them, how the people of those parts were addicted to the obedience of the Catholicke king, whereof many doubted. Certain Iesuits being walled vp within their Monasterie at the Terceras,Iesuites. (to whom me at was giuen but once a weeke) grie∣uing to be thus wrongfully imprisoned, vpon a certaine day they opened the doores of the Church, & hauig placed ye Sacrament in the midst, they would try by this means, if they might remain free. The ministers of iustice went vnto the couent to demand the reason of this innouation, to whom it was propounded by the Fathers, that if their offences so required, they shuld punish thē, but holding them as suspect, they shuld suffer thē to depart into Portugall. The resolutō was (after some speeches vsed be∣yond modestie) that the Fathers should be walled vp again, & a
certaine person, who said that in iustice they should burne these Priests, with their monasterie, the which they had for the affection they bare vnto the Castillians. Hee stayed not long to acknowledge his error, for departing from thence, hee fell sicke vnto the death, and God would haue him confesse (as he said) that this griefe happened vnto him for that occasion. Ie∣ronimo Conestaggio. D. of Aniou.Francis Duke of Aniou, the French Kings brother, and other Nobles of France, the first of Nouember (hauing lately arriued in Kent, came to London, where he was honorably re∣ceiued. The 7. of February he departed out of England, where at his shipping, a Post brought him word, that the States of the lowe Countries were reuolted, and namely the Citie of Ant∣werpe, whither he presently sailed with 15. ships, and was there entertained by the Prince of Orange. In the time of this Pope Gregorie the 13. a very straunge thing happened in Valladolid. There dwelled in Ʋalladolid a knight well qualified, who in the Inquisitiō had two daughters which constantly perseuering in that religion that they had learned of the good D. Cacalla, and other Martyrs of Iesus Christ, were cōdemned to be burned. The father being a most ranke Papist, besought the Inquisitors to permit them for their better instruction, to be carried to his house: which things the Inquisitors in regard of the great credit they reposed in him, graunted. And brought thus to his house, the father endeuou∣red to diuert them from their constant resolution: but seeing he could not conuince them, hee caused Priests & Friars to dis∣pute with them: but it was in vaine. For the Lord (as in Luk. 21.15. he had promised) gaue them vtterance and wisdome, which the new Pharisies, Priests, and Friars, were not able to resist or gainesay. The father seeing then, that all his endeuour not a∣uailed,The crueltie of a father. went himselfe to his Groue, cut downe wood, and cau∣sed it to be drawne to Valladolid, hee himselfe kindled the fire▪ and so they were both burned. M. Cyprian. Val. Richard At∣kins burned for religion.In the moneth of Iuly, one Richard Atkins borne in Hart∣fordshire, an English man, came to Rome to the English Col∣ledge there, whom they kindly welcomed, willing him to go to
the Hospitall, and there to receuie his meate and lodging, ac∣cording as was appointed: wherevnto hee answered, I came not (my countrey men) to any such intent as you iudge, but I come louingly to rebuke the great misorder of your liues, and to let your proud Antichrist vnderstand, that hee dooth robbe God of his honour, and poisoneth the whole world with his most abhominable blasphemies. When they heard this, a Student in the Colledge caused him to bee put in the Inquisition, but after certaine dayes, hee was set at libertie againe. And one day as he was going in the streete, hee met a Priest carrying the Sacrament, which offending his consci∣ence, to see the people so crouch and bowe downe to it, hee caught at it to haue throwne it downe, but missing it, hee was iudged by the people that he catched at the holinesse which (as they say commeth from the Sacrament) & so vpon meer deuo∣tion hee was let passe. Certaine dayes after he came to S. Pe∣ters Church, where many were hearing Masse of the Priest at the eleuation, (hee vsing no reuerence) stepped to the Aul∣tar, and threw downe the Chalice with the wine, striuing likewise to pull the Cake out of the Priests hands: for which cause diuers of the people rose vp and beate him, and after carried him to prison: where hee was examined wherefore hee did it, who said, that hee came purposely to rebuke the Popes wickednesse, and their Idolatrie. Vpon this hee was condemned to bee burned: but before that, hee was set vp∣on an Asse, without any saddle, hee being from the middle vp∣ward naked: all the way as hee went, there were foure that did nothing else but thrust at his body with burning Torches, whereat hee neuer mooued, and when hee came before S. Pe∣ters Church where the place of execution was, there was hee burned. I. Fox. Katherine de Medices, mother to the French Queene,The Queene of France discontented with king Phillip. was discontented with the Catholicke King, for diuers respects, but that she made most shewe of, was that he had taken the Realme of Portugall by force, refusing to submit himselfe to iustice, saying that shee had more interest then hee. Wherevpon it was supposed, that (mooued with this disdaine) shee should
labour to make warre against Portugall, with whom agreed Frances duke of Alanson, her sonne, no lesse enemie to the Ca∣tholicke king, then the mother, mooued therevnto, for that ha∣uing demanded one of the daughters of the said king in marri∣age, he was refused, for that he required with her a portion fit for her qualitie. Hee was followed by the whole Nobilitie of France, whom he might easily haue ledde where hee pleased, although it were against the Kings liking, the which grew, for that remaining the third sonne to Henry the 2. with small hope neuer to aspire vnto the Crowne, hauing two brothers, Charles and Henry, his elders, hauing a great mind and stirring, he gaue care to all such as were discontented with the king, or desirous of innouation (whereof there are numbers in France) laboured to alter the quiet estate of Christendome, with whom hee had often resolued to conquer himselfe some new estate out of France. Ieronimo Conestaggio. The Duke Alanson againe returned into England, beeing alreadie agreed with the Prince of Orange,D. Alanson. who was the instru∣ment of all these practises, he passed from thence to Antwerpe, where the peoples humours being before disposed by the said Prince, hee was receiued with great ioy, and on the eleuenth day of February, 1582. they did sweare him Duke of Bra∣bant. Ouids tombeIn Cyonia, a Citie of Muschouie, within a pleasant valley, the tombe of P. Ouidius Naso was found, with this Epitaphe. Hic situs est vates quem viui Caesaris ira Augusti, Latio cedere iussit humo: Saepe miser voluit patrijs succumbere tectis Sed frustra; hunc illi fatadedere locum. Genebrardus. The Prince of Orange shotThe 18. day of March the Prince of Orange being in Ant∣werpe quiet, and in the greatest fortune that hee was euer, was shot in his house as he was rising from the table, in the middest of all his seruants, with a Pistoll, by one Iohn Scarigni; a Bis∣caine, mooued therevnto by zeale of Religion as hee preten∣ded, the bullet hitting him vnder his right Iawe, passed
forth through the windowe, and although hee was supposed dead, yet was he cured and liued, and the offender was present∣ly slaine by his guard, and all such as were found accessary, were executed. Cardinall Albert Arch-duke of Austria,Cardinall Albert. was made gouer∣nour of Portugall. Ieronimo Conestaggio. Don Antonio departed for France from the Terceres, leauing Emanuel de Sylua in his place, with 500. Frenchmen, vnder the charge of Baptist Florentine, and Charles a French man, their Captaine. In the moneth of August, the Forces of Don Antonio king of Portugall, skirmishing with Phillip king of Spaine, in a bat∣taile at Sea at S. Michaels Mount, were discomfited. Heere Strossius the Generall of the Forces of France, with the losse almost of all his Army, was in the ende discomfited. Gene∣brardus. There was one thing worthy of obseruation in the fight at Sea. Within the Gallion of S. Mathew,A Priest died for feare. a Priest called Iohn de Iaem, Chaplaine vnto the Marshall of the field, a man which had seene the warres during the fight, being vnder lowest deck of the Gallion, when hee sawe so much wilde fier cast by the French, heauing their shot, and seeing the hurt which the Can∣non did, he died onely of feare and amazement, hauing recei∣ued no wound. Phillip after the death of Diego his eldest sonne, who was sworne Prince of Portugall at Tomar, hee would likewise that the same oath should bee made in the person of Phillip, his se∣cond sonne, being then sicke; and for the swearing of him, hee assembled the estates at Lisbone, resolute to accomplish this ce∣remonie before his departure. At that time the Duke of Alua (consumed with a continuall feauer) died in the Pallace at Lisbone,The death of the Duke of Alua. in the Kings owne quar∣ter, being of the age of three score and fourteen yeares. During his sicknesse hee was greatly fauoured of the king, who did visit him a litle before his death: but after it, the next day the Por∣tugalls obserued that he went publikely to Masse without a∣ny shewe of discontentment in him, contrary to the custome
of their Kings, who vpon the death of one of lesse qualitie (ha∣uing done many notable seruices to the Crowne) relied them∣selues for a time, the which seemed the more straunge, for that King Emanuel vpon the death of a noble Pilot, withdrew himselfe three dayes. Ieronimo Conestaggio. He arrogating too much to himselfe, caused a statue of brasse to be erected for him in the Citadell of Antwerpe, which the king willed afterwards to be beaten downe. Charles Borgia.Charles Borgia Duke of Candia, a man of greater vertue then experience, succeeded in his place. Vpon the 28. of Iune, Peregrin Bartu Lord Willougbie, was sent Embassador to Frederick the second, with the Garter. The Prince of Orange hauing recouered his hurt, came a∣broad. His wife Carola, lineally discended from the right noble house of Montpensier, with ouermuch ioy of his recouerie, within three daies after died of a plurisie. D. Chytreus. The new Ca∣lender set forth by the Pope.In this yeare of our Lord, 1582. this Pope by anticipating tenne daies in the yeare, gaue himselfe to correct the Calender, and to eternize his name; this Calender he called Gregorianum: and by his decree, all Christian Princes obeying the Romish Sea, gaue commandement to cut of tenne daies in the moneth of October, so as for the fift day, they should generally write fifteene: the which was done to fitte the meanes, and princi∣pall aspects, wherein the heauens were, when as our Redeemer Iesus Christ suffered, that they might celebrate Easter, and the other Feasts vpon their proper dayes. The which they had not formerly done, for that the true course of the Sunne which makes the yeare, being certaine minutes of an houre lesse the time, which they vntill then had taken for a yeare. It seemed that in the course of so many yeares, so small a dif∣ference had mounted vnto tenne dayes, so as by this equallitie, it was made cōformable to the time past. Ieron. Con. D. Chytreus. Phillip caused the bones of Sebastian, late king of Portugall, to be brought out of Affricke, the which with king Henries that were at Almerin, he would before his departure see solemnly interred in the Church of Belem, neare to the other Kings of Portugall.
At this time were revnited all the kingdomes of Spaine, which from the entrance of the Moores into Spaine, 860. and so many yeares fithence, haue bene diuided. M. Cyprian. Va∣lera. D. Saunders the Popes Nuntio and Legate,D. Saunders who came from Rome with Iames Fitzmoris in Iuly, in the yeare 1599. to beare Armes in Ireland against her maiestie, after that hee had wan∣dred vp & downe three yeares together with the Earle of Des∣mond, and Syr Iohn his brother, hee fell sicke of an Irish Ague, and a Flixe, and lay in the wood Clennetisse, which wood is full of withies, bryers & thornes, and through which is no passage, where partly through his sicknesse, but chiefly through famine and want, dyed. Hollenshed. The Earle of Desmond was taken by one Kollie an Irish∣man, in an old house alone, and there slain, whose head was sent into England, and set vpon London bridge. Amias D. of Leneux,Amia. banished Scotland. so created in the yeare 1579. was now in this yeare vpon displeasure banished Scotland, and enforced to returne into France: in whose exile was performed an olde prophecie, That a man of fiue shillings should buy all the Dukes of England & Scotland: For when this Duke was out of the Scot∣tish kingdome, there was neither Duke in that Countrey nor in England. Idem. Henry King of Nauarre, when hee vnderstood that the  Archbishop of Cullen was in great distresse,The King of Nauarre. and the many trai∣terous practises of the Pope against him, hee sent his Embassa∣dor to the Electors & Princes of Germanie, who professed the true doctrine of the Gospell; First for the establishing of a ge∣nerall concord, by a generall Synode of the Churches in Ger∣manie, France, England, and other Countries imbracing the true Religion. Then that these Princes of the reformed Church, should by oath, all ioyne their powers against the Pope & his adherents: which that hee might the better perswade, hee set downe in his Letters the imminent daungers ouer the princi∣pall kingdomes in Europe, which professed the true Faith. As many as in Spaine or Italie were suspected for the truth, were put into the Inquisition, and so martyred. In France the pro∣mulgation
of the Councell of Trent, and the constitution of the Inquisition was vrged by the Popes Legate, against the in∣tercession of the Senate, and the liberties of the Church of France. That in England by the treacherous practises of the Ie∣suites, the hearts of her maiesties subiects were drawne from their alleagiance. As for the Scots such matters were set a∣broach euen in the Court, that those of the better sort, and such as studied for the common good and peace of the realme, by the dissention of some Nobles and the Kings youth, were banished, which vnlesse it were presently remoued, it would hazard the estate of their Church, and raise warre betweene England and Scotland. The miseries of Belgia, it being so ouer∣pressed by the Spanish powers, and they euery day encreasing, promise no good successe to their Church. In Heluetia, by the Popes contributions, subtilties, and the most turbulent prea∣chings of the Iesuites these two yeares, haue bene ciuil warres: Insomuch that the Bernates, imbracers of the reformed Religi∣on, should be oppressed by the power of the D. of Sauoy. The Churches of Suecia stand wauering, whilest the Popish cere∣monies are there kept, and Iesuites frequent the Court, and feare least their perswasions should alienate their King. And for Germanie, in the which by the care & sinceritie of the most mightie Princes, the surest and safest harbours are giuen to the Churches, the Pope doth what in him lyeth to confound and ouerthrow. In Coloine he hath stirred vp such tragedies against that Princely Elector, the ende whereof, vnlesse it be brought vpon his owne head, he hopeth wil be the confusion of all Ger∣manie. This Embassage although it was beningly receiued of all the Princes to whom it came: yet new disputations & trou∣bles arising in France about the death of Alanson, the dangers encreased. D. Chytreus. Georgius Ernestus, the last Prince of Henneberge, died this present yeare. Idem. Elias Thacker was hanged at S. Edmonds-Bury in Suffolke, and Iohn Copping for spreading certain bookes, seditiously pen∣ned by one Robert Browne, against the booke of commō praier, established by the lawes of the realme; their bookes as many a could be found were burnt before them. I. S.
Iohn Lewis, who named himselfe Abdiot, an obstinate he∣retike, denying the Godhead of Christ, and holding diuers other detestable heresies (much like to his predecessor Mathew Hamond) was burned at Norwich. Albertus Alasco, free Baron of Lasco, Ʋaiuode,Albertus Alasoo. or Palatine of Syradia in Poland, arriued at Harwiche in Essex, and on the last of April, came by water to Winchester house in Southwarke, where he remained for the most part of his abode. Frances of Ʋalois Duke of Alanson,The death of Fr. D. of A∣lanson. attempted diuers ex∣ployts  in the lowe Countries, the issue whereof fell out to his misfortune, wherefore feeling himselfe sicke, he retyred from Dunkerke towards Fraunce, where hee fell into so straunge a iudgement, that euen the Phisitians beganne to doubt him: for a flixe of blood issued so continually out of his nose, and mouth, that they were still forced to hold him a Basen where∣into hee voyded the cleare and pure blood, whereof he dyed. Some say this happend either by his riotousnesse in the lowe Countries, or for griefe of the hard successe of his affaires there, or by Salcedas meanes that was executed. His death weakened the most drowsie heads, it brake all the bonds that staied the proceedings of the League, and caused it presently to waine, at Chalouns, Rhemes, Troy, Dyon and Mezeiuel. Histo∣rie of France. The tenth of Iuly, William Nassau Prince of Orange;The Prince of Orange is slaine. in the one and fiftie yeare of his age, was slaine with a Bullet, by Balthazar Gerardus, otherwise called Serach. See Ge∣nebrardus. This villaine beeing taken aliue, confessed that hee was neither set on by the French nor Spanish, but did it of his owne minde, thinking that thereby hee did God good ser∣uice, foorthwith hee was punished with such a death as the qualitie of so hainous a fact deserued. Yet a certaine writer of Coloine setteth him downe for a Martyr. See Dauid Chy∣traeus. H. Earle of Darbie by the Queenes maiestie was sent Em∣bassador to Henry the third the French King, the 30. of Ianua∣ry, to inuest him with the order of the Garter.
Hyperas the eight day of April, and Briges, which next to Gaunt is the chiefe Citie of Flaunders, a little before the Prince of Orange his death, in the moneth of May, was recouered by the Prince of Parma, all former offences forgotten, so that they would restore the Catholicke religion of Rome, and performe true allegiance to the king of Spaine. Assoone as the League perceiued that diuers Townes had made great fiers for ioy of her byrth, it was presented to the Pope, that he might giue it his blessing, auouch it for his, and declare it to be for the Catholicke, Apostolicke and Romish Church. But Gregorie the 13. desiring to shewe himselfe the Father of all Christians, and a Pastor, and not, a dispearser of his flocke, considering that the raising of Armes against a most Christian & Catholicke king, was wholy contrary to the doc∣trine of the Gospell, the examples of Christ and his Apostles, and the lawes of policie and state; certified the Leagues De∣puties, that he could not approue their inuentions: and to con∣clude, sent them back againe without an answer. And not long before he dyed, hee said to the Cardinall Est, that the League should neuer haue Bull, Letter, nor Commission from him, for hee knew not what they meant: and that hee would not serue for a fire-brand to kindle a warre, which he could by no means quench. In the prime of this yeare the first of April, S. Walter Raleigh tooke his voyage for the discouery of that land, which lieth be∣tween Norembega and Florida in the West Indies, and returned in August following, preparing afterwards for a second voiage. Syr H. Gil∣bert.S. H. Gilbert attempted to discouer with intention this coun∣try of Norembega, to settle an English Colonie there, in the yeare 1578. accompanied with a company of Gentlemen of good calling, and ten sailes of all sorts of shipping; but the iourney tooke no successe, for all their ships inforced by some occasion, or mischance, made their present returne, that only excepted, where his brother S. W. R. was Captaine, who tooke his course to the West Indies, but for want of vittailes & other necessaries, when he had sailed as farre as the Ilands of Cape de Ʋerde, vpō the coast of Affrica, he was cōstrained to set saile and
returne for England. But S. H. G. enterprised the voyage the second time, and set to sea with three shippes and pinnases this yeare 1584. in which iourney he lost his life. This yeare also S. W.R. encouraged by the reports of his men of the goodnes of the soile,S.W. Ra∣leigh. and the fertillitie of the coun∣try, which they had discouered the last yeare past, and now by her maiestie called Virginia, furnished with 8. sailes of all sorts, set them to the sea,S.R. Green∣feeld. appointing S. Richard Greenfeeld his Lieu∣tenant, enioyning him either to tarry himselfe, or to leaue some Gentlemen of good worth with a competent number of soul∣diers in the Country of Virginia, there to begin an English Co∣lonie. After they had sailed a certain number of leagues on the sea, by force and violence of fowle weather, they were sepera∣ted one from the other; so that S.R.G. being singled from his fleete, all alone arriued in the Iland of Hispaniola in the West Indies, about the midst of Iune following. In the moneth of May,Bruges recouered. the Prince of Parma recouered the Towne of Bruges, which next to Gaunt is the chiefest Citie in all Flaunders, all matters forepassed forgotten, vpon conditi∣on they would restore the Catholicke Romane religion, and become true leigemen to the king of Spaine. They of Gaunt likewise, all their Townes about them being taken by the Spa∣niards, and all their passage for prouisiō stopped vp, as also con∣strained through famine, entered into counsell either of deliue∣ring their towne, or else of some reconciliatiō: and the Prince of Parma offered them the same cōditions which they of Bru∣ges had, all which, the Senators addicted to the Romane religi∣on, and the Citizens thought good to imbrace. And Imbysa who being Consull sixe yeares before, was the cause that their pacification was broken, and the expelling of the Popes A∣gents, necessitie thus constraining, yeelded therevnto. The Pope daily vrged by his Embassador the Emperour, Rodolphe,The refusall of the new Ca∣lender. that his Calender might be receiued & vsed through∣out all Germanie. But although the Emperour commaunded it to be kept and obserued in the kingdome of Bohemia, Austria, and other his hereditary possessions; yet the Princes of Saxonie and others, constantly refused so to do, following the counsell
of Augusta. But the Bishoppes for the most part, and amongst those, Ernestus of Coloine, Elector, and the Bishop of Mona∣sterie, began to allow of it in their Diocesses. The Senate of Augusta said, that in allowing of this Calender, they intended nothing against the quiet of Religion, but for policie sake, that they might exercise their vsuall marchandise with the subiects of those neighbour Princes and Bishops which had receiued it; and that all manner of confusion in iudgements, markets, and other publike places in the Citie, risen by the difference of the Calenders, might be auoyded: the which decree was ob∣tained. Which when it was published at Augusta, the Ministers of the Gospel wrote to the Senators, that they would obey the decree in all politicall affaires, but in their Churches and cele∣bration of their Feasts & exercises of their religion, they would by no meanes obey the Pope. Therefore the 24. day of May, they denounced to their auditorie the Feast of the Ascentiō of Christ, the next day the 28. of May to be celebrated, which the Bishops had finished one moneth before. The Senate ta∣king this in ill part, caused the Superintendent to be carryed out of the Citie, but the Citizens knowing thereof, ran first vn∣armed, then with weapons, and at the gate of the Citie tooke their Pastor out of the Cart; but the tumult increasing, the Ministers of the Gospell at the intreatie of the Senate disswa∣ded the Citizens from sedition, and appeased them. When some should be chosen out of the Senate, Patricians, Mar∣chants, and the Commons, which should determine this con∣trouersie. To these the D. of Wittenberge and the Senate of Ʋlme ioyned their Embassadors, who the 4. day of Iune, which according to the Gregorian Calender was the 14. doo so arbi∣trate the matter, that al faults remitted, they after that throgh∣out the whole Citie, should follow the new Calender, which should be kept in policies, and both the Churches of Religion. Notwithstanding the peace and quietnesse of it should remain constant and firme. And that it should be lawfull for the Mi∣nisters of the Gospell to protest vnto their Auditors, that they had chaunged nothing, nor would chaunge any thing in that doctrine which they had hitherto preached vnto them, nor
that they did obey the Pope, but the Imperiall maiestie and politicall magistrates, in obseruing & keeping the new Calen∣der with the rest in the Citie. D. Chytraeus. About the middle of Iune, Syr I. Perrot Knight, was sent ouer to be Lord Deputie in Ireland. This Deputie by the aduise of the Councell of Ireland, thought it best to bring the whole land into shyre grounds, whereby the lawes of England, might haue a thorough course, and passage. And what S. H. Sidney had done in fewe Coun∣tries, that be performed in the whole realme, and to euery new County he appointed & assigned seuerall Sheriffes. Hollen. Vpon the K. of Frances deuise when he was K. of Poland, Manet vltima caelo: the Leaguers made this Distiche. Qui dedit ante duas vnam abstulit, altera nutat, Tertia tonsoris nùnc facienda manu. Ericus Duke of Brunswicke, the sonne of Ericus,The death of the Duke of Brunswicke. who spent the better part of his life in Belgia, Italie, Spaine, and gaue him∣selfe more to the Romish religion then the true doctrine of the Gospell, imbraced of his Nobles and subiects, in the fiftie sixe yeare of his age departed this life at Papia in Italie, vpon whom this was written. Papa tibi, Papiaque fuit, non patria cura, Hinc procul a patria te tegit vrbs Papia. Whom Iulius, founder of the Vniuersitie of Iulia, succee∣ded in the kingdome. D. Chytraeus. Iohannes Basilides, the great Duke of Mochouia,Iohannes Basilides. or Empe∣rour of Russia, who for 25 whole yeares had afflicted & scour∣ged Linouia with warre, this yeare ended his tyrannie with his life. Who after the manner of Russia is reported to haue bene verie godlie. Beeing readie to die, hee called his sonne Fae∣dor (so they call Theodore) and the chiefe of his Nobilitie to him, in whose presence, with a godly exhortation he com∣mitted the whole Empire, and ioyned to him foure of his
wisest Counsellors, who should haue care of him and the Em∣pire, whom hee perswaded, that being warned by him they would abstaine from making warre, and make peace with their neighbour Kings and Princes. He commaunded also that for ten yeares space they should remit his subiects (sore wasted and brought to pouertie by his waries) all his tributes, taxes, and Subsidies, that in this space they might recouer themselues, and to all his Captaines he gaue free leaue either to stay or de∣part: after this done, he was shauen, and betooke himselfe to a Monasticall life, and so dyed. Idem. The Christi∣an Churches at Constanti∣nople.The same time that Amurathes ioyned the North part of Tauricus Cherronesus to the Turkish Prouinces, all the Christi∣an Churches at Constantinople (of which I vnderstand there are about 30 in Monasteries and otherwise remaining) had almost bene conuerted into denne and holes of the religion of Ma∣homet, by the earnest motion of the high Bishop of the Tur∣kish Priests (whom they call Mufti) And when the Grecians, Armenians, and other Christian nations most humbly pleaded and alledged the priuiledges granted by Mahomet the second, and other succeding Emperours to the Christians, for a free ex∣ercise of their religion; the answere was, that they were tolle∣rated by reason of the desolatiō of the Citie, and the smal num∣ber of Musulmans Now since such multitudes professe the re∣ligion of Mahomet, that they need more Churches, it is meete that the Christians should yeeld to them. After this the Spa∣nish Liedger at Ʋenice, wrote, that Amurathes had spoyled all the Christian Temples, and made them his owne: and had commaunded to be done so with them at Ierusalem: his anger was so great towards the Patriarke, that hee caused him to be bound in chaines & to be shamefully carried through the Ci∣tie, and from thence sent him to Rhodes. One cause of his an∣ger towards him was, that he vnderstood, that he had receiued the Popes new Calender into Greece & other Christian chur∣ches of the East, to the great offence of many. An other, for that he pronounced a sentence of diuorcement against a migh∣tie man in Greece, who the better to be reuenged vpon the Pa∣triarke, renounced his faith & turned Turke, liuing afterwards
in Amurathes Court, and continually incyting him against the Patriarke. Finally when in a Synode,The Patriark of Constanti∣nople. it was decreed (as the Turke willed) that a company of the Grecians shouuld be carried in∣to the Desarts, and there erect a Colonie, and the Patriark had said it was very hard & iniust: Theophilus Hieroneonaclus & Pe∣rachonnius, told the Turke hereof: who abdicated the Patriark, and put Pachonnius in his place; who being a rude and vn∣learned man, after hee had beene in the place one yeare, was remooued, and Theoseptus succeeded, who was inaugurated the yeare, 1585. William Carter of London, at a Sessions in the Old-bayly, was there indighted, arraigned, and condemned of high trea∣son, for printing a seditious and traiterous booke in English: In∣tituled, A Treatise of schisme: and was for the same (according to sentence pronounced against him) drawne, hanged, and quartered. I. St. Two and thirtie Seminaries, Massing Priests,Seminaries banished. and other late prisoners in the Tower of London, Marshall-sea, Kings bench, and other places, were embarked in the Mary Marlin of Colchester, to bee transported ouer into the coasts of Nor∣mandie, to bee banished this Realme for euer, by the vertue of a Commission from her Maiestie, before specified. In the beginning of this yeare, at Riga in Liuonia,An insurrecti∣on about the new Calender a great hurly burly happened amongst the Citizens about the Popes new Calender, which presently burst out into open sedition. D. Chytraeus. Henry Archbishop of Breme, Osuaborge, Padeborne, Duke of Saxonie, the sonne of Frances the elder, a Prince endued with vertue, wisedome, clemencie, and learning, in the flower of his youth, being of the age of 35. yeares, was called out of this World. Idem. Pope Gregorie, the thirteenth of that name, a Bolonist,The Popes death. called before Hugo Boncompagno, beeing of the age of eigh∣tie yeares, dyed at Rome the eleuenth day of Aprill, when he had ruled in the Sea the space of thirteene yeares and a litle more.
This Pope renewed the hatred of his predecessor Pius the fift, against the Queene of England: and so practised by all manner of meanes, one while by force, (as it appeareth by the great Armada sent into Ireland, and had a miserable ende) an other while by craft and deceit (as was seene in the great traytor Parry, and others by him sent) who had also misera∣ble end. It was the common voyce and fame in Rome, that this Gregorie before hee was Pope, and also beeing Pope, had his concubine, of whom hee had also title sonnes, which said vnto him such Graces as made him to laugh: and beeing Pope, such was the grace that Phillippicus his sonne said, that the Pope his father gaue him 5000. crownes a yeare. M. Cyp. Val. Sixtus. 5.Felix Pereto, called Sixtus 5. was borne in a Village cal∣led Montalto, neare to the Citie of Firmo, which is in the Mar∣ches of Ancona: he was of the order of the Franciscans, & Car∣dinall of Montalto. In this Pope the common saying of Spaine was fulfilled: Rex por natura, y papa por ventura. A King by name, a Pope by aduenture: for so poore was his father, that hee was a Swine-heard. Felix in his childhood was very poorely brought vp, but shewing some sparkes of wit, a gentlewoman for Gods sake cloathed him with the habit of S. Frances, and entreated the Warden to receiue him into his couent, where hee studied the liberall sciences and schoole diuinitie, and in those sciences hee much profited. In the end, being now of age, he was made In∣quisitor. In which office such was his carriages, as feawe could a∣bide his crueltie: and so it hapned, that he called before him a Magnifico of Ʋenice, (who being come) hee intreated discour∣teously & inhumanely. This gentleman vnaccustomed to hre such iniuries and disgraces (as by that which after he did for re∣uenge to the L. Inquisitor appeareth) stomacked the matter. A feawe daies after, this Gentleman encountred the Inquisitor; and when he sawe him, he commanded his seruant with a good cudgell which he carried, to abate the fiercenesse of the vnhap∣pie Pereto. Felix being thus cudgelled returned to Rome, and recounted his mischance to Pope Pius 4. The Pope hereat dis∣daining,
sent him backe to Ʋenice with much more authori∣tie and power then before.A notable act of the Seignory of Venice. When hee was returned to Ʋe∣nice. hee presented his commission to the Seignorie. The Seignory beeing wise, and knowing the quarrelous humour of this man, and well perceiuing that hee came with a desire to bee reuenged, commaunded a Waxe candle to bee ligh∣ted, and Felix, if hee were wise, precisely to depart theyr dominion and iurisdiction, before that candle were consu∣med. This Felix vnable to doo otherwise, returned eftsoones to Rome, and complained to the Pope. The Pope see∣ing this man meete for his seruice, made him Maister of his Pallace. After this, when the Spanish Inquisition (of all men how high so euer feared, and liked of none) held the Arch∣bishoppe of Tolledo for suspected of heresie; the Pope sent Felix into Spaine to heare this cause. The Generall of the Franciscans, the chiefe dignitie among them, now happe∣ned to die. This dignitie gaue the Pope, whom a feawe yeares after, the same Pope made Cardinall. In the conclu∣sion, when Gregorie was dead, Felix by the meanes of his good friends in Spaine was made Pope, and called himselfe Sixtus the fift. This name he tooke in memorie of Sixtus 4. who was as he, a Franciscan Friar. M. Cyp. Val. This Pope talking one day of his base birth and paren∣tage, saide that hee came from a most illustrious house: for (said hee) the vpper part of the roofe thereof beeing al∣waies torne and vncouered, the Sunne daily made it most glorious with his beames. Anthonius Ciracella, de vitis pon∣tificum The Princes of the Empire, with the K. of Denmarke,The Prince of Saxonie prisoner. sent their Embassadors in the moneth of March to the Emperor at Prage, to entreat for the enlargement of Iohn Frederick Prince of Saxonie, whom hee held in prison the space of 18. yeares: which although the Emperor condiscended to in word only, yet he bound the captiue Prince with such hard conditions that he
had rather haue bene a continual prisoner, then to be deliuered after such maner. D. Chytraeus. The League.Two things gaue an alarum to he League: one, the assembly at Mountauban: the other the voyage of the D. d'Espernon to the K. of Nauarre, which it tooke as brands to kindle her fire, and began to send out Commissions in all places in the kings name, who disauouched them, & prohibited the raising of soul∣diers.The K. Edict 18. of March, 1585. against raising of men The first point of their disliking, shewed the reason which mooued the Cardinall of Bourbon, the Princes, Lords, Townes and Commons, beeing Catholickes, to oppose themselues a∣gainst the heretikes. Secondly, because they were offended that the Parliament which they would haue had to be holden concerning warres, to be made against the Huguenots, had beene reuoked. Thirdly, to breake the Edict of pacification. Fourthly, because they stood in feare, that if the King should die without children, there would rise great trouble for the succession of the Crowne: whereof the King of Nauarre had great hope since the death of Monsieur the kings brother, by the practice of his friends, and fauourers of the king. Fiftly, because of the great preparations of warre, made both within and without the Realme, that should be readie by the 15. of Aprill then next ensuing, to execute that which they said had beene concluded in an assembly at Magdebourge the 15. of December, 1584. against ye religion, the king, and his subiects: by the which it was agreed, that the Queen of England should furnish 5000. Rutters, 4000. Switzers, 12000. English Count Palatine, Prince Cassamire, and the D. Pomeranie, each of them 4000, Rutters. The Lantgraue of Hesse, two thousand & 500. The Duke of Wittemberge 2000. The Lords of their League besides the Queene of Englands Forces 5000. Switzers. The Kings Protector and Consull of Scotland, 2000. Scots. The King of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, & their Associats, twen∣tie and fiue thousand Harquebusiers, and 4000. horse, that had sworne neuer to make peace with the King of France, but with all their consents to maintaine the Prince of O∣range in the lowe Countries against the King of Spaine, and to helpe the Emperour to get the Domaines of the
Empire, withholden by the Pope, and to send their deputies from all places in the moneth of March, to Basill and Swit∣zerland, there to determine the differences of the Lords Sup∣per. Sixtly, because those of the religion would not yeeld vp the Townes by them held for the assurance of the execution of the Edict of peace. Seuenthly, because of the vniuersall a∣buse suffered in placing of Officers, in leauying of monies, and by inuention of excessiue oppressions laid vpon the people: And lastly, against such as at abusing the Kings fauour and au∣thoritie, had in a manner seazed vpon his person, impeached the ordinary accesse of honest men vnto him, consumed the Kings treasures, braued the Nobilitie out of the libertie of iu∣stice, spoiled the Cleargie of their Tithes, and perswaded the King that it was necessary for his seruice, to weaken and dimi∣nish the authoritie of the Catholicke Princes and Lords. Vp∣on these iust occasions, they said they were forced to meete in armes. H. of Fr. The League made warre against the Huguenots, seazing vpon the best Townes of the Catholickes in all the Realme. Religion was preached in Guyenne, and they went to driue it out of Picardie: the Huguenots were Rochell, and the Leagues Army marched straight to Paris, they were at Mount∣pellier, and the League set vpon Marsaille: which by meanes of the second Consull of the Towne they tooke, who afterward was hanged. Antwerpe, a Citie Brabant,Antwerpe yeeldeth to the king of Spaine. the most famous Towne of all Belgia and Europe, after Alexander Farnese Duke of Par∣ma had stopped their passage by the Riuer by the space almost of an whole yeare: constrained by famine and the daily tu∣mult of the common people, who desired peace, returned to the obedience of the king of Spaine, & yeelded to the Duke vpon very meane conditions. On the 26. of Iune, arriued at London, Deputies for the Estates of the Netherlands or lowe Countries; and on the 29. of the same, they came to Greenwich, where by vertue of their commission from the vnited Countries, they presented to her Maiestie the soueraigntie of those Countries, to wit, of
Brabant (but the commission for the siege of Antwerpe not ful∣ly authorised) of Gelder, of Flaunders, Holland, Friseland, Zeland, and Ʋtrick. I. Hooker. The Queene of England, of her most gracious compassi∣on and mercie, tooke into her protection and defence, the e∣state of Poland and Zeland. S.F. Drake.Syr Frances Drake, Generall of the English Nauie, tooke his voyage to the coasts of Spaine and America, that thereby hee might weaken the power of king Phillip: hee tooke the greene Promontory, where the ships that are to goe to Ame∣rica lie at Roade. Then came he to Hispaniola, an Iland of S. Domingo, in the beginning of Ianuary, where he stirred vp the slaues of Affrica and Aethiopia (who had there their Colonies, and were so cruelly handled, that many times in dispaire they offered violence to themselues) to fight for their libertie, who being armed by thē, killed the Spaniards, and deliuered vp the Ile. He tooke all their gold which was ready shipped for Spaine: 254. peeces of Ordinance, and returned richly laden with gold into England, before Autumne, with 23. ships. D. Chytraeus. At this time was the conspiracie of Anth. Babington, Salisbury, Tytchbourne, Abington, &c. against our most gracious Soue∣raigne, incited thereto by Mary Q. of Scots: who for this trai∣terous attempt, were arraigned, conuicted, condemned & exe∣cuted, according to the law made for traitors. A great victory hapned to the Queen in Ireland, against the E. of Arrane and L. Feruhurst, who were banished out of Scot∣land. These practised with the Guise & the Spaniards, & brought with thē 3000. Scots into Ireland, and at Conocke they were put to the sword by S. Ri. Bingā, gouernor of that prouince. Chytraeus. Vpon the 8. day of September, Robert E. of Leicester, ac∣companied with diuers honorable personages, Captaines, and souldiers, with a traine to the number of 50. sailes of ships and hoyes, set forward toward Flushing, where he was princely en∣tertained by Graue Maurice, second son to the deceased Prince of Orange. I. Hooper. The Pope excommunicated the King of Nauarre & the Prince of Conde, declaring him incapable to the succession of
the Crowne of France:The Pope ex∣communica∣ted the king of Nauarre and ye Prince of Conde. abandoning his person and his Coun∣tries, for a pray to such as could obtaine it: but they sleigthly regarding it, opposed themselues against it. The K. of Nauarre complained himselfe to all the estates of France, in that they had caused the succession of a king being yet aliue, to be deci∣ded in the Court of Rome, made the title of a Prince of the bloud, to be iudged by the Pope: and suffered the Consistorie to giue that which belonged not vnto them: he sent his Letters to the Cleargie, the Nobilitie, and the Commons. The Princes of Germanie, that sought to aide such as were of their religion, perceiuing France to be a body wounded to death, sent their Embassadors to the K. desiring him to open his eyes to the teares, & his eares to the complaints of his poore subiects, to heare the requests of his neighbours for his owne good, the quietnes and honor of his faith, his name, and repu∣tation. The K. answered, that he knew what was necessary for himselfe and his subiects, & that according to the cause, and for their good and tranquillitie, he had made and changed his ordi∣nances, as all Princes in Christendome vse to do: and that for his part, hauing the feare of God, & the loue of his subiects liue∣ly ingrauen in his heart, hee would do nothing against the ho∣nour of his conscience, nor the fatherly care he had of his peo∣ple. With which answere they returned not well pleased. This yeare, Augustus Duke of Saxonie, one of the Princes E∣lectors, new come from hunting suddenly died,The death of Augustus. being of the age of 60. yeares, and was buried at Friberge. Genebrardus. There died likewise at the same time, Margarite of Au∣stria, the base daughter of Charles the fift, and mother of Alex∣ander Duke of Parma, and Gouernour of Belgia. Charles Count Palatine married Dorithie the daughter of William Duke of Brunswick, at Cella. D. Chytraeus. On the fourth day of Iune, L. Edward, Earle of Rutland, went Embassador into Scotland, for a ratificatiō of a firme bond of peace betweene Elizabeth Queene of England, & Iames the sixt, K. of Scots, vpon certain causes necessary and important, which was confirmed at Barwicke the 19. of Iune, where the Embassadors of Scotland were likewise present. I. Vowell.
The 16. of Iuly, not farre from Barwick, the borderers of both the Nations of England and Scotland assembled to de∣termine for recompence of all such iniuries, as each people of∣fered to other, at what time the Lord of Fernhurst. Warden of the Scottish borders, Iames Steward, Earle of Arrane, then Chauncelor, and Syr  Russell Knight, Lord Russell, and Syr I. Forster Knight, Warden of their middle Marshes. came with their company. When the Wardens were set vpon the bench, there did suddenly arise amongst the people a contention, whereby followed at the first, some small fray, which beeing perceiued by the Lord Russell,The death of the L. Russel. hee arose from the bench, and called for his horse, who meaning to appease the matter, went amongst the prease, at what time a certaine number of shot comming on him, he was suddenly (but most vniustly) slaine with a peece amongst the rest, discharged against him by a Scot, borne about that place (suspected by the most, to be the Lord of Fernhursts brother) The losse of which noble Gen∣tleman, being of so great a hope, was much lamented, and that especially for his vntimely death, so iniuriously by the Earle of Arrane (as the common report went) procured and so sud∣denly performed, hee in the 35. yeare of his age, did bereaue the Realme of England of a goodly young person, well stayed in gouernment, bountiful, wise, and vertuous, whose death hap∣pened the day before that his honourable father the Earle of Bedford, departed this world. I. Hooker. Heluetians.Fourteene thousand Heluetians who were Catholickes, and commaunded to appeare by the King of Nauarre, went to the aide of the holy League: but before they tooke their iour∣ney, they all receiued the Sacrament, and swore that they did beare Armes onely for the defence of the Catholicke faith: but if the king shuld be found to do any fauour to the Heluetians, they promised to lay downe their weapons and returne. Anth. Cicarella. A Parliament was held in Nouember, both for the con∣tinuing of the defence of the lowe Countries against the King of Spaine: and as for the determining of the treacherous practi∣ses of the Queene of Scot, shee was forthwith conueyed
to Foderinghay Castle, in Northampton Shire,The death of the Queene of Scots. which sometimes belonged to the Dukes of Lancaster; where being tried by the Nobles of the Realme, shee was found guiltie, and afterward beheaded. She was crowned Queene of Scots when she was but 18. moneths old, and after in the sixt yeare of her raigne called in∣to France, where at 15. yeares she was married to Frances the second: then the Dolphin of France being 14. yeares of age, with whom she liued three yeares. After whose decease, she re∣turned into Scotland, and was married to Henry Arlye, at the age of 22. by whom she had one onely sonne, Ieames the sixt, now king. This husband dead, she was married the third time to the Earle of Bothuell, who died in prison; after this, she liued 18. yeares in England. Genebrardus. Gulielmus Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua, departed this life, whom his onely sonne Ʋincentius succeeded, being of the age of 25. yeares. Idem. Syr F. Drake returned out of America, came into Zeland, the other fleete went towards India, who tooke two ships out of S. Thomas Ile, and the Gouernour thereof. The one of them pe∣rished, the other was brought home a rich prize. This yeare at Zutphen in Gilderland. S. Phillip Sidney,The Death of S. Ph. Sidney Eng∣lands Mars and Muse, was shot in the thigh with a Musket, whereof he died. His body was conueyed into England, and ho∣nourably buried in Powles. I. Vowell. Frederick king of Denmarke, sollicited by the king of Na∣uarre for aide against Guise, sent his Embassadors to Henry king of France, who should entreate that the peace of the reformed Religion, graunted before by the king, and confirmed by oath, might bee kept with the king of Nauarre and his fol∣lowers D. Chytraeus. At Augusta, after the superintendent was cast out,Augusta. the estate of the Ministers of the Church, waxed euery day worse. For after that, the Gregorian Calendar was receiued of them, the pontificall Magistrate assured to himselfe authoritie and right of choosing and calling the Ministers of the Church, which pri∣uiledge the Elders and Gouernours of the Church had before,
with the Ministery, & held it by the authority of the Emperor, who sent Commissioners to that end into the Citie. But when the Ministers of the Church would not agree to them, they were all commanded to depart the Citie before Sunne set, and others of the same confession were called from Noriberga and other places, and substituted in their places. Whom when the people could not heare, nor vse their seruice, the pontificall Magistrate besides the garrison that was alreadie in the towne, brought more souldiers, thereby to terrifie them, and bring them to obedience. D. Chytraeus. Iulius Bishop of Wurtzeburg began to vse great crueltie towards them of the confession of Augusta, in his Diocesses, banishing many of them, and constraining them to sell their goods in so short a space that they left the third part to him. William Lantsgraue of Hesse his neighbour, disswaded him from this crueltie; but following the example of Balthasar Abbot of Fulden, who greatly persecuted his subiects vnder the prae∣text of Religion: hee not only incurred the hatred of all men, but was depriued of all titles and dignities. Idem. Bathorus dieth.This yeare vpon the 27. of September, Stephen Bathorus King of Poland, Prince of Transiluania, died when he had raig∣ned 10. yeares. Him followed in this way of all flesh, Mahomet (the ser∣uant of God) King of Persia, who all his raigne held warre with the Turke with equall fortunes. And in Saxonie Fredericke Duke of Saxonie. Iames K. of Scots, be∣sieged and taken.The 20. of October, Iames the King of Scots was besie∣ged by his subiects, and taken in the Castle of Saint Damian. Those Dukedomes and Seignories which many yeares before Iohn Basilides Prince of Moschouites had taken from the Polan∣ders, the aforesaid Stephen recouered again, and annexed them to the crowne, he shewed himselfe of a dauntlesse spirit against the Turke, for when according to the auncient custome, he demaunded certain Forces to maintaine his warres against the Sophy of Persia, hee denied him, saying that the white Eagle of Poland which before was vnfeathered, and of no force, was now become young againe, full fledged, and had whet and sharpe∣ned
her bill and talents. Anch. Cicar. This yeare Maister Thomas Cauendish began his voyage about the world, vpon the twentie one of Iuly,M. Cauēdish voyage about the world. entering in at the straight of Magellan, and returning by the Cape bona Speranza; Which voyage hee finished to the space of two yeares, and lesse then two moneths, arriuing at Plimmouth the ninth of September. 1588. Maister Richard Hakl∣nit. In the beginning of this yeare, Syr William Standley trai∣torously yeelded vp those Townes of the which he was made Gouernour by the Earle of Leicester. After the death of Stephen King of Poland,Contention about the election of the king of Poland the Polanders were carefull for the election of a new. Some thought it best to offer it to the Emperour, who had succeeded without any other election his Father Maximilian, the chosen King of Po∣land, If hee had come to the possession thereof. Some propo∣sed the Duke of Parma, because hee was a wise and valiant souldier, and for that he was the Nephew of Cardinal Farnese, who when he was Protector of this Realme, was verie kinde and liberall to the people. Many had liking to the Prince of Transiluania, and to Cardinall Bathoraeus, and the Duke of Ferrrara. Nobles likewise were desirous of it, amongst whom Samoscius the high Chauncellour (whom Stephen had prefer∣red to such height of honor that nothing was thought wanting in him for the perfection thereof but the title of a King) was thought most fit. But all these were excluded, and there were yet two other competitors, Sigismond Prince of Suecia, and Maximilian Archduke of Austria, and brother to the Empe∣rour. Maximilian is chosen of the one part;Maximilian. Sigismond. Others proclaimed med Sigismond, a young Prince of twentie yeares of age, or there-about. These two were both called to the possession of a kingdome, who hearing thereof made speedie haste thereto. Maximilian first came with his Armie, consisting of sixteen thousand horse and foote, and pitched his Tents in a field neare the Citie of Craconia, and sent to the Citizens that he might be crowned.
The Cracouians would by no meanes admit him, but sent Let∣ters to the Prince of Suetia, that hee would come, who with great ioy was receiued and crowned. Now the Polanders thought themselues strong enough for the Muschouites, whose Duke they called the Dragon of the North, and against whom they beare an innated hatred. Chytraeus. And. Cica∣rell. Gen. D. of Guise.The Duke of Guise perceiuing the Army of Rutters to be a body dispearced, hauing nothing but the legs and Armes, executed vpon them that, which he had determined from the first day of their entrie, which was vpon the Generalls lodging, and so by striking the shepheard, diuided the flocke, as Caesar did at the battaile of Pharsalia. The Pope, the King of Spaine, and the Duke of Sauoy, made fiers of ioy, and pronounced the praises of the Duke of Guise. The Pope sent him a sword engrauen with burning flames. The Duke of Parma had sent him his Armes, saying: that among all the Princes of Europe, it belonged only to Hen∣ry of Lorraine to beare Armes, and to be a commaunder in the warres. Max. taken prisoner.After many broiles betweene these two elected Kings of Poland, Max▪ was constrained to leaue Poland, but hee was pursued by Samoscius the Chauncelor, and at Pitscha he besie∣ged him and tooke him prisoner. Maria de la Visitatione.In this yeare, 1588. Maria de la Visitatione, Prioresse of the Monasterie de Annūciada in Lisbone, was held for wonderful holy: whose hypocrisie and false myracles were discouered, and publikely condemned. Her the fond people called the holy Nunne. Another Franciscan (I should haue said a Dominican) a feawe yeares since, rose vp in Lisbone, who they said had the fiue wounds of Christ, as had S. Francess: and many other things they say of her. One Stephen de Lusignan, a Dominican Friar, who collecting all he could get to extoll her, compiled a booke in French, and dedicated the same to the Queene of Fraunce, Imprinted at Paris by Iohn Bessant 1586. In the beginning of the booke, shee is pictured like a Dominican Nunne, with a blacke mantle, and a white rolle, a coate, and
white loose habit vpon the Mantle, and on her head a crowne of thornes: the Crucifix on high set ouer her, and falling to∣wards her, with rayes from the wounds which reach to the feet and hands of the Nunne, that out of the same commeth a heart, which she holdeth betwixt the fingers of her right hand: a Dragon she hath vnder her feete, a Dominican Friar before her kneeling, and a secular man and woman: and at her left side, a paire of Beads hanging. The title of the booke is this. The great miracles, and the most holy wounds, which this present yeare haue happened to the right reuerend mother, now Prioresse of the Mona∣sterie de la Anunciada, in the Citie of Lisbon, in the Kingdome of Portugall, of the order of preaching Friars, approoued by the reue∣rend Father, Friar Lewis de Granada, and by other persons of cre∣dit M. Cyp. Val. So famous was the holinesse of this Nunne, that Cardi∣nall Albertus of Austria, sent information to Pope Sixtus the fift. To whom the Pope wrote this Letter. With great ioy haue wee read that thou hast procured to bee written, the vertues of the Prioresse of the Monasterie Anunciada, of the most holy Virgin. And of the great benefites which God hath shewed her, we pray thy diuine goodnesse from day to day, to make her more worthy of his grace, and to in∣rich her with his heauenly gifts, for the glory of his name, and ioy of his faithfull. Giuen in S. Maries at Rome, with the litle Ring of the fish. Fredericke the second, king of Denmarke, the 30. yeare of his raigne, and 54. of his age, departed this life at Arderfoa in Zeland: whom Christian the fourth, of eleuen yeares of age succeeded. In the moneth of Aprill,K. Phillip asketh counsel of Maria de la Visitatione 1588. Phillip the second of that name, King of Spaine, pretending to send his inuinci∣ble Fleete for the conquest of England, made choyce by the aduice of the Prioresse of the Monasterie of the A∣nunciada, whose name was Mary of the visitation, as most worthy for her holinesse, to blesse his Standard royall, the which shee did, with vsing diuers other ceremonies, and in the deliuerie thereof to the Duke of Medina Sidonia,
who was appointed the chiefe Generall, shee did pronounce openly good successe and victorie to the Duke, in saying hee should returne a victorious Prince. This standard was car∣ried in procession by Dan Francisco de Gordoua, who was a Spaniard, and the tallest Gentleman that could bee founde, hee beeing on horse-backe, to the ende it might bee better seene. At the solemnizing whereof, there was such a number of people assembled, that diuers of them perished in the thrōg. There was present the Arch-duke Albertus, Cardinall and Gouernour of the kingdome of Portugall, the Popes Nuncio the Arch-bishop, who was head Inquisitor, with diuers other Nobles, Prelates, and Gentlemen. This solemnization du∣red so long that Albertus fainted with fasting, and his holie Nunne to comfort him, caused a messe of the broath which was for her owne diet to bee brought, who presented it to him, which hee accepted most willingly, comming from the hand of so holy a Nunne: but the next yeare all her holi∣nesse false myracles, and great dissimulations was then found out, and shee condemned and punished for the same. M. Cyp. Val. The Spanish Nauie.The Nauie of the King of Spaine three whole yeares in furnishing, was 125. great shippes, with 20000. choyse souldiers out of Spaine and Italie, 10000. souldiers, 2000. peeces of Ordinance, with all manner of furniture and pro∣uision for sixe moneths, at the ende of May set out from the hauen of Tagus, and slowly proceeding to the Westerne coast of Spaine, the 30. of Iune it came to Coronis, a Port of Spaine, towards the farthest North in the bounds of Gallicia and Astu∣ria, which Ptoloney calleth the hauen of the Artabrians. The chiefe Generall of the Nauie was Alphonsus Peresius, Duke of Medina Sidonia. The Admirall by sea was Iohannes Marsinus Recaldeus of Cantabria. But when hey had hoisted their sailes, scarce out of the sight of the Spanish coast,A tempest di∣uideth them. a tempest suddenly ri∣sing, they were diuided and scattered, and with contrary windes driuen into the same and the neighbouring hauens of Asturia and Biscay.
The King when hee vnderstood that the whole Nauy met together at Coronis, commaunded that forthwith it should goe for England, ioyning with the Duke of Parmaes shippes in Belgia, and to set the souldiers vpon the conti∣nent. S. F. Drake Vice-admirall, followed them close,S. F. Drake. and tooke the hindermost that slowly sailed after, and in her, Pe∣trus Ʋaldesius. The Nauy of the Duke of Parma partly by aduerse windes hindered, and partly by a Nauy of Zeland, that lay before Dunkerke, in vaine any longer expected of the Spaniards, the Duke of Sidonia cast Anchor neare vnto Cal∣laice. Syr Frances Drake the next night filled eight old ships with pitch, brimstone, and other matter for fire,A strategem. a great winde blowing on their backes, draue them vpon the Spanish Na∣uie. Who fearing least their ships likewise had beene burnt, cut their Anchors and departed. Whom S. Frances by this stratagem so dispersed and put to flight, pursued with his balls of fire, and by reason of the greatnesse and height of the Spa∣nish ships, feawe of them missed. Of this great Fleete 32. were sunke and taken by the English, and in them, 10000. souldiers, the rest of the Nauie were thus scattered: two were driuen to Flissingam all to beaten and wrackt: the other after long say∣ling, returned into Spaine. The D. of Parma dismissed his fleet, cashiered his Marriners, and sent some of the souldiers to the siege of Bergam Vpsome. D. Chytraeus. M. Gall. Anth. Cic∣carella This yeare the Duke of Bullen died at Geneua of the age of 25. yeares. The most Christian Prince of Conde,The Prince of Conde poi∣soned. whom Sixtus the fift excommunicated and cursed, died of poison. In the same yeare, H. of Lotharing, D. of Guise, by the com∣maundement of the K. of France, was slaine at Blois,The Duke of Guise slaine. where the Parliament was held: and the day after the Cardinal his bro∣ther. The Duke was 42. yeares of age, and was slaine in his Clymactetic yeare. If Plutarch had liued in these times, hee would haue
compared him to C. Iulius Caesar. Genebrardus. This is that wonderfull yeare of the which Iohannes Rhe∣giomontanus the great Mathematician wrote a Prognosticati∣on or Prophecie, almost after that of Sibilla. Post mille exple∣tos. Idem. The generall troubles and tumults in this yeare.The like Iohannes Stofflaus a famous Astrologian, and in our time that noble Gentleman Iohannes Rantzoutus, foretold in his booke of Climacterike yeares, and the fall of Empires. Whose Prophecies haue sorted to trie euents, which we haue seene this yeare. Poland.First the kingdom of Poland was most miserably troubled by ciuil & intestine warres, by reason of foure Kings they had at once in this yeare. Sigismond of Suecia, Maximilian of Au∣strich, Henry Valois, and Stephen Bathor, as then vnburied. So likewise Suecia was vexed by sundry tumults; Fredericke the se∣cond being dead, foure Protectors gouerned the kingdom du∣ring his sonnes minoritie.Q of Scots. England. Turkes. The Queene of Scots was beheaded. England obteined a wonderful victorie at sea ouer the Spani∣ards. The Sophie of Persia dyed. The Turke had ill successe in Hungarie against the Christians. The Hungarians likewise suf∣fered great losses.Italie. Maximilian taken captiue by the Polanders was committed to prison. Italie was sore molested by the Ban∣detti. Fraunce was incombred with ciuil broyles. Germanie brought to sleep by her old religion, imbraceth now that face of religion. And to be briefe, from the rising of the Sunne, to the setting thereof, there was no place in the which somewhat happened that was not worthie to be wondred at. See Gene∣brardus. Guise.The death of the Duke of Guise and of his brother, caused many, and the most principall Cities of France, as Paris, Roan, Lyons, Tholous, and others, to rebell against the King. M. Cy∣prian. Ʋal. After that the King of France had commanded the D. of Guise to be slaine,The Pope angrie with Henry the 3. and his brother Cardinall to be strangled, he committed likewise to prison Charles Cardinall Burbon, Legate Apostolike, Peter Arch-bishop of Lions, and heire of the Duke of Guise, which when the Pope vnderstood, he tooke it gree∣uously,
and in the highest Consistory, made an oration thereof to his Cardinalls. About this matter, not long after hee sent an Embassador to H. of France, to intreat for the deliuery of the Cardinall of Bourbon, and the Archbishop of Lyons: to whom was answered, that for the Cardinall, he might by no meanes be deliuered, for that his enlargement would stirre sedition: and as touching the Archbishop, that it was not in him to doo, whē that Guastius, who had charge of the Castle of Ambois, and the prisoners, now being treated Lord therof, no prisoner could be dismissed without paying his raunsome, Whē the Pope had often in vaine sollicited the K. and was denied, he thus decreed,He threatneth excommuni∣cation. that if at a certaine time the King did not deliuer them, and thirtie daies after their enlargement, certifie it to the Apo∣stolicke Sea by his Letters, vnder his owne hand and seale, that forthwith he was excommunicated, and did incurre all Ecclesi∣asticall censures, which are read in the holy Canons, in the ge∣nerall and particular constitutions, and in the Bull of the Sup∣per of the Lord. This also was determined against all those which were of his counsell or aide, or any way had assisted him in the premisses. Besides, he cited the King himselfe, that with∣in the space of 60. dayes, which should begin from the day of the notice to the king: that hee in his owne proper person, or some one especially in his place, should come to Rome, there to yeeld reason wherefore he caused the Duke of Guise to bee slaine, and held in prison the Cardinall and Archbishop: and that the rest that were sommoned, should come themselues without deputies: to this also hee added, that none of them, nor the king himselfe, no not in case of conscience, the houre and dayes of death excepted, and not then to bee absolued, vn∣lesse hee obeyed, and satisfied the Church in all things which hee was enioyned to doo. Without this promise hee might not be absolued, not in the full Iubily, or the holy marke of the Crosse, any indulgence, power, or priviledge whatsoeuer, to him or his predecessors before granted notwithstanding. Anth. Cicarella. The Huguenots in their writings published at that time,Huguenots. acknowledged not that action of the thirteenth of December,
as a clap of thunder, that maketh more noise then it doth hurt, nor as a disgrace of fortune, wherevnto the greatest personages are most subiect▪ but as a worke of God, and as one of the most notable workes that he had wrought for them, thereby begin∣ning to worke their reuenge, for the massacre of S. Bartholo∣mewes day, and to relieue them out of the miserable state wher∣in they stood. In the moneth of Ianuary the Embassadors of the Em∣perour Rodolphe, treated with the Polanders about the deliue∣rie of Max. Arch-duke of Austria, in the territories of Silesia & Polonia at Beutena. Where vpon certaine conditions to bee by him performed, he was enlarged without ransome. D. Chytreus. The death of the Queene of France.Vpon Twelfe eue, Katherine de Medices, the daughter of Laurentius de Medices, D. of Vrbin, and Magdelen the daughter of the E. of Bononie and Auerina, the wife of H. the 2. King of France, and mother of the French K. H. 3. in the 70. yeare of her age, and fift day of her sicknesse, died at Blois. Gene∣brardus. This yeare, 1589. the holy Nun before spoken of, was found to be a counterfeit. Wherfore the Lords pronounced sentence against her, in the Monastery of the mother of God, of the or∣der of S. Francis, in the Citie of Lisbone. And for that she had not dealt with, nor inuocated the diuell, they adiudged her to perpetuall imprisonment. M. Cyp. Val. The king of France ex∣cōmunicated.The Pope Sixtus 5. excommunicateth the K. of France. The K. came vpon Paris, and besieged it straightly. The Pari∣sians. seeing themselues in that estate, resolued of no other re∣medie for deliuerance of their present miserie, but to kill the king. To him that would kill him, they did promise great re∣wards. Amongst all these, was a Iacobine Friar, called Iaques Clement, borne in a Village called Sorbone, neare Seins, hauing passed through the hands of certain Confessors, and conferred with some Iesuites and others, was for a kind of dexteritie in him obserued, found meete to strike so great a stroake. He was vrged and put forward therein; and in the end the D. Demaine, the sister of Montpensier, & other, had conference with him in diuers places, they requested him to perseuer in this good deter∣mination,
which they knew to rise in him by extraordinarie inspirations to performe so renowned a seruice to the holy v∣nion, the Catholick Church and his Countrie. They caused the zealous Sorbonists and Iesuits to preach, that the people should yet haue patience for 7. or 8. daies, and they should see some wonderfull matter come to passe, that shuld make wel with the vnion. The Preachers of Roan, Orleance, and Amiens, preached the like at the same time, and in semblable tearmes. The Friar hauing taken order for his complot, departed frō Paris, & went toward S. Clouis. He being presented to speake to the K. the 1. of August, said that he had Letters from the President of Har∣lay, and credence on hs part: the K. caused him to be called in∣to his chamber, where there was no other but the L. of Belle-good, and the procurer Generall,The K is slain by a Iacobin Friar. whom he procured to retire a part. The Friar perceiuing himselfe alone, and opportunitie put into his hand, confirming his countenance more & more, drew out of one sleeue a paper, which he presented to the K. and out of the other, poisoned knife, with which, violētly he sheathed a thrust within the kings small ribbes: who feeling himselfe wounded, plucked the knife out of the wound, wherewith hee strooke the Friar aboue the eye, & thervpon some gentlemen rushing in, could not containe, but murdered the murderer, al∣though the king commanded the contrary. This Friar after, for his bloudie deed was canonized a Saint. In the annagransme of his name, Friar Iaques Clement,The Death of the king of France, H. the 3. were found these words in so many letters: C'est l'enfer quim'a creè: which signifieth: It is hell that created or brought me forth. The K. died ye next morning following: but before his depar∣ture, he named the K. of Nauarre his brother, lawfull successor to the Crowne, exhorted his subiects to obey him, to remaine vnited, and to refer the difference of religion, to the conuoca∣tion of the estates generall of the Realme, who would thinke vpon conuenient remedies for the same, to haue a care of reli∣gion and pietie, and pray to God for him: vpon these words he gaue vp the ghost. Hist. of France. D. Chytraeus. He liued 37 yeares, 10 moneths, and 11. daies, he raigned 15. yeares and two moneths, in this Prince failed the Kings of the
race of Ʋalois, which had raigned in France from the yeare, 1515. to the yeare, 1589. vnder their dominions, almost all the won∣ders of former ages had bene renewed. Whom H. the 4. of the race of Bourbon, succeeded. Genebrardus. This is worthy of speciall note. In the moneth of May, 4. moneths before he was slaine, a certaine learned man beeing asked by his friends what he hoped of this H. the third K. Per sortes Virgilianas inquirens, The booke of Virgill being opened, and the 7. verse, which number he chose in his mind▪ he found, Olli dura quies oculis, & ferreus vrget Soninus, in aeternam clauduntur lumina noctem. The victory of Harens.After his death, warres began a fresh, betwixt the confede∣rate Catholickes, and the king of Nauarre, many hotte skirmi∣ges were, at the length, on the tenth of March, a battaile was fought at Harens, where the king had the victory, but not without the losse of many of his Nobles. The D. Demaine pre∣sently repaired his Hoste, but the K. conuerted all his Forces against Paris,The siege at Paris. and besieged it, where was so great a famine, that a bushel of wheate was sold for one hundred & fiftie crownes, a mutton for 26. pounds. This siege was raised by the Duke of Parma: in all this space the Pope sent no succour to the confe∣derates. Anth. Cicarrella. Phillip dis∣pleased with the Pope.Phillip K. of Spaine, was much displeased with the Pope, for that he would not aide the confederates, nor excommunicate those Princes and Prelates which followed the K. of Nauarre. The K. therfore vrged that there might be a protestatiō made therof against the Pope. But the Pope iustified his cause before the Cardinals, shewing that hee alwaies behaued himselfe vp∣rightly in the French affaires wherfore certain Cardinals were appointed, who should vnderstand both the causes of ye Popes, and the kings, so that no protestation might be made. A litle before, some difference hapned between the Pope and Count Oliuer, the kings Embassador: for that cause the K. sent the D. of Soisson for the French businesses, but what time this Legate came, he was fallen very sicke, so that no conference was had about so waightie a cause. Anth. Cicarr.
This Sixtus was very couetous, for he sold many offices which before were giuen gratis. When newes came to him Rome of the King of France his death, he made a solemne oration in the Consistory of Car∣dinals the 11. of September, 1589. where he not onely com∣pared the treason of this cursed Iacobine Friar, with the act of Eleazar and of Iudith, but said also that it surpassed thē. Of Elea∣zar is made mention 1. Machab. 6. who seeing an Elephant more mightie then the rest, armed with the Armes of the king, supposing that King Antiochus was vpon him, to deliuer his people, and purchase eternall glory, he aduentured himselfe, and ranne couragiously to the Elephant, through the midst of the squadron, killing on the right hand and on the left, and all sides throwing downe, vntill he came vnder the Elephant, and placing himselfe vnder him, slew him: the Elephant fell to the ground vpon him, and there he died, Iudith cut off the head of Holophernes. The warre that Antiochus and Holophernes made against the people of God, was most vniust: the war which H. the 3. made against the League which had cōspired against him, to kill him, was most iust, so that herein was he no tyrant. This Pope likewise not thus satisfied, forbad that any ob∣sequies & honors accustomed to be made for the dead, should be made for him; and commaunded also, that they should nor pray for him. M. Cyp. Valerian. This yeare in the moneth of Aprill,A Fleete for Lisbone. the Queene of Eng∣land commiserating the wrong of D. Antonio, the exiled King of Portugall, sent a well appointed Nauie to Vlisbone, vnder the conduct of Syr F. Drake, and Syr I. Norris. Where they tooke many Spanish ships, richly laden with all manner of Marchandize. Thē landing their souldiers, they tooke Cascais, a neighbouring Towne to Lisbone, and a Suburbe. But the plague encreasing in their ships, they went no further, but re∣turned for England: and by the way forbidden the coasts of Germanie, by reason of their contagious sicknesse, many of them died miserably. This Pope through the deuotion & request of the most Catholicke K. of Spaine,Friar Lewis de Baltram. ordained to bee made the processe of
the miracles of Friar Lewis de Beltram in Aragon, one of the or∣der of the Friars of S. Dominicke, to put him in the number and Catalogue of the Saints. M. Cyp. Val. Priests recan∣ted.William Tedder and Anthony Tirrill, Seminary Priests, re∣canted their erronious opinions at Pauls Crosse. This yeare in Italy fell such store of raine, as neuer was re∣membred the like before. And at Rome was a great aboundance of waters, that Tybris could not be held within his bounds, but twise breaking forth, so ouerflowed the Citie, that they went vp and downe the streetes in boates. At Venice (which contai∣neth in circuite 8. Italian miles, 25. Ilands, Parishes 62. Mona∣steries 41. and 400. common bridges, which euery yeare recei∣ueth onely out of custome and toll, twentie hundred thousand Ducats, which is a Citie in the midst of the Sea, built vpon piles, without walles, & most famous throughout al the world) the Adriatique Sea did so arise, that the chanels of the citie with the abundance of the water fallen, did so rage and swell, that they had no other thought but the whole Citie would haue bin drowned. Genebr. After this, followed a great dearth. Cicar. Anne, the sister of Christiā the 4. K. of Denmarke, daughter of Frederick the 2. is married to Iames the 6. K. of Scots. D. Chytr. In the higher Germanie, Iohannes Starmius Rector of the Vniuersitie of Strasbourge, a very learned and studious man, departed this life the 92. yeare of his age. Idem. The Popes great treasurePope Sixtus, the first yeare of his Popedome, laid vp in the Castle of S. Angelo, tenne hundred thousand Ducats, with this decree, that no part of this treasure might be expended, or er∣rogated, vnlesse it were in the recouery of the holy Land, or a generall expedition against the Turke; and not then, till the Armies were ouer the Sea, and vpon the Turkish shore. Or that there were such an exceeding dearth & scarcitie, or pesti∣lence, or some Christian Prouince were in distresse, or like to fall into the hands of the Infidels, and enemies of the Church, which cannot be recouered without money. Anth. Cicarrella. An heretike burned.Frances Ket, M. of Art, of Wimondham in Norfolke, was con∣uented before Edmund Bishop of Norwiche, for holding diuers detestable opinions against Christ our Sauiour, and was there∣fore burned nigh the Citie.
This yeare died Iohannes Sturmius in high Germanie, be∣ing of the age of foure score and two yeares: hee was Rector of the Vniuersitie of Argentine, a very learned and religious man. In the same yeare, and for the same vse, the Pope laid vp tenne thousand Ducats more, for the recouerie of some king∣dome in the possession of the enemies of the Church of Rome: to these two treasures he added thirtie hundred thousand more, so that after his death were left about fiue Millions, 1.500000. Crownes. Anth. Cicarrella. In the moneth of Ianuary,The marriage of the King of Scots. the marriage of the king of Scots  to Anne the daughter of Fred. the 2. was solemnized with great and royall pompe at Crouebourge. Genebrardus. All Saxonie this yeare was in quiet. In the beginning of March, the Duke de Maine with all his troupes came to the Riuer of Seine, therby to passe ouer the bridge of Mante, whereof the king being aduertised,The battaile at Yurie. prouided for his affaires, and the 12. of the same moneth, he set forward to meet his enemies: and at Yurie he did many notable exploits, and had the victorie. Of the horsmen there were about fifteene hundred slaine and drowned, and about 400. taken prisoners. Amongst the dead was knowne to be slaine, the E. of Egmont, who was Colonell of the troupes, sent by the Duke of Parma: one of the Dukes of Brunswicke, Chastegueray with others. More then 20. Coronells of horsmē was at this time wonne by the K. among the which was the white Cornet, the chief standard be∣longing to the Spanish Generall, and to the Flemings: the Cornet of the Rutters, and more then 60. Ensignes of footmen, besides the 24. Ensignes of the Switzers, which were yeelded presently after the slaughter. In this battaile of Yurie, all the footmen of the Leaguers were ouerthrowne. The King lost the Lords of Cleremount, d' Antragues, Cap∣tain of his Guards, the Lord Scliomberge, de Bongualuay, de Cre∣nay, Fesquieres, and 15. or 20. other Gentlemen, a fewe souldi∣ers, and a fewe hurt. D. Chytraeus. The 10. of May, Charls Cardinal Bourbon,The death of Carls Bour∣bon. proclaimed K. by the cōfederates of the League, by the name of Charls 10. died at
Fountnay, being in prison. The same learned man that prophe∣sied of H. the 3. his death, being asked likewise by a friend, whe∣ther this Charles should be K. of France or no, hee opened his Ʋirgill againe, and pronounced this verse which was next at hand. Cedat ius proprium regi, patriae{que} remittat. This was done the 19. of August, 1589. Genebrardus. The death of Sixtus. 5.The 27. of August, whilest the Parisians did striue with famine and death, Pope Sixtus the 5. died at Rome. This Pope made a Decree that there should not be aboue 70. Cardinalls at once, and amongst them, 4. Doctors of Diui∣nitie, who shuld be chosen out of the Regulars Mendicant, and that the Cardinal shuld be created in the moneth of Decemb. For frō Clemēt 6. this custom began in December, & cōtinued in the church aboue 600. yeares after Christ. This Pope not∣withstanding brake this decree whē he created Cardinals, Allen and Morosine, who he made out of this time. Besides, he decreed that the number of 70. shuld neuer be ful, but there should al∣waies be some voyd places. Hee made many new holy daies in the Church, as the presentation of the glorious virgin Mary, of S. Frances, of Paula, S. Nicholas, of Tollentius, S. Anthonius, of Pa∣dua, S. Placid, & his fellowe Martyrs, Eutichius, Victorinus, bro∣thers of those Cardinals, and his sister Flauia, whom hee com∣manded to be put in the Romane Calender. Anth. Ciccarella. A dissention happened between the Legate of Spaine and France, about the Popes canonizing of Didaco in the Church of S. Peter. Idem. Whilst the Sea was voyd, by reason of some who would haue pulled downe a statue, which was erected to this Pope in the Capitoll; the Romanes decreed that no Pope afterward should haue any statue set vp during his life. Vrban. 7.Vrban Pope, the 7. before called Iohn Baptist, borne at Rome, of the house of Castagnea, which was one of the noblest houses in Genoa, Sixtus alwaies loued this house well, & greatly approued his iudgement, which he vsed in all his serious affaires. A litle before he died, when Peares were set vpon the table, he tooke one of them & cut in the midst, and found it rotten, like∣wise an other, and found it so too, then hee said, these Peares
are loathsome, let them be chaunged for Chest-nuts; by the Peares signifying himselfe, for that he issued from the stock of the Piretts, and in his Armes did beare Peares: by the Chest-nuts he meant the Cardinall, who descended from the house of Castagnea or Castanea, and bare in his Scutcheon a Chestnut in cheefe. This Pope would be called Vrbanus, either for that he much affected the precedent Popes of this name, or that he might signifie, that hee was borne at Rome, for Vrbs with the Romanes per Automasiam, signifieth Rome. Or for that he had determined to vse all sorts of men gently. Anth. Cicce. Gene∣brardus. D. Chytraeus. Vpon the day of his election, there happened a wonder∣full Earthquake at Vienna in Austria, and in many Townes of Morauia and Bohemia. This yeare dyed Iacobus Andrens, Chauncelor of the Vni∣uersitie of Tubing, who reformed many Churches of the Prin∣ces and Cities in Germanie. And Hieronimus Mencetius a reue∣rend old man, whē he had gouerned the churches of the Coun∣tie of Mansfeeld thirtie yeares. Likewise Paulus Mathias Bi∣shop of Roscilda in Denmarke, a most learned man and religi∣ous. And Iohannes Areuarius, who set forth the Hebrew Lexi∣con. The next day after his election he fell sicke, wherefore he determined in the euening to remoue his Court to the hill of Quirinus, as to a better aire; many Cardinalls therfore, Prelates and Lordes, came to attend vpon him, but when hee was tolde, that it was against custome to goe abroad before he was crow∣ned, hee would not goe.The death of Pope Vrban. But his disease increasing so violently vpon him, that the 17. of August hee departed this life, hauing continued in the place 12. dayes, and in the 70. yeare of his age: and was buried in S. Peters Church. Anth. Ciccer. The same day that Ʋrbanus was chosen Pope, there was a great Earthquake in Ʋienna, Morauia, and Bohemia, Prage. D. Chytraeus. A truce was taken for 10. yeares betweene the Emperour of the Turkes Amurathes, and the King of Persia.Magus Bra∣gadinus. Marcus Bragadinus a Grecian borne, first a Franciscane,
then a Capuchine a notable cosoner, was executed at Monaca in Bauaria. This fellow professed at Ʋenice the art of making gold, neither did his art or cunning deceiue him, for he made so much gold that hee gaue away whole wedges to his friends, making no more account of gold then of brasse or Iron. Hee liued princelike, and kept a great traine, and by his excellen∣cie in the art Magicke, drew the hearts of many of the greatest Nobles in Italie to him, so that he was called an other Paracel∣sus. When his name was thus spred far & neare, at the length he came to Monaca, the D. of Bauaria his court. Who soone fin∣ding out his deceits and diuellish arts, cast him into prison, and when the D. commanded that he should be examined vpō the rack, he desired that he might not be tortured, saying that he would confesse all he had done voluntarily; with request that it might not be published. He likewise said that he had deserued death, but desired that his concubine Signora Caura & her fa∣mily might be conueyed safe & harmlesse into Italie. This sen∣tence then was pronounced vpon him: First that a couple of dogges whom hee had abused in his diabolicall art, should be shot, and himselfe to be hanged. The next day a new gibbet was set vp couered all ouer with copper, and in the midst of it an halter, likewise wrapped with copper, by which signe his cosoning in making Golde might be signified. Neare the gal∣lowes a high scaffold was set vp and couered with blacke cloth, vpon it a chaire where Marcus Bragadinus was placed, and af∣ter a speech made he was executed. M. G. Belgicus. D. de MaineThe Duke de Maine being in the D. of Parmaes court, writ diuers Letters to the borderers of Picardie, that shortly they should see a puissant army for the deliuerance of Paris. After∣ward the D. de Nemours being the Popes Legat, the Embassa∣dor of Spaine, the Bishop of Paris, the Archbishop of Lyons, the Bishop of Plaisance, those of Remes, Senlis, and others, Bellarmin and Tyceus, Iesuites, with many more of the Romane Cleargie, caused solemne processions to be made, double fastings, bro∣therhoods, visitations of Temples, vowes & supplications, and all to entertain & hold the people in a vain hope of deliuerāce; but all this while famine made warre against the Parisians.
Gregorie 14. before called Nicholas, was borne at Millaine,Gregorie 14 his fathers name was Frances Sfondrate, of an auncient & weal∣thy family. He was elected Pope in the place of Vrbane. The 8. day of Ianuary he instituted a Iubily, and commaun∣ded  it to be published. Anth. Cicca.A Iubily. After this he made Gcnerall of the Churches army, Count Sfondrate his nephew, and sent him with an army into France, to the maintenance of which warre, he contributed fiue hun∣dred thousand ducats, besides other 40000. poundes of his owne. He created his nephew Duke of Mount Marian, the which state, for that the great D. of Florence for his conspiracies and rebelliō against the church was put to death, was now void by confiscation, and therfore the Pope said he might bestow it where he thought good. A great & dangerous tumult hapned at Cracouia,A tumult at Cracouia about religion. (the king himself being there) vnder the name of religion, chiefly by cer∣taine schollers, who egged on by their maisters the Iesuites, as∣saulted violently such houses where the exercise of religion dif∣ferent from the Popes were celebrated. This was soone appea∣sed by the magistrates, but the third night when they thought all had beene quiet, they gathered their companies together and set fire on the house. D. Chytraeus. The Princes & Romane Catholicke Lords which were the Kings partakers, perswaded with him to frame himselfe to the exterior profession of the religiō, and by the D. of Luxembourg, who had before made a voyage vnto Rome in their name, they practised with the Pope to that end. On the contrary side the Protestant Lords, beseeched the king to haue them in remem∣brance, who were so faithfully imployed for him. Other of his Councel pressed vpō him, to prouide for his peaceable subiects, as wel of the one as of the other religiō. Also that he wold pre∣uent the new attempts of the Pope and his adhaerents against France. And these sollicitations begat an Edict for the vphol∣ding of the two religions in his kingdome. D. Chytraeus. An act was made by the high Court of Parliament at Cha∣louns and at Tours, against the Popes Bulls, his Nuntio,An act against the Popes buls and his Legate in France. This likewise was proclaimed; We
haue proclaimed, and do proclaime Pope Gregorie the 14. of that name, an enemy to the common peace, to the vnion of the Romane Catholike Church, to the King, and to his roial state, adhearent to the conspiracie of Spaine, a fauourer of rebels, guil∣tie of the most cruell, most inhumane, and most detestable par∣racide, traiterously committed on the person of Henry the 3. of most famous, most Christian, and most Catholike memorie. Christian Duke of Saxonie, Prince Elector, died of the age 31. yeares. D. Chytraeus. The death of Gregory 14.Gregorie the 14. fell now sicke of a quotidian Feuer, hee was also troubled with a continuall flix and the stone, whereof he dyed, and was buried in the Chappell of the Gregories in S. Peters Church. Hee sate in the seate ten moneths, and as many dayes, and it was vacant 15. dayes. Anth. Cicca. A Dearth.In this time there was a great dearth through the most part of Italie, and other Christian Prouinces: after which followed a great plague. There dyed in Rome from August 1590. vnto the end of August the yeare following 1591. threescore thou∣sand. Idem. Innocent 9.Innocent the 9. before called Antonius Fachiuertus, Cardi∣nall of the 4. holy Crownes. He was borne at Bononia, and be∣fore hee was Cardinall, by Pope Gregorie made Patriarke of Ierusalem. Fredericus Wilelmus Duke of Saxonie, and Iohannes Geor∣gius Elector and Marquesse of Brandebourge, had the Protec∣torship of Christians sonne: these no further vrged his man∣dates concerning Religion, and recalled home many Ministers of the Church and Superindents who had not obeyed them, and therefore banished by him, a litle before his death. D. Chy∣traeus. The escape of the Duke of Guise.The Duke of Guise by a cord which was giuen him, wher∣with sliding downe out of a window, escaped out of prison, and fled to the Lord de la Chastre. The great Chancelor of Poland Zamoscius, rebelled against his leige Lord, with an Armie of 30000. men. The death of Innocent. 9.Pope Innocent the 9. being 70. yeares of age, and hauing ruled two moneths & odde dayes, dyed. So that in the space of
fourteene moneths 4. Popes dyed: Sixtus, Vrban, Gregorie and Innocent; and it is to be thought, the most, or all of them dyed of poyson. For Brazuto is not dead that giueth them poyson. This Brazuto killed 6. Popes with poyson, (as it is to be read in the life of Damasus). The seate was vacant one moneth, and a day. Edmond Coppinger and H. Arthington, conferring with one of their sect called William Hacket, they offered to annoint him king; but Hacket taking Coppinger by the hand, said: You shall not need to annoint me, for I haue bene already annoynted in heauen by the holy Ghost himselfe: then Coppinger asked him what his pleasure was to be done: Goe your way both said he, and tell them in the Citie, that Christ Iesus is come with his Fanne in his hand to iudge the earth. Which they did in diuers streets, crying also, repent England, repent: and in Cheapeside got vp into a Cart, and preached how this Hacket represented Christ, that they were two Prophets, the one of mercy, the other of iudgement, sent, and extraordinarily called by God, to assist him in this great worke, and were witnesses of these things. For these misdemeanors and spreading of false prophe∣cies, as also for his traiterous words against the Queenes Maie∣stie, Hacket was hanged. But Coppinger dyed in Bridewell, and Arthington long after was reserued in the Counter in Wood∣streete, in hope of repentance. I. Stowe. Hippolitus Aldobrandinus Cardinall, was elected Pope by  the name of Clement the eight.Clement 8. When Sebastian King of Portugall went with his Armie into Affrica, hee requested hostage of Muhameth, to whom hee deliuered his sonne Mulei Xeques; him, Sebastian sent Magaza;Xeques Mu∣lei his sonne becommeth a Christian. but they both being slaine in the battaile of Alcazar, 1578. Xeques was sent into Spaine, and brought vp vnder King Phil∣lip. At the last this yeare (hauing before by degrees perswaded to become a Christian) was baptised with his kinsman & other of his Nobles, in the most famous Monastery of S. Laurence, and vowed euer after to continue true Christians. Genebrar∣dus. The 16. of Ianuary Cassimere Duke Palatine, to the great
sorrow and discomfort of the Church of Geneua, departed this life. Ladislaus King of Hungarie and Boheme, died of the age of 18 yeares. This yeare Amurathes Emperour of the Turkes prepared for warre against the Christians. The cause was this. The truce taken was yet kept betweene the Emperour and the Turke, to the great quietnesse of both their subiects. But in the meane season a peace was concluded betweene the Turke & the Per∣sian. Wherefore many of the Turkish Basses perswaded their Emperour to make war vpon the Christian, and so forthwith he dispatched a puissant Army into the confines of Hungary. The Emperour Rodolphe, although hee had this opinion that Amurath would deny that the truce was broken by him, notwithstanding knowing that it is the Turkes custome not to restore those Cities which they had once taken, maketh all the power he can to resist his Forces. M. G Belg. William, Lantgraue of Hesse, a most wise vertuous & lear∣ned Prince, being 70. yeares of age departed this world. William Duke of Brunswicke, the sonne of Ernestus, a Prince of most sincere Religion, dyed likewise, leauing behind him se∣uen sonnes, whom he had by Dorithie the daughter of Christi∣an, the third King of Denmarke. D. Chytraeus. At this time deceased likewise Iohan 3. King of Suetia, the Father of Sigismond, the 3. King of Poland. As the Leaguers were promised great things, by the E∣states of Paris and the partakers of Spaine; held it for a most cer∣taine troth, that the Duke of Parma would returne yet the third time with puissant Forces to doo some notable exployt, thereby to couer the shame of his two former voyages, and so to assure the K. of France to King Phillip, or to the Princesse his daughter.The death of the Duke of Parma. But death cut off the thred of his life, together with his enterprises: the 2. of December, 1592. His bodie was carried to Parma, and buried without any great solemnitie in the litle Chappell of the Cappuchins, with this Epitaphe. A∣lexandr Farnesius Belgis diuictis, Francis obsidione leuatis, vt humili hoc loco cadauer eius reponeretur manaauit 3. nonas Decem. 1592.
Et vt secum Mariae eius coniugis optimae ossa iungerentur. Genebr. The Senate and the people of Rome caused his statue to be made and set vp in the Capitoll. M. G. Belg. After much conference, commings & goings, Letters and answers frō the deputie on each side, the supplications of those which desired, in such sort, that the king who since he withdrew himselfe from the Court of France, for 15. yeares before, had made open profession of the reformed religion, cōtrary to the aduice of his Ministers, went to see & heare Masse sung in the Cathedrall Church of S. Denis, the 25. Sunday of Iuly, where he was receiued of the Archbishop of Bourges, and other Pre∣lates, with certaine peculiar ceremonies, peculiar receiuing, which was incontinently published throughout the Realme, with diuers censures as well of the Catholicke nobilitie, as also of those of the religiō, wherof not one followed this example. The Preachers belonging to the League, publike & priuately, before & after the truce, their discourses at Paris & other pla∣ces were, that the Masse which they sung before the king, was but a deceit. That the Pope should not recatholize him: that it was lawfull for the people to rise against him & his officers: that it appertained to the Sorbonists, to iudge whether the Pope ought to receiue him as King. And if peraduenture hee should doo it, neuerthelesse hee might be held for an he∣reticke, and one excommunicate: that it was lawfull for any particular man to kill him that should say, he was vnited to the Catholicke Romane Church. D. Chytraeus. The Parisians, and other Townes, that held for the League, desired that the King of Spaines daughter might be marryed to the Duke of Guise, and so be crowned King and Queene of France. Ernestus Duke of Pomerian a Prince endued with singular vertues, most bountiful to the Churches & Vniuersities depar∣ted this life, leauing his successor Philippus Iulius, of the age of seuen yeares, who was committed to the custody and protecti∣on of Bogislaus. Chytraeus. In Poland the marriage of Sigismond the 3. king thereof,The end of the yeare 1592. and Anne of Austrich, the daughter of Charles the Archduke, was solemnized. Idem.
In Belgia Maurice Count Nassau the sonne of William Prince of Orange, and Gouernour of Holland, tooke the Mount Ger∣trude, a Towne well fortified, bordering on the confines of Brabant and Holland; when for three moneths he had besieged it, and they by force and famine were constrained to yeeld: al∣though Petrus Ernestus Count Mansfeeld, (to whom after the death of the Duke of Parma the king of Spaine committed the gouernment of the lowe Countries) labours in vaine by his forces to raise the siege. Dissention in Religion.At Aquisgrane the dissention in Religion raised great tu∣mults: but they of the reformed Religion had the worst. The Turke spoyled and deliuered many Townes in Hun∣garie and Croalia; but comming with his Forces to Gomorra, he was most valiantly resisted. He not only presecuted at this time the Christians, but the Persians also, (vpon some cause vnkowne the truce being broken) and inuaded them with two hundred thousand men, where he made great hauocke sparing none. The Turkes ouerthrowne.After this the Christians had a notable victorie ouer the Turkes in Hungarie, and did kill in fight & put to flight more then fiue thousand of the Turkes. D. of Guise.Charles Guise, & Duke de Maine, vnder the colour of resto∣ring the Catholick religiō in France, were confederate with the Pope and the King of Spaine, against Henry the 4. K. of France and Nauarre, therefore out of euery Prouince of the king∣dome elected certaine Embassadors to holde a Parliament at Paris, there to determine and set downe for a Catholike king. Pope Clement the eight, sent Phillip Cardinall of Plaisans. And the King of Spaine his Embassadors. At this time the King of France was againe excommunicated. Afterward the Duke of Guise, the sonne of him that was slaine by Henry the 3. being of the age of 25. yeares, was nominated and elected King by cer∣taine of the confederates, but the Senat & Parliament of Paris not admitting that any one should be King, vnlesse he were of the blood royall, he was not proclaimed, neither would the Guise beare the citie thereof. D. Chytraeus. Vpon this the King of France as before is declared, bare∣footed,
with a candle in his hand, went to the Temple of Saint Denis, and being confessed to the Archbishop of Bourges,The King of Fraunce conuerted. and absolued of his heresie, had solemne Masse, and remoued the Preachers of his late professed Religion out of his Court. At Riga in Liuonia, the Kings Commissaries,A motion for recalling of the Iesuites into Riga. amongst their affaires of the Estate, vrged them for the restoring of the religiō to the same estate it was, determined with king Stephen and the Churches likewise, that the Iesuites should be againe admitted into the Temple of S. Iames, and Mary Magdalen, whom the yeare before the incensed Citizens had expulsed: So by these meanes that the Senate and people of Riga should hold all the other Churches within the Citie and the suburbes, with all the goods, profits, and reuenewes belonging to them. But the Senate and Citizens refusing to entertaine the Iesuites as being most vnquiet & turbulent spirits, and the very brands of discord and sedition; as also the better part of them desirous to keepe and continue in their Citie one onely religion of the confession of Augusta: Or if they should altogether obey the Kings authoritie, and the present necessitie of the time and fate; thinking it better the secular authoritie as King Stephen had set it downe, to be admitted againe into the Cittie then the Iesuits: the matter as then was left in suspence & put ouer to the K. & the Parliament of the realme. But the Iesuits being importunate vpon the king, the K. the yeare following sent one Iohannes Ostrouius into the Citie, who instructed by the kings commandement, demaunded that all those that were spoyled and eiected of the seditious communaltie, might be put into possession of their Churches, whose Oration was forthwith an∣swered in the name of the Citie and the Senate, by Dauid Hil∣cheuius theyr aduocate. The 26. of August, Peter Barrier, alias Bar,Peter Bar∣rier. borne at Orle∣ans, was prisoner at Melena, where he confessed that he was se∣duced by a Capuchin Friar at Lyons, by the Curat & Vicar of a certaine parish in Paris, and also by a Iesuite, closely to follow the king, and to murder him with a two edged knife, the which was found about him: he further confessed, that two Priests by him nominated, were also come frō Lyons for the same intent:
and that he set himselfe the forwardest in the execution therof, to the ende hee might get the greatest honour thereby. For the which hee was executed. At this time was the Duke of Nemours within Lyons, from whence he would not stirre, to goe to the Estates of the League, although the Pope had giuen him commaundement: the other chiefe Captaines thought it meet, and his friends & seruants desired him to goe, he vouch∣safed not so much as to send vnto them, knowing that the Lea∣guers cast their eyes altogether vpon the D of Guise, and that the D. de Maine his brother by the mothers side, crost all his purposes, and would worke all meanes for his death. A certaine bold Friar of Lyons, perceiuing well that this young Prince pretended to bring some new matter to passe within the League, whereby he might at least haue some great hand in the gouernment, by the aduice of two or three Coun∣cellors, who were of his complices, he compassed Lyons, with many Fortresses, which held on his side at Toissai, Vienne, Mont∣brison, Chastillon, de Dombres, and other places. Quilian forsaking him, he bought it with a great summe of mony, at the hands of the Lord of S. Iulian, who was Gouer∣nour thereof. This done, Lyon was inclosed, as well by water as by land. The Lyonnois did not withstand neither his prodigalli∣ties, nor his Councellors, nor his men of warre, which forraged the plaine country, receiuing the guerdon of their reuolt from the kings obedience. In the end acknowledging themselues, they rose vp against the D. of Nemours, assisted by the presēce and counsell of the Archbishop, sent by the D. de Maine: and the 18. of Decemb. they tooke hold of Nemours, who was seene three times at deaths doore, committing him to close prison, where hee continued certain moneths, and at last escaping by cunning meanes, spoyled of his succours, chased from his For∣tresses,The death of Nemours. he went & dyed farre from France, in a litle Towne cal∣led Aueci scituate in Sauoy, in the Country of Geneuois. After the solemne funeralls of Henry the 3. late King of France were performed in the Cathedrall Church of S. Denis, Henry the 4. King of Nauarre, was publikely proclaimed king. In the meane season the Popes Legat with the Embassador of
Spaine, vrged the election of the D. of Guise at Paris, and cur∣sed the K. of Nauarre, for that he s oft had fallen, and those Bishops, with the Archbishop of Bourges, by whom he had bin reconciled to the Church, and absolued. Likewise at Rome, the Agents and Ministers of the K. of Spaine, sollicited the Pope, that he would confirne the excommunication pronounced by his Legate at Paris: nor would admit any Embassadors from the hypocriticall king: If he did, they vowed as his Embassa∣dors came in at one gate, they would goe out at the other. The 26. of Nouember, the Duke of Neuers came to Rome, sent by the K. of France for his absolution, whom the Pope en∣tertained with all kindnesse: but a litle while after, hee dismis∣sed him, not denying simply absolution to the K. but deferring it vntill he sawe more manifest signes of penitence. D. Chy∣taeus. The K. of France deliberated to assemble at Mante, cer∣taine of the chiefe Nobles of the Realme, to take counsell of di∣uers matters at that time needfull. The deputies of the refor∣med Churches were there present about the ende of Nouem∣ber, whom the king caused to be called together the 12. day of the moneth following: and hauing giuen them audience, and heard the great sorrowe which they made vpon the infinite cōtradictions of his decrees, and the complaints of the wrongs done vnto them through all his Prouinces▪ hee answered, that the change of religiō had not any way changed his affection frō them; that he would redresse their griefes, and make peace and concord among his subiects. Hee receiued their Bills of com∣plaints, to haue them pervsed. But these affaires were dri∣uen to such length, that the distance of many yeares hath bu∣ried all. And the Captaines of the League hauing plunged the Realme into new miseries, those of the religion almost in all parts of the kingdome, continued as grieuous vnder the crosse as before. Sigismond K. of Poland, was perswaded to embrace that religi∣on  and seruice of God, comprehended in his word,Sigis. K. of Poland. & the con∣fessiō of Augusta, as it had flourished in ye later time of Gostauus, and the former daies of Iohn the 3. king of Poland: and as it was
receiued by the States of the land, in the Councell of Vpsalem, the yeare, 1593. by a solemne testification, for the confirma∣tion and defence of the same religion, hee voluntarily offered his oath, which remaineth vpon record. Chytraeus. The same day that Sigismond K. of Poland and Vpsalem, was inuested with the crowne of Suetia, Iames the 6. K. of Scots, had a sonne by Anne his wife, the sister of Christian the 4. K. of Denmarke: to whose christening, the K. of France, the Q. of England, the K. of Denmarke, Count Maurice, H. D. Brunswic, Vtricus Duke of Magapolis, were inuited. The 9. of April, Ferdinādo E. of Darbie, deceased at Latham. H. crowned K. of FranceHenry the 4. king of France and Nauarre, was with great solemnitie crowned king at Chartres. When the last yeare he sent to the Pope, the D. of Neuers, for absolution: Pope Cle∣ment the eight then answered, that hee stood in need of three fold benefite from the Apostolicke Sea: first of absolution in Court of Conscience: secondly in a lower Court of Consci∣ence, from publike excommunication: thirdly, in the Court of Rehabilitation (as they say) to the kingdome, for the which before, by reason of his heresies hee was held vnfit. Paetrus Mathaeus. Mathias Arch-duke of Austria.Mathias Arch-duke of Austria, was by the Emperour his brother, chosen Generall of the Forces against the Turke, and went to Vienna. Idem. The same time, the Pope promised to send to the Emperour 5000. footemen, and 500. horsemen; for the leuying of which, sixe Tents were gathered of the Clear∣gie throughout all Italie: which amounted to 600000. crownes. Paetrus Mathaeus. An expedition against the Turke.The Princes likewise of Italy, sent their aide to Caesar, eue∣ry one as they were able: the great D. of Hetruria 70000. Genoua 40000. the Duke of Ferrara 50000. Luca 20000. Parma 25000. crownes: the Dukes of Mantua and Ʋrbin, offered their owne persons and forces, against the mightie ene∣mie of Christendome, the Emperour of Constantinople. Ion∣sonius. Note.At what time many vncertaine rumours were spread a∣broad throughout ye Turkish kingdomes of the happie successe
the Christians were like to haue in these warres; Beglerbegus of Greece, whether to know the euent, or that hee desired to traine the Turkish youth in martiall affaires, he gathered to∣gether 600 of them, some of eleuen, some twelue and vpwards of age, these hee armed with little staues, and brought them into an open fielde, where hee diuided them into two Bat∣tailes, of the which hee commaunded one to be called the Christians, the other the Turkes: The one in their fight, to crie Iesus, the other, Hala, Hala. Hee willed them both to fight couragiously, and promised rewardes to the hardiest. The signall giuen, both Armies ranne together, and fought so eagerly, that many on both sides were so beaten, that they were carried away halfe dead. But they, that called on the name of Iesus, got the victorie, and put their enemies to flight, driuing them into the Citie before them. Beglerbegus tooke this as a very euill signe, and as many as were with him, and greatly feared that the Christians after this would bee vic∣tors. Henry King of France, hauing newly recouered Camerake a Towne in Picardie, hee entered into it with great pompe: whom Balignius the Gouernour of the same entertained with the Senators & Citizens all armed, on their knees: and to him they deliuered the keyes of the Citie; First the Cleargie men did sweare, then the Senators, Nobles, and Citizens, that they would euer become faithfull and obedient to God, the King, and the Christian Catholicke Church. Ernestus Archduke of Austria, offered a peace to the E∣states of Holland and the vnited Prouinces, by his Letters and Embassadors, protesting therein his loue to Belgia, and his de∣sire for the common tranquillitie thereof. But when a litle be∣fore a certaine priuie murderer an Elder of Nemours, that was suborned by Count Barlymount, by commandement from the Court (as he said) to kill the Count Maurice of Nassau, was pri∣soner with the Count of Hage; the States of Holland and other confedarates, thinking they were not well dealt withall, set downe in writing at large, certaine conferences and dealings of the Spaniards with them concerning peace of late yeares, but
all tending to a fraudulent and deceitfull ende; besides they complained that the Spaniards did no way seeke the quietnes of the subiects in Belgia and other Christians, but that they might be Lordes, and tyrannize ouer all as they list. D. Chy∣traeus. D. Lopes.Doctor Lopes a Spaniard & a Phisitian, practised in England towards the Queene, by the instigation of the Earle of Fuentes his country-man, and the promise of 50000. Crownes, to haue poysoned her maiestie: but (God be thanked) in the attemp∣ting thereof he was apprehended, with his companions and as∣sociates in the treason; who were Emanuel Lois, and Stephen de Ferera, for which they were hanged, drawne, and quartered. The aforesaid Earle dealt with one Emanuel Andrad, to kill the King of Fraunce, with the odious smell of a poysoned Rose. This is worthie to be noted. The Estates of Holland and the vnited prouinces, this sommer set forth 4. shippes well ap∣pointed for munition and victuall, with skilfull Generalls and Captaines, towards the North and the East, that leauing vpon the right hand Norwege, Moschouia, and Tartaria, that so they might passe to Sinae, or the kingdome of China; the Indians, and the Iles of Moloccus. They hauing past beyonde Condora and Obdora, Regions of the continent to the new Iland, Sem∣bla and Wigatz, and passing through the straites of a narrow sea (which was 5000. miles lōg, & but one in breadth, they came to Oby, which is a Frontier of Tartaria. That narrow sea they cal∣led the sea of Nassau: to one of the Ilands they gaue the name Holland, to an other of Euchusa, and to the rest other names. And being commaunded to returne this sommer, they did so, but the next yeare determined to goe the same voyage & bet∣ter appointed, for they hoped to turne the traffique of Spices and other Easterne marchandise, by the which the Spaniard is so enriched, an other way, by the Northerne sea into the lowe Countries, and other Prouinces of Europe. D. Chy∣traeus. The Turkes ouerthrowne.This sommer the Turkes had a notable ouerthrow by the Christians.
The Spaniards being desirous to continue the fire of dis∣sention in France, instantly sollicited the Duke de Mercaeur, one of the chiefe of the League, and an vsurper of a part of the Duchy of Britaine, alwayes to continue warre. His sister Loyse d' Ʋandemont, King Henry the thirds widow, did all she might to make his peace. Certaine troubles happening in the meane time, brake all that was done. The Spaniards who were maisters of Blauet, a Fortresse almost inuincible, had builded during the sommer of the yeare 1594. a strong Fort neare vnto Croysil, to stop the entrance to the Port of Brest: which would haue bin bet∣ter for them, if they had made an other right against it, and on the other side of the Hauen. To hinder them came the Marshall of Aument, and Syr Iohn Norris, Generall of the English men, to whom was sent a supply by sea, vnder the con∣duct of Captaine Furbusher, they soone became maisters of Quinpercouincin, and of the Towne and Castle of Morley. Soone after they assailed the Spaniards new Fort, and slew foure hundred souldiers that kept it, not without losse of their owne men, among other, Captaine Frobisher. The King on the other side, deliberating to make warre out of his owne Realme against the Spaniards, agreed with the states of Hol∣land and their confederates, to begin in the Duchie of Lux∣enbourge, where the Marshall of Bouillon, who married one of the daughters of the deceased Prince of Orange, and E. Phi∣lip of Nassau, assaied to enter in the moneth of October, where they found all the passages shut vp, and Earle Charles of Mansfeeld making head against them, especially on the troupes of Holland. The King on the other side, sought to ouerrunne the Frontiers of Picardie, and gaue the Estates of Artois and Hainaut to vnderstand, that if they fauoured him so little, to suffer the Spanish Forces to molest Cambray and Countries adioyning, that hee should make warre vpon them incontinent. P. Math. The 27. day of December, as the King was returning from Picardie to Paris readie booted and spurd within a cham∣ber at Louure, hauing about him his cousins, the Prince of
Conde, the Earle of Soissans, the Earle of S. Paul, and 30 or 40. other Lord and Gentlemen of his Court. There came also in, the Lords of Ragne & Mountigni, who had not as yet takē their leaue of his maiestie.The King of Fraunce wounded. And euen as he was receiuing them for his farwell a yong stripling named Iohn Castil, of 18. yeares of age, a Drapers sonne of Paris, who was got into the Chamber amongst the preace, drew neare vnto the King, before he was almost perceiued of any bodie, and suddenly would haue stabd him into the bodie with a knife, but by reason that his maie∣stie was very readie to take vp the Lordes, which were on theyr knees before him, in his stooping hee strooke him on the face, on the vpper iaw on the right side, therewithall cut∣ting out one of his teeth. Wherevpon hee was apprehended by the Captaine of the Garde, to whom the King comman∣ded, after hee had throwne his knife to the ground, to let him goe: saying that he freely forgaue him. But afterwards vnder∣standing that he was a Scholler to the Iesuites, hee sayd, and must it needs be, that the Iesuites should be confounded by my mouth? This villaine being brought vnto the Bishops prison, freely declared the circumstance of his trayterous intent, and that he was perswaded thereto by his maister a Iesuite: who said that it was lawfull to kill him, that hee was excommunicate of the Church, that hee was not to be obeyed, nor to be taken for the King, vntill such time as he was allowed by the Pope. For this he was executed, and the Iesuites of Claremount with whom this fellow was brought vp, and all other throughout the whole Realme of France, were commaunded within three dayes to depart their Colledges, and after 15. dayes to leaue the realme. D. Chytraeus. The death of Amurath.In the beginning of this yeare, Amurathes the third Em∣perour of the Turkes, the sonne of Selim, in the 48. yeare of his age, ended his life and Empire with much blasphemie, and impatience. Whom Mahomet the third beeing thir∣tie yeares of age succeeded: who before hee performed his Father; Funeralls, hee caused eighteene of his brethren borne of diuers Concubines, to bee strangeled and most
honourably to be buried with his father in the same monument. He suffered his 27. sisters to liue in Teragliuun. And that no more might bee borne, hee comaunded tenne of his fathers wiues to be throwne into the Sea, and hauing richly furnished his owne mother, he sent her to dwell in a farre Countrie. Ge∣nebrardus. This Mahomet is the thirteenth Emperour from Otho∣man.Mahomet. Ferdinand Arch-duke of Austria, the sonne of Ferdinand the Emperor, and brother of Maximilian the second, departed this life. The one and twentieth of February likewise dyed Ernestus his brothers sonne, Archduke of Austria, Gouernor of the Prouinces in the lowe Countries, being 42. yeares of age. Idem. Some of the Deputies of the Court which were sent to search Cleremount Colledge, which belonged to the Iesuites, hauing seized vpon many papers, found among them certain written bookes made by a Iesuite Priest, named Iohn Guiguard, since the generall pardon giuen by the king at Paris: there was written in these bookes many vile matters, as well against H. the 3. as against H. the 4. now liuing, containing nothing but traitorous practises: for the which the Iesuite being sent for, auouched, by meanes whereof he was found guiltie, and therefore executed. The K. of France proclaimed open warres against Spaine,Wars proclai∣med against Spaine. and the Spanish Army is ouerthrowne by the Marshall of Bo∣uillon, in the Duchie of Luxembourge. The King after two yeares suppliant intreaties to the Pope,The king of France is absolued by the Pope. at the length was absolued by the Pope at Rome, and receiued into the lappe of the mother Church, and declared the most Christian king of France. The conditions propounded were these. That the king should receiue the Councell of Trent, and giue commaunde∣ment that it should be kept throughout all his Realme: but and if in some of his Prouinces he could not do it without dan∣ger of new seditions, he should aske leaue of the Pope. That hee should within the compasse of one yeare, remooue the
young Prince of Conde, being 9. yeares of age, from the com∣pany of heretikes, and to bring him vp in the Catholicke A∣postolicke Romane religion. That he should restore all the re∣uenewes and goods which he had taken from his Bishops and Abbies. Lastly, that he should by his Letters certifie all Ca∣tholicke Princes, of his conuersion and detestation of all here∣sies. After this, the Church of S. Peter which before was shut, was now opened. Then the Pope said to the Orators of France, that as hee now opened againe to their King, the doore of the Church Militant vppon earth, so should his Maiestie endeuour likewise by a liuely faith and good workes, to make his way into the triumphant Church of heauen. D. Chytraeus. Vpon the Church doore were placed the armes of the K. of France, with this inscription: Henricus 4. Galliae, & Na∣uarrae Rex Christianissimus. Arbertus the Cardinall, made generallWhilst Camerac is besieged by the Spaniards, Phillip king of Spaine, created Albertus Arch-duke of Austria, and Cardi∣nall of Toledo, Generall of all his Forces in Belgia: Hee was the sonne of Max. 2. Emperour, and Mary the sister of Phillip King of Spaine, the fift in order after Rodolphus the Emperour that now is, borne in Nouember, the yeare, 1559. Genebrardus. The D. de Maine re∣stored to fa∣uour.The D. de Maine seeing the Spaniards take other course then was accustomed, his Forces slaine, his credit crackt, & his destruction at the doore, though late, yet at last he sought by mediators the kings fauour, which he obtained: vpon this re∣ceiued grace, the D. wrought the yeelding vp of Soisson, Pier∣font, and other places, to the King. The Duke of Aumale.The Duke of Aumale, who onely remained among all the chiefe Leaguers, lawe being prosecuted against him in the Par∣liament of Paris, he was found guiltie of treason in the highest degree; so that his Image of likenes being made, it was drawne in peeces with foure horses, and his goods and lands confiscate to the King. The most famous Poet and Orator of all Italy, Torguatus Tassus, died this yeare at Rome.
The Garrisons of Peronne, Amiens, and other places that he held for the king, began againe in Ianuary their former cour∣ses against the enemies Countrie, still killing and sleying cer∣taine Spaniards and Wallons. Marseill is brought to the kings subiection. George, Lantgraue of Hesse, the sonne of Phillip, a vertuous, wise, and religious Prince, departed out of this world, leauing his sonne Lodowicke to succeed him. Albert Arch-duke of Austria,Arch-duke of Austria. and Gouernour of the lowe Countries, entered Bruxelles with great pompe, accompanied with the Dukes of Fere and Aumale, and Philippus Wilihelmus, the Prince of Orange his sonne. Before his comming, there was great hope of peace, but after his arriuall he made no mention of peace, for that he foresawe there would be none graunted. D. Chytreus. In the beginning of March, the Cardinal gaue such order, that the besieged within the Towne of Fere, were succoured with some munition, and for his first exployt against France, in the beginning of Aprill, did so dispose of his Armie (at that time most mightie) so pollitikely and secretly,He winneth Callais. that in fewe dayes hee besieged, assailed, and with plaine force, wonne the Towne and Castle of Calais, in spight of all the Kings Forces, and the resistance of the besieged. There dyed in the taking heereof, a great number of the Nobilitie of France. The Cardinall following this new wonne victorie,Fere yeel∣deth besie∣ged the strong Towne of Ardres in the beginning of May, and became maister thereof the 23. of the same moneth, se∣uen daies before Fere was yeelded to the King vpon composi∣tion. Chytraeus. The Emperour appointed Alphonsus, Duke of Fer∣rara, Generall against the Turkes: who thirtie yeares be∣fore in the time of Maximilian the second, the father of Rodolphus, had waged warre against them at his owne char∣ges. But hee beeing the last Duke that was of his house, and hauing had no issue by his three wiues, was very desi∣rous to leaue a certaine successor before hee departed, and
therefore he desired the Pope that Cardinall Est might be his heire, and to that end offered him a great summe of gold, but the Pope stifly denying to do it, the expedition for Hungary was intermitted by the Duke of Ferrara. D. Chytraeus. Christian, the fourthking of Denmarke, the sonne of Frede∣ricke the second, of the age of twentie yeares was crowned King. An English Nauie for Spaine.In the moneth of Iune the Queene of England sent a Fleete of 16. sailes, well appointed with munition and vittaile, vnder the conduct of Robert Earle of Essex, into Spaine, who with a prosperous gale hauing passed the bound, of France and Portugall, the 20. of Iune arriued neare Gades, and lighted vp∣on the 12. Apostles of the king of Spaine (of the which S. Phil∣lip carried 900. souldiers, and 62. peeces of Ordinance) and 57. Marchants ships, bound for the Easterne Indies. But when in these straits they had fought with them valiantly, and happily, and had set S. Phillip on fire, the rest conueying themselues in∣to the deepe, the Earle came on land with part of his company, and when he came neare the Citie, the gouernours and knights of the Citie, to the number of 400. came out, who seeing the English so well appointed, drew backe into the Citie: but such was the courage of our men, that following, some of them got into the Citie with them: some at the assult got vpon the walles, and recouered the Market place, although they were much troubled by the Citizens from out of theyr houses and house tops. The same euening the greatest part of them got into a Castle, the lower part of the Citie was spoiled, the vpper part was ransomed for 12000. Ducats.The Fleet for India bur∣ned. And for the Indian fleet they offered great store of gold. But the Duke Medine would not let it be redeemed, and therefore set it all on fire. The losse of which, was 12. Millions of crownes. The English Nauie in August following, returned to England. D. Chy∣traeus. The Spaniards seeke reuenge and are cros∣sed.The Spaniards greatly incensed with this daring enter∣prise of the English, of their owne free will gaue a great summe of money to their king, whereby to make new ships, and leuie new forces against them, and in the moneth of October,
the Fleete loosed out of the mouth of Tagus, into Corouis, a Ha∣uen in Spaine, towards the farthest North, in the territories of Gallicia, which Ptolomey calleth the harbour of the Artabry, a people by the Promontory Artabrum, which is in Portugall. But when the Nauie came neare the coasts of Gallicia, by night it ranne vpon the Rockes, where 30. of the Spanish ships peri∣shed, the rest went forward to Corouis, and attempted nothing else this winter. The Emperour appointed Arnold Baron of Echwartzen∣berge in Belgia, Marshall of the field in Hungarie against the Turke, in the place of the D. of Ferrara, whom the Pope Cle∣ment the 8. would not graunt, that his adopted heire should suc∣ceed him. Anne, Q. of Poland, the widow of Stephen, the sister of Si∣gismond Augustus, died this yeare, being 70. yeares of age:The death of Anne Q. of Poland. lea∣uing great store of treasure behind her, which shee gaue to her sisters Catherines children, Q. of Suetia, Sigismond the 3. king, and Anne his sister. The last of Aprill, deceased Syr Iohn Puckering Knight, Lord Keeper of the great Seale: he died of a dead Palsie, and was buried at Westminster. In Prussia, a Prouince in the kingdome of Poland, the chie∣fest Bishops, armed with the kings decrees against the true Churches of the Gospell, remooued many Preachers out of their Parishes into the Countrie, and vpon S. Iohn Baptists day, tooke possession of the chiefe Church in the Citie of Turon: the like was done at Meua and Stargardia: besides,The Church troubled. they ear∣nestly desired that the Church of S. Maries which was neare the Market place, might be deliuered to them, with the Mo∣nasteries of S. Briget, and that therein their religion might bee freely exercised, and all their causes belonging to the Consisto∣rie to be referred to their Officialls in the Citie, and to be iud∣ged by them. Iacobus Fabritius Gouernor of the Colledge,Iacobus Fa∣tricius. was peremp∣torily cited to Subcouia, for that he allowed, preached, & main∣tained publikely, the doctrine of Caluin, and as they inferred a∣gainst the expresse priuiledges of the Citie, the constitutions
of the Commissaries, and the decrees of the Senate, concerning religion. But the Senate excusing him, said that the Citizens were not bound to appeare out of their Citie: the Bishops sent their Commissaries into the Citie, who with their Officialls should there proceed against him. The King himselfe likewise commanded that the Senate should deliuer vp the Church to the Bishop of Subcouia within certaine daies, or should agree with him. But Agria, a neare neighbour to Poland, being new∣ly taken by the Turkes, and the Court was busied in counsell how to auoyd new dangers: the Dantiscanes were quiet till Easter, the yeare following. The estate of the vnited Prouinces of Belgia, Geldria, Zut∣phen, Holland, and Westfrizeland, Zeland, Ʋtricht, Friseland, the Groine, &c. with the Q. of England, and the K. of France, ente∣red a league of defence for themselues, and offence of their ene∣mie, the K. of Spaine. None of these could make peace with him without the consent of all. Which was also agreed be∣tweene the king of France and the vnited States of Belgia, that the kings of Scotland and Denmarke, should be vnited to the so∣cietie of this league. The 22. of Iuly, the right honourable H. Cary, Baron of Hunsdon, and Lord Chamberlaine to the Queene, deceased at Sommerset house in Strandstreet, and was honourably buried at Westminster. The second of Iune, the Emperour Rodolphe, caused all the Princes Electors, and others of his dominion, with the Embassadors of those that were absent, to come before him in the Pallace of the Bishop of Ratisbone: who all appeared the next morning and accompanied him to the Church, and from thence, to the Court; where when euery one according to their calling had taken his place, Philippus Ludouicus stood vp, and made an Oration in the name of the Emperour Rodolphus Caesar: wherein he shewed how the Emperour of the Turkes Sultan Amurathes had broken the truce, which was made in the yeare, 1591. by Haly Bassa in Bosua, who had forraged diuers of their frontiers, and had spoiled and wasted Crotia, and the fertile Region Tyropolia, leading away many Christians
captiues, and that this Bassa beeing thereof explained to the Turke, he was therefore bountifully rewarded, and set in grea∣ter place and authoritie then he had before: but at the siege of the Castle Zisekna, he was driuen to flie, and there receiued by death a iust reward for his trecherie. This making the Turke more incensed, hee made warre vpon the Christians, and sent Beglerbegus of Creece, who be∣sieged the aforesaid Castle Ziseckna, and forced them to yeeld it. At this time also he sent diuers of his choisest Bassaes to in∣uade Hungarie, and tooke there two Cities, Ʋesprian and Pa∣lotta. Besides, hee imprisoned the Emperours Embassadour and Orator at Constantinople. Caesars request therefore was, that greater defence might be made against the Turkish pow∣ers, and that all the Christian Princes of his Empire would con∣ioyne to the resisting of this great enemie of Christ and Chri∣stendome. Which forthwith was agreed vnto. But in this Session a great dissention arose amongst the Protestant Princes: the reason was, for that the Elector Pala∣tine did not so strictly and precisely keepe the confession of Augusta, as the rest of them did: that is to say, Duke William Fredericke, Administrator of the Electorship of Saxonie, who in the administration of the charge of the Electors in their mi∣noritie, recalled and brought in the opinions of Flaccus Illiricus, and Iacobus Andreas (approoued of the aforesaid Electors) and all those that withstood them, or opposed themselues against either, in Vniuersities, Schooles, or any place whatsoeuer, hee cruelly persecuted and banished them, as Caluinists and Zuin∣glians: so that at Lipsia and other places, vnder the pretext and colour of his execution against the Caluinists, much spoile and hurt was done. Many of these beeing let out of prison, were receiued by the Elector Palatine: and for this cause the Pro∣testants of Saxonie would seperate themselues in this Session, in the common petitions and propositions from them that held of the Count Palatine: but the greater part of them desi∣rous of peace, did not consent thereto. But when it was obiected to the Prince Palatine, that hee was of a con∣trary religion to his father, hee before them all made an
orderly and modest confession of his faith and religion, in this maner. I haue not anyway digressed from the religion which my worthy father professed. He whilest he liued, beleeued not in S. Martin or S. Iames, but in Christ. The same beliefe, the same grounds and principles of faith I do constantly hold, and euer intend to do. My father condemned the errours of Arrius, Nestorius, Eutychius, and the Anabaptists, and so do I his sonne; not onely condemne them, but with my soule detest and ab∣horre them. The errours in the Sacraments (which are two fold; some of them who make Idolls of Sacraments, and worship and reuerence the signes for the thing signed, not obseruing nor considering the signification of the Sacraments: other some that vnderstand them for naked and simple signes) my father detested, and so do I his sonne. I come nearer: My father re∣iected Caluanisme and Zuinglanisme, and so do I his sonne. If so be it be true, that the Vbiquitaries and Flactians do faine, that is to say, if truth, or omnipotencie, or the whole presence of Christ should bee denied vpon the earth. But in this errour I am happier then my father, in that I know the true and right religion vnder the name of Caluine, to bee defiled and scandal∣led, by certaine seditious and ambitious persons in Germanie: which my father had knowne if he had liued longer, as now the two mightie Electors of Saxonie, Augustus his sonne, and Christian do vnderstand. In this Session great consultation was had, for composition for peace in the lowe Countries. This yeare the Italians made great tumults in Brabant: the reason was, for that they were not so much esteemed of since the Duke of Parmaes death, and that the Spaniards were preferred before them: that they had pay daily, and the Itali∣ans not regarded. For this cause they left the Kings Campe, and tooke the Towne of Sidien in Brabant, and fortified it. In this space no pay was sent, wherfore they made great hauocke throughout all Brabant, euen to the gates of Bruxelles. Com∣plaints were made hereof to the Gouernour the Arch-duke of Ernestus, that hee was faine to send certaine companies of
the Spaniards who had authoritie to bring them into order, and make them obedient, or driue them out of the Countrey. This more incensed the Italians, but the Spaniards draue them out of certaine of their holds: And Graue Maurice fearing least they of enemies, should become friends, went to the Ita∣lians, and politikely praised them and their dauntlesse spirits, extolled their worthy acts, and great victories that they got vnder their famous leader the Duke of Parma, that the Span∣iard, had offered them such an iniurie and disgrace as the like was not to bee borne, and therefore it behoued them to looke to their safetie, and that there was no better way but to serue vnder the King of Fraunce, as long as they might bee well payed. The Italians mooued by his perswasion, the last of No∣uember wrote to the King of Fraunce, humbly desiring him, that he would receiue them into his charge and defence, bee∣ing in number 1023. footemen, and 200. hosemen. But the King commended the determining of these businesse to the States of Holland. The Arch-duke Ernestus died at Bruxells, as some say, of a melancholy, for that hee might not marrie the Infant of Spaine, and that the names of his house of Austriche against the Turkes, and his owne against the confederates, had no bet∣ter successe, that he was not onely despised of the enemie, but of the Spaniards, and that hee had receiued no Letters a long time from the king, amongst whose Councell hee had many enemies: hee died of the age of 42. a very modest and sober Prince, who was seldome seene to laugh. This winter dyed Amurathe the 3. the 14. Emperour of the house of Othoman, and the very best thereof,The death of Amurath. 3. beeing not so cruell as the other: hee was much giuen to pleasure. His eldest sonne succeeded him in the Empire, beeing of the age of 29. yeares. The Castle and Citie of Strigon by Ister, after it had bene three and fiftie yeares vnder the tyrannie of the Turkish Em∣perour, by the valour and industrie of Count Charles Mans∣field, was deliuered to the Christians: which victorie hee sawe
not, for he died at the siege thereof, of a lingring disease. This Prince was from his childhood brought vp in marti∣all affaires, and shewed himselfe a good subiect to the King of Spaine his maister. The King of Fraunce hauing got absolution from the Pope, sent by his Embassadors, Letters and thankes to him, and in them, promised all obedience to the Apostolicke Sea of Rome. Christopher Mountdragon a Spaniard, Gouernour of the Castle of Antwerpe, and Captaine of the Garrisons, dyed at Antwerpe. The Estates of Holland and the vnited Prouinces, that they might more establish and make strong the Common-wealth, which they had already instituted and begun,An Edict a∣gainst Iesuits. published a new Edict, against those that rashly go into the Prouinces and Ci∣ties, of the aduerse faction, or should come out of them into theirs: also against the Iesuites, against such as were in the Vni∣uersities, subiect to the king of Spaine, and against those who were preferred to promotions vnder the oath of the maintei∣nance of the Romane religion. Further, it was decreed that all the fauourers and adherents of the pernitious and bloudie sect of the Iesuites, should be ex∣cluded out of all the confederate Prouinces, and that by no meanes they should be againe remitted. It was likewise enacted that none of the same Sect, whe∣ther borne in the same Prouinces, or a Stranger, do at any time come into these vnited Prouinces either by Sea or land, vpon paine to bee taken for an enemie, and so to be presently execu∣ted, although in this case he come with testimoniall by Letters. Furthermore, that within the space of two moneths they depart out of these Prouinces, nor returne againe into them during the present warres, vnlesse in that space they go to the Gouer∣nour and Magistrate, and satisfie them in euery point, and re∣nounce their oath and fealtie to the K. of Spaine. Besides, that all his subiects beware that after the publishing of this Edict, they doo not frequent any schoole of the Iesuites in Belgia. Of the Academies, they determined, that none inhabiting the
Prouinces, should studie in any of the Vniuersities which are subiect to the king of Spaine: willing also that within sixe mo∣neths after this Edict published, they should depart from those Vniuersities. Against those that haue sworne to maintaine and vphold the Romish religion, and to othersome that were promoted to dignities, this punishment was set downe, that heereafter they should haue no dignities, officies, or publike ministeries in the confederate Prouinces. Whosoeuer after sixe moneths next comming, shall be preferred vnder the oath of the defending the Romish errors and superstitions; and that they haue alrea∣die got this promotion, or in sixe moneths after shall get it, and are now admitted to offices, or shalbe hereafter admitted, shall first desire that they may be absolued from this oath, and in that stead shall sweare alleagiance to their Countrey, and shall vt∣terly renounce and abiure the gouernment of the K. of Spaine. And this absolution of oath, and exaction of the new, to bee made before a Iudge, to whom full power thereof and autho∣ritie is giuen. If they doo not appeare and satisfie this Edict, they shall not execute their offices. Those that doo not o∣bey, they shall presently depart the Countries: which if they doo not the first moneth, they shall bee fined at discretion, the second time the penaltie shall bee doubled: but if at the ende of three moneths they shall bee found to stay with∣in the confederate Prouinces, they shall bee banished for euer. The 24. day of August the Cardinall came to Antwerpe, where hee was receiued with great pompe. And the next moneth following, the English Nauie and certaine shippes of the Hollanders and Zelanders, returned out of Spaine rich∣ly laden. In Hungarie the Christians recouered against the Turke, the Citie of Hattawan, where except some fewe, they put all to the sword. On the 20. day of September, the Turkes laid siege to Agria, by which the way lieth open into Transiluania, Bohemia, Morauia, and Silesia, and with faire words and promises, desired
them to yeeld: but the gouernours of the Citie, for that by reason of the continuall battailes, they could not possibly any longer hold out, set fire on the Citie, and got them to the Ca∣stle. The Turkes then entered, and through couetousnesse of the spoyle, saued most of the houses. Then did the Emperour of the Turkes request them to yeeld, but they denyed it, and brauely resisted the fierce assault made against the Castle. In the end, beeing so farre ouermatched, they were constrained to their great griefe and losse, to yeeld vp the Castle, where the Gouernours and diuers Captaines were in most cruell ma∣ner put to the sword, for the slaughter which they made of the Turkes at Hattawan. Maximilian commeth to Agria.Maximilian leauing off this, came downe with an Army consisting of 60000. horse and foote. The Christians then marched towards Agria, where the Emperour of the Turkes was. The first encounter was with light skirmiges, but when the maine battaile was ioyned, the Christians got the better part, and hauing slaine certaine thousands of the Turkes, they put the rest to flight, and were maisters of their Tents. But whilest they too greedily entended the spoile, the enemie re∣couered his scattered troupes, and vpon the sudden killed a number of the Christians in their Tents, the rest beeing daun∣ted with this vnexpected ouerthrowe, betooke themselues to flight. This so amazed the Christian Hoste, that they were all dispearsed: and Maximilian himselfe accompanied with a small number, came to Caschoccia. Thus the victory that was thought happy in the beginning, sorted to this vnluc∣kie end. King Phillip determined to marry his daughter to Cardinall Albert, and for her dowry giueth the Prouinces of the lowe Countries. On Sonday the 8. of August, great triumph was made at London for the good successe of the two Generalls and com∣panies in Spaine, the winning, sacking, & burning of the famous Towne of Cadiz, the ouerthrow and burning of the Spanish Nauie, and other accidents. The 29. day of August the Duke of Boloine arriued
in England, and came to the Court at Greenwich, and there by her Maiesties oath, confirmed the league of amitie and peace betwixt the two Realmes of England and France, and shortly after, souldiers were sent ouer to aide the French in their wars against the Spaniards. Presently vpon the departure of the Duke of Bulloine, the right honourable Gilbert Earle of Shrewsburie, was sent Em∣bassador into France, to take the oath of Henry the fourth, the French King, for the confirmation of the said league, as also to inuest the King with the order of the Garter. I. Stowe. This Sommer arriued heere an Orator from the King of Polonia, and had audience at the Court then at Greenwich, whose Oration was in Latin; the which was presently most learnedly & eloquently answered by her Maiestie, in the same language. In the Parliament at Roane, the reformed Churches desi∣red  free exercise of their religion throughout the whole king∣dome of France, wherefore concerning the controuersie of the two Religions in the Parliament at Paris, these Articles fol∣lowing were set downe. 1 First, that an heretike fallen, and by name excommuni∣cated by the holy Sea, shall not loose the right of the crowne. 2 That he is a lawfull king, sent and appointed of God. 3 That the Church cannot depriue him of this right, nor generally any Princes of their dignities, or succession of their kingdomes, for any heresie whatsoeuer. 4 Nor release their subiects of their alleagiance to theyr Princes. 5 To withstand these sentences, and that they do not bind the conscience. 6 That they must looke into the actions of the Prince or his conscience. 7 That by the Christian religion, no order may bee ap∣pointed to the Salique lawe, that the king be constrained to be a Catholicke. 8 That an herelike by diuine grace is a Christian. 9 That it is not lawfull to resist a Prince that is an heretike.
10 That a Catholicke king may permit and suffer two re∣ligions in his kingdome. 11 Not to punish heretikes, nor to compell any to be Ca∣tholickes. 12 To pray for those that are excommunicated, as well the liuing as the dead, and that publikely in Churches: and to performe this, the Cleargie to be bound vpon paine of depar∣ting the Realme. 13. That Confessions may be reuealed for iustice sake. This yeare Arnald Whitfeeld, Chauncelor of the Realme in Denmarke, came Embassator into England, and Christian Barnice his assistant: they had audience at the Court then at Tiballs. Turnbaut is deliuered vp to Graue Maurice. And this yeare Belgia was in reasonable guietnesse. The States of the vnited Prouinces entered a mutuall league with the Queene of England and the King of France, defensiue and offensiue against Phillip the King of Spaine, their common enemie. The king of France with often excursions and assailes, had troubled and vexed the confines of Artesia and Hamonia. The Cardinall Albertus being at Bruxells, and thinking of repairing his Army, found great difficulties for want of mo∣ney; for king Phillip refused to pay the Italian Merchants, and those of other Nations their money, who tooke monstrous vsu∣rie of him, so that he complained that by this meanes his kingly patrimonie, his annuall reuenewes, and extraordinary subsi∣dies, were consumed. Yet that he might keepe his word, and shewe himselfe to be of a good conscience, he turned the con∣trouersie into religion, and appointed two of his, and his sonnes Confessors, to disswade these Merchants from taking this vn∣reasonable vsurie, and to tell them what daunger their soules were in, if they did not remit it: in the meane season, certaine of the creditors became bankerupt, the rest by their example were afterward afraid to lend the King any money. D. Chy∣traeus. The Emperour Rodolphus promised Sigismond Duke of
Transiluania, new supplies of souldiers and money, and with great solemnitie receiued him into the fellowship of the gol∣den Fleece. Maximilian againe was made Generall by the Emperour. The Pope by his Embassador Iohannes Franciscus Aldobrandi∣nus, promised to send ten thousand Italians into Hungary at his owne costs and charges, and made the D. of Mantua their Ge∣nerall. The higher Saxonie sent a thousand horsemen, and the lower Saxonie as many. Francouia, Bauania, Suenia, and the other Countries, Bohemia and Austria, sent in their aide like∣wise. These all marched towards Pappa, the which after eight day siege they tooke: from thence to Raba, which yeeded without any assault: but hearing that Mahomet Bassa was com∣ming towards them, and finding themselues too weake to bold out that place against them, they went backe ouer Danubie, into Scythia, towards Gomorrha. The Turkes eight dayes after besieged the Castle of Totes, whilest the Christians Armie lay Idle: which went downe to Watsia, and there hearing that the Turkes came towards them, they went to Strigonia. Alphonsus Duke of Ferrara, whom the yeare before gone,The death of Alphonsus. the Emperour Rodolphus determined to make Generall of the Turkish expedition, departed this life: whose Dukedome Caesar Est bastard (being in his life time appointed his heire and cessor) presently possessed. The Pope was much discontented with this, and forth∣with strooke Caesar with the thunderbold of excommunicati∣on, and made warre vpon him. Christian the 4. king of Denmarke, was married to Anne the daughter of Ioachimus Fredericus, Marquesse of Brande∣bourghe, by the Archbishop of Magdebourghe. This yeare dyed in the higher Germanie, Iohannes Postius an excellent Poet, and the chiefe Phisitian to the Count Pa∣latine. Graue Maurice made a bridge vpon Rhene. Berke was besieged of him, and yeelded within twelue dayes: which hee fortified.
Syr Robert Cecill principall Secretary, Maister Harbert Maister of the Requests, Sir George Carewe Lieftenant for the Ordinance, and others, prepared for their Embassage into France, and set sayle from Douer the ninteenth of February. Syr Robert Cecill returned the fift of May out of France. In the beginning of this yeare many Princes died. Iohan∣nes Georgius Marquesse of Bradenbourghe, of 37. yeares died, leauing behind him, sixe sonnes and foure daughters. The same moneth of Ianuary, died Richard Count Pala∣tine of Rhene at Sinouerne, where he kept his Court. Him fol∣lowed Theodorus the great Duke of Muschouia. In the lower Saxonie died Henry Duke of Brunswicke and Luzemburge, the sonne of Ernestus: and Clare the wife of Bogislaus, Duke of Pomerian. The last of Ianuary, Anne Queene of Poland, the daughter of Charles Arch-duke of Austria, departed this life. This moneth the Pope Clement the 8. made warre vpon Caesar Est Duke of Ferrara, for the Dukedome, but the mat∣ter was taken vp: and the Duke yeelded vp Ferrara vnto him: but all the other Cities and Townes he enioyed, and by the Emperour Rodolphus, was created Duke of Mulina. The Pope annexed this to the Popedome. Sigismond Prince of Transiluania, who hitherto had held out with an inuincible courage against the Turkes, in the be∣ginning of this yeare chaunged the course of his life, and sur∣rendred the Prouince of Transiluania, to the Emperour Ro∣dolphe and his heires, least it should fall into the hands of the Turkes. A peace was concluded betweene the Kings of France and Spaine, in the lowe Countries at Ʋeruini, in the beginning of May: Pledges sent into France from the Spaniard, were Phi∣lippus de Croy, Franciscus de Mendoza, the Admiral of the king∣dome of Arragon, Charles Prince and Countie Aremberge, Ludouicus de Velasco; the Popes Embassadors that made the peace, were Alexāder Cardinal de Medicis, and Generall of the order of the Franciscanes, Bonauentura a Sicilian. The King of Spaines deputies, were Iohannes Richardotus President of the
Councell, Iohannes Baptista, and Ludouicus Ʋerreiken the K. his Secretary in the lowe Countries. Amongst the conditions of peace, this was the chiefe: That former iniuries and vnkind∣nesses forgotten, these Articles of peace that were set downe in the yeare 1559 at Camerac, betweene Henry the second, king of France, and Phillip the 2. king of Spaine, might be kept. The whole pacification was comprehended in 35. Articles, and printed at Paris and Poloine. Calice, Capella, Ardea, and other Cities of Picardie, were restored to Henry the 4. K. of France, by the Spaniard. The Queene of England perswaded the Hollanders to peace, who notwithstanding preferred warre before a treche∣rous peace with the Spaniards. Therefore Albertus Arch-duke, going into Spaine to be married, Franciscus Mendoza Admirall of Arragon, chiefe Generall of the Spanish Forces, hauing brought his Army to Rhene, prepareth it against the Hollanders and the vnited Prouinces. They of Aquisgrane two yeares before condemned by the sentence of Caesar were now exposed to the spoiles & slaugh∣ter of all. Sigismond Prince of Transiluania, repented him of his change of life, and that he had giuen vp his gouernment, wher∣fore he came out of Silesia through Poland, into Transiluania, and desired of his subiects that their oath of alleageance to him might be renewed, and perswaded Maximilian Arch-duke, (whom the Emperour had made Gouernour of Transiluania) that hee would lead his forces against the Turkes towards the recouerie of Agnia, then against Transiluania. Vpon the fourth of August, Syr William Cecill knight of the Order, Lord Burghley, Maister of the Wards and Liueries, high Treasurer of England, a famous Counsellor to ye Queenes Maiestie all her raigne, and likewise had bene to Edward the sixt; who for his singular wisedome, was renowned through∣out all Europe, departed this mortall life at his house by the Strand, his body was conueyed to Westminster with solemne Funerall, and from thence secretly to Stamford in Lincolnshyre, and there buried. I. Stowe.
The second of October, George Earle of Comberland, re∣turned from the Seas, hauing made spoile of the strong Towne and Castle of S. Iohn de Portanoico in Spaine. This yeare died Phillip the 2. king of Spaine, being of the age of 72. yeares. Pope Clement the 8. created 13. Cardinals, amongst whom was Robert Bellarmine, Iesuite. Phillip the 3. the sonne of Phillip the 2. succeeded his fa∣ther in the kingdome of Spaine. Hee tooke to wife Margarite of Austria. And Albert Arch-duke of Austria, married the In∣fant of Spaine, the kings sister. Both these marrriages were ce∣lebrated by the Pope Clement the 8. at Ferrara. The 7. of February, the right honourable Charles Blunt. Lord Mountioy, hauing taken his leaue at the Court, depar∣ted towards Ireland, as Lieftenant there. Souldiers out of di∣uers Shyres were sent before him, and also after him, in this mo∣neth of February. This yeare, Richard Lord Bishow of London, with two other Commissioners, to wit, Doctor Perkins, & Doctor Swale, were sent in Embassage to Emden, there to treat with the Com∣missaries from the King of Denmarke, and returned the eight of Iuly following. On Tuesday the 5. of August, Charles Iames king of Scots, in Scotland escaped a straunge and strong conspiracie, practised by the Earle Gowrye and his brother. Embassa∣dors from Marocco.About the 8. of August, arriued at Doner certaine Em∣bassadors and assistants, 16. in number, sent from the king of Marocco in Barbaria. I. Stowe. Embassa∣dors from Moschouie.The 18. of September, certaine Embassadors came from Moschouie or Russia, and the 14. of October, the said Embassadors rode to the Court, and had au∣dience before her Maiestie. FINIS.
A briefe Discourse of the Churches estate from the death of Iesus Christ, vntill this present. ALl which hath bene succinctly said in this booke touching the estate of the Church,Three times of the Christi∣an Church. should remember the Reader of three di∣uers times in the consideration of the go∣uernment of the house of God, the better to marke things as they came, and to haue thereof a certaine abridgement in his me∣morie. We take the first time of the Christian Church,The first from the preaching of the Apo∣stles vntill Phocas, di∣stinguished into three periodes. from the be∣ginning of the Apostles preaching vntil the Empire of Phocas: which is ordinarily distinguished into three periodes. 1. The first of about 70. yeares from the Lords Ascention, vntill the death of the Apostles, and of their first Disciples. 2. The second began at the Empire of Traian, and stretched by the space of 200. yeares vntill Constantine: which time also was honoured with the presence of certain of the Apostles Disciples, & other excellent Pastors of the Church, and faithfull Martyrs of Iesus Christ. 3. The third frō Cōstantine vntil Phocas, which is the last periode of the first time of the Church, about 300. years: during which, the Church had many great Doctors, Greeks & Latins. As for the first periode of the first time,Of the first periode of the first time of ye Church. it is very certaine that neuer Christian Church was more happie thē during that time, whether we consider the doctrine taught by the Apostles and their first successors, or wee contemplate all the parts of the Ministerie, and of the Ecclesiasticall discipline.
Now for the doctrine we haue by a singular grace of God, the Apostles Epistles whereby it is easie to gather a body and sum∣mary of all that which euery Christiā ought to know touching his saluation. And that which is more, if they which came af∣ter the Apostles had continued to build vpon the foundation which they had laid, the Church had remained in his first spiri∣tuall splendor and brightnesse: the simplicitie then being such and so great in doctrine, in the maner of teaching, and in cere∣monies, that the sheepheards and sheepe, were altogether eli∣uated vnto the heauenly Father through Iesus Christ; liuing moreouer in such charitie & concord, as truly this world might be well called the golden world. For although that in the A∣postles time and their next successors, there rose vp certaine mutinous persons to trouble the happie rest of the Church, this hurt not much, the maiestie of the spirit of God discouering it selfe in such sort in the preaching of the Gospell, that all the world was constrained to acknowledge in this infirmitie of the seruants of God, an admirable efficacie, to biing all wise∣dome and humane power captiue vnder the obedience of Iesus Christ. True it is, that alreadie Sathan thought vpō his affaires, and brought forth his practises with greater force then euer be∣fore, building his Sinagogue nigh vnto the Church. For euen when the Apostles themselues liued, certaine Iewes and Gen∣tiles making the same profession of Christianisme, fought a∣gainst Iesus Christ in diuers maners, as S. Paul his Epistles doo witnesse. And what diligence soeuer the seruants of God vsed to eradicate and root out the tares which the enemie did sowe: yet remained there the seedes thereof in the bosome of the Church during the periodes following: God meaning to hum∣ble his, and to shewe them that truly they had and would al∣waies haue cause to fight in this life, but that the triumph ther∣of was reserued for the other world. For as for the strength of the persecutors since the Apostles time, it hath alwaies shew∣ed it true, that the bloud of the Martyrs is the seede of the Church. But let this be said in a word, onely to awake the Reader and to prepare him to a diligent meditation of the Ecclesiasti∣call
historie. Now something is to be said of the second periode of the first time. The Apostolike men,Of the second periode of the first time of the Church. armed with the vertue and power of ye Lord, maintained constantly the truth, amongst all the tempests and stormes of persecution, and in despite of Gentilisme, & of diuers heresies which boldly began to left vp their heads. In so much, that great maruel it was, that so soone af∣ter so great light, men should see the East in many places coue∣red with so deep darknes, many goodly Churches ruinated, and the doctrine of saluatiō transported otherwhere. Yet the grea∣test euil was in the bowels of the Church it selfe; many Pastors wherof, not being so attentiue as of reason they shuld haue bin to conserue and keepe the puritie of the Euangelicall doctrine, but suffering to take roote (I know not how) that which tasted of carnall wisedome: in so much that in the place of the true end & marke which the Gospell proposeth vnto vs, men began to establish vnto vs, all the perfection of Christianitie in suffe∣rings and afflictions for the Gospell, and in arresting & abiding a litle too subtilly, vpon the stay of certaine fantastike persons, springing from the schoole of Philosophers, so fell by litle and litle, to that vnhappinesse, as to transforme the holy scripture in∣to allegorike interpretations, a maruellous baite for the curio∣sitie of humane vnderstanding, and a fountaine of infinite mis∣chiefes in the Church. True it is that the first inuentors of such things, thought nothing lesse then that which came after. So much then did the Lord humble his people. But about the end of this periode, euil was seene to aduance, and ceremonies en∣crease in such sort, that men enclined vnto Indaisme and Paga∣nisme, the loue of solitude and Munkery, the abstinence from marriage, and from certaine viands and meates on particular dayes, many Feasts and other seeds of superstition after succee∣ding, tooke a maruellous roote. So the commencement of prai∣ers for the dead, and of the sacrifice of the Masse, did then dis∣couer themselues: not that the intent of such as made mention of the dead, to encourage the liuing constantly to serue God, and which brought of their goods into the company of the faithfull, for the comfort of the poore after the celebration of the Supper, was to bring in the execrable Idolatrie which long
time after sprung vp. There were also introducted and brought into Baptisme, certaine ceremonies, yet not such as the ridicu∣lous superstitions which since haue bin forged. Finally the good intent began to shewe it selfe, and from thenceforth to lift vp the head, vntill at the last vpon the ende of the second time of the Church, it rose vp aboue the word of God. Of the third periode of the first time of the Church.As for the third periode of the first time, heerein it was happie, in that God during that time, raised vp diuers learned persons, Greekes and Latines, to oppose themselues with liue∣ly voyce at Sinodes, as also by their bookes, whereof wee haue some number at this day, against the impietie of infinite here∣tikes. Amongst other, S. Augustine was an excellent Doctor of the Church: who notwithstanding is not alwaies so cleare as is to be desired. Amongst the Latines this time also brought forth other great persons, yet men also, which yet is more seene in the Greeke Doctors, lesse pure then the Latines, espe∣cially in the right knowledge of the merite of Iesus Christ, and all was the want of a pure and natiue intelligence of the Lords language in the Prophetike and Apostolike bookes. Their allegorike interpretations had as it were gotten the vp∣per hand, ceremonies maruellously encreased, Monkeries began to take footing, the true meanes to diuide the Church, and to forge a new seruice of God: afterward, the veneration of the Martyrs Sepulchres, paintings, and after Images gliste∣red in Churches. The pure doctrine of the Lords Supper be∣gan to bee falsified for want of right vnderstanding the man∣ner of Sacramentall speeches, and the vertue of the alone sa∣crifice of Iesus Christ. Bishops, especially that of Rome, thrust into the world, and the misterie of iniquitie formed it selfe as it afterward should come into the light. For Arrianisme ha∣uing serued for a seed to Mahumatisme, and the dispising of the celestall veritie, with corruption of manners maintaining the audacitie and boldnesse of the Bishops of Rome▪ this peri∣ode finishing, gaue entry vnto straunge euils, wherewith the Church was ouerthrowne a litle space after. Let vs now say something of the second time of the
Church, which we diuide into two periodes. The first,The second time of the Church frō Phocas vn∣til Charls. 5. The first periode. from Phocas about the yeare 600. vntill Charlamaine by the space of 300. yeares. The second from Charlamaine vnto Charles the fift of that name, Emperour, about 700. yeares. In the first periode of this second time of the Church, as the Antichrist of the East thrust himselfe well forward, that of the West established his Throne, and then was the doore open to all errours: which notwithstanding entred not at once, but came by litle and litle into the Church. Aboue all, the opini∣on of purgatorie, fire, and of the sacrifice for the dead, were the foundation of the Papaltie and of all that vermine of their Cleargie and infinite Sects of Monkes, which like Grashop∣pers from the deepe pit, came to spread themselues through Eu∣rope. But it was in the second periode of the second time,The second periode. that Idolatrie and superstitions obtained the vpper hand. Insomuch that the poore Church as it were buried, had no more any spring, neither appeared there any token wherevpon to cast her eye, but onely the inuocation of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost in Baptisme. And although from time to time, the Lord made shine some flames and torches in the bowells of that darkenesse, to redargue and weaken such as rot∣ted in so heauie and palpable ignorance: yet was their blind∣ness so lamentable, and their sleepe so deepe, that for one which lifted vp the head, and to whom Antichrist gaue no release nor leaue to approach, witnesse all such as during this periode opposed themselues neuer so litle against his tyrannie, an infi∣nite remained liuelesse and altogether dead. The Lord making himselfe admirable in the mercie which he shewed vpon some, and renowned in horrible and iust punishment of their in∣gratitude, which loued better lyes then truth. Who can heere recyte the superstitions & Idolatries of Antichrist, & his crafts and subtilties, to establish his kingdome and tirannie vpon bo∣dies and soule? He had his seruants and instruments of all sorts, to leane, fasten, encrease, and multiply his Throne in the Temple of GOD, carrying in his browe the name of mi∣serie, sitting in the Temple of God, calling himselfe God,
yet vnknown of such as called themselues Christians, which he put off vntill the end of the world, and to I know not what fan∣cie and dreame of an Antichrist which should be borne but a li∣tle before the second comming of the sonne of God. Briefly, the great spiritual Babilon, the murdresse of soules, had her king∣dome during this period, tyrannizing the Israell of God, hid and dispearced in a litle number and by her impostures, blas∣phemies and impieties, mocked the true God, & Father of Ie∣sus Christ, whose name auowed with the mouth, shee trode vn∣der her feet, by her abhominable errour. The third time of the Church from Charles the fift, til this pre∣sent time.But the Lord willing to make his worke admirable, which was to ruinate Babilon, to destroy the man of sin by the breath of his mouth, and by the brightnesse of his comming, presen∣ted himselfe in the third time, and by the ministerie of people, feeble and of small appearance, yet driuen and drawne on with the zeale of his glory, first brought in ye knowledge of tongues, then the celestial truth, maugre all the strengthes of the world, and in sixtie yeares hath made vs againe see all the maruells of the worlds passed in the gouernment of his Church, as well in the efficacie of his word, as in the vertue thereof, to maintaine it, to fortifie his seruants, against all sorts of enemies, within and without, and to represse tyrants, Apostates, heretikes and hi∣pocrites: which we hope he will pursue more and more, and we pray him to do it for the loue of Iesus Christ his sonne, vntill that great Sauiour appeare in the cloudes, to iudge the qucke and the dead. Amen. FINIS.
A Table of the principall things contained in this booke. A. ABbey of S. Denis in France, builded by Dagobert. 190 Absimarus Emperor. 206 Abbreuiataries created 465. destroyed 487 Acarius an heretike, murdred. 69 Acephali heretikes. 82 Acolites. 91 Achaia and other Countries brought into Prouinces. 73 Acchio D. of Millain from whose helme fell the serpent. 114 Adamites heretikes in Bohemia. 81 Adiaphores. 130 Adrian the Emperour chaunged the name of Ierusalem. 34 Adrian the 4. angry because the Emp. held his right stirrop 130 Angry because hee placed his name before the Popes. 136 He is choaked with a flie. 140 Albertus Alasco. 145 Aluaes tyrannie. 636 His death. 641 Amais banished Scotland. 643 A Priest dieth for feare. 641 A notable act of the Seignory of Venice. 653 Antwerpe yeeldeth. 655 Augusta. 659 Augustus D. of Sax. dieth. 657 A Fleet for Lisbon. 671 A Iubiley. 677 An act against the P. Bulls. 677 Albertus made Generall. 692 He winneth Callais. 693 Articles concerning controuer∣sies in religion. 703 Aemilian Emp. 65 Ayme D. of Sauoy, became an hermit. 89 Albarit Marquesse of Toscane, chaseth away the Sarrasins. 55 Alban martyred. 49 Appellation of the Masse. 141 Albert first author of the Car∣mes. 106 Adrian Pope a buggerer, yet worshipped as God. 36 His death. Ibid. Aelis Pertinax. 45 Alexander Seuerus Emp. 53 Albigeois, or Albiois, opposing themselues against Transub∣stantiation are ouercome. 112 Albinus first K. of Lombard is slaine. 67 Alcoran of the Mahomatists. 190 Alcibiades Martyr, of a scrupu∣lous life. 42 Almaine followed the fashion of the Romane Masse. 94
Almaine changed by ciuil war. 91 Alexander Bishop. 13 Alexander ordaineth new cere∣monies. 36 Alexander martyred. 42 Alex. Bishop of Ierusalem. 58 Alex. 3. sent vnto the Souldā, the Image of the Emp. Barbarossa. 103 He fled in his cookes attire. 109 Hee treadeth vpon the necke of Fredericke Barbarossa. 117 Alexander 5. poysoned. 122 Alexander 6. poysoned. 129 Ambrose beeing sicke, receiueth the Eucharist. 73 Anacletus 28. Martyr. 29 Auicetus Pope. 28. Martired. Ibid Antonius Pius Emp. 37 Amurathes Emp. of the Turkes. 452 Anastatius commandeth to wor∣ship a quaternitie. 145 Anastatius the Emp. dieth with lightning 99 Annates imposed vpō Frāce. 451 Confirmed. 460 Antichrist in his ful tiranny per∣secuteth the faithfull after the yeare, 130. according to Sybil∣la Erithred, and makes warre vpon himselfe. 153 Anthonius & his cohaeritikes. 96 Anthonius Bishop of Nicomedia Martyred. 73 Anthropomorphits. 268 Antinous. 36 Antioche shaketh & trēbleth. 91 Sinketh in an Earthquake. 100 Taken by Boemundus the Nor∣man. 111 Antiphones and the Introite of the Masse. 145 Apollonius beheaded. 44 Apostles gouerne Churches. 11 False Apostles. Ibid. Apostles & their charge. 9 A fabulous apparition of S. Mi∣chaell. 61 Arabici heretikes. 19 Arcadius and other martired by Genseric. 83 Archilaus Herods successor. 31 Archpriests and Cardinalls. 54 Arrius & his adherents excom∣municated. 103 Could not bee revnited with A∣lexander. 105 Purgeth himselfe by oathes. Armacan publisheth conclusions against the Friars. 116 Armenia againe receiueth the faith. 70 Arnoldus de noua villa, a true and faithfull man. 399 Arnold Brira opposeth himselfe against the Cleargie, vsurping the temporall sword. 329 Arnulphus Bishop of Lyons slain. 322 Arrius Antonius persecuteth the Christians. 33 Articles of the doctrine of the Valdois. 339. Of the Bohe. Ibid.
Artois erected vnto an Earldome or Countie 227 Asia looseth 13. Townes by earth∣quake. 6 Asia the lesse, hath flourishing Churches, 8. Persecuted. 49 Attyla spoyseth Aquileia and all Italy. 153. Taketh Rome. 224 Besiegeth Orleance. 227. Is discomfited by Meronee. 244 Aug. S. dieth. 151 Athanasius. 109 Aubriot accused of heresie, is cō∣demned to perpetual prison with bread and water. 128 Augustines drawne from their Hermitages to preach in good Townes. 367 Auignō the seat for the Romane Court. 394 Auriflame the French standerd. 343 Ausbourge deliuered from the Barbarians. 72 Augustus Caesar. 1 Aurelian Emp 64. His death. 70 B BAbilon hath a Church. 10 Battaile of Lepante. 602 Baiazeth 4 Emp. of the Turkes, slew his brother Soli∣man. 486 Baia. is put in an Iron cage. 447 Baiazeth giueth 200000. Du∣cats to Pope Alexander the 6. to poison Gemē his brother. 451 Basilides heretikes. 26 Bauier conquered 223 Beda the Venerable 118 Bellisarius makes Affrica tribu∣tary 123 Beneuent giuen to the Pope 326 Bennet the yonger cast into a for∣nace 190 Berēgarius smothered the truth vnder certaine errours 294 He speakes against himselfe. Ibid. Benet 1. Pope 176 Beginning of leaden seales 200 Baron 366 Berillus heretike 33 Barnard Monke poisoned H. the 7. 223 Bishop and Priest all one. 14 Bishops married. 68 Bishop of Rome made vniuersall 92 Bishoppe ought to bee conuinced by 12. witnesses before hee be condemned. 129 Bishops make of a Councel a con∣uenticle and a monopoly 248 Blasphemy new of the Popes keies 313 Blondus the Historiographer. 300 Boheme tamed by Charlemaine. 156 Is erected into a kingdome. 302 Brought into the obedience of O∣tho 307 Bohemians communicate vnder both kindes 315 Make no account of the Pope. 19
Withdraw from subiection. 334 They propound 4. articles in the Councell of Basill. 351 Boniface Pope. 116 Boniface an English man, prea∣cheth in Frise and is there Mar∣tyred. 221 Burgraues. 366 Bruno the first Chartreux, with Hugh Bishoppe of Grenoble. 307 Bulgaria made subiect to the Ro∣mane Church. 221 Bull of gold. 249 Bull of the Stigmates of S. Fran∣ces. 110 Bullist and Friars minors doo striue for the gouernment of the Nuns. 226 Burchardus compileth the aun∣tient Canons. 121 Bells in vse. 30 Bell tolls at noone-tide. 461 C CAligula afflicteth the Iewes. 6 Calyphe the great, compa∣rable to the Pope. 366 Hee dieth of famine in the midst of his great riches. 371 Caluin. 579 Charlemaine first called Tres∣christian. 226 Canons obserued by the comman∣dement of Caelestine. 153 Canonization of Saints. 346 Cardinalls name now in vse. 282 Cardinalls alone to weare redde hats. 468 Cardinalls named as principalls of the Cleargie. 54 Cardinalls exalted against here∣tikes. 58 Carmes called the bretheren of the Virgin Mary. 378 Carpocrates heretike. 35 Carus Emperor died being stric∣ken with lightning. 62 Cataphryges heretikes. 35 Catechumenes. 101.43 Cathares heretikes, called No∣uatians. 101 Chapplers inuented. 362 Cassimere. 627 Carmelites. 341 Conrade Emp. 263 Celsus heretike. 35 Caelestinus Pope. 150 Cerdon a stoicke heretike. 38 Ceremonies inuented. 52.180 Cerinthus heretike. 40 Caesar Valentine, Alex. the 6. his bastard. 482 Chaldeans afflict the Iewes. 76 Chanons regular or irregular in∣stituted. 307 Calixtus Bishop of Rome. 52 Carus Emp. 74 Caius Emp. of Rome. 75 Caracalla Emp. 51. slaine. 161 Charles K. of Naples, sleyeth his sister Iane at the Popes instigati∣on. 397 Chartreux order founded. 370
Castle of S. Angeto builded. Chiliastes renued. 67 Chorepiscopi particular Bishops. 91 Christian libertie. 19 Church of Antioche in great fame. 16 Church in Babylon. 10 In Affrike troubled by Genseri∣cus. 78 Romaine declared principall. 111 Church called Sancta Sanctorū builded. 63 Churches flourishing in Asia the lesse, gouerned by the Apostles. 8 Churches orientall communica∣ted but once a yeare. 227 Churches orientall and occiden∣tall appeased. 244 Church of Aquilegia reduced. 89 Christians persecuted the first time by Nero. 19 The second vnder Domitian. 27 The third vnder Traian. 28 The 4. vnder M. Aurelius. 40 The 5. vnder Seuerus. 41 The 6. vnder Iulius Max. 55 The 7. vnder Decius. 58 The 8. vnder Galius. 60 The 9. vnder Aurelian. 70 The 10. and most cruell, vnder Dioclesian. 76 Christ exerciseth his ministerie, suffereth his passion. 6 Cleargie, Clarkes, and their sig∣nification. 90 The Cleargie augmented. 112 Cleargie Romane vsurpeth the election of the Pope. 149 The temporall sword. 201 They wil haue no reformatiō 232 Except from common collectors. 241 Clarkes enioy immunities. 39 That they ought to meddle with secular affaires. 160 Clouis baptised and his Nobles. 108 Collation of Benefices. 209 Colledge of faire women. 194 Comet seene three moneths to∣gether. 397 Commodus strangled. 45 Cōmunicants take the wine and bread in their hands. 238 Councell at Ierusalem. 192 Councells touching Easter. 162 Clerus Bishop. 26 Clement the first. 27 Claudius Emp. 69 Councells of Philadelphia. 56 At Antioche. 68 At Nice. 96 Councels prouinciall euery yeare. 98 Councell Affrican. 107 Councell of Carthage. 109 Ephesus. 112 Of Chalcedon. 120 Of Orleance 132 At Tara in Spaine. 136
Tolledo 141 Constantinople 155 Councell at Auuergne 161 At Orleance 171 At Lyons 177 Paris 197 Ciuill 200 Tolledo 222 Councells the foure generall to be kept as the Gospell 223 Councell at Rome 128 Councels cannot prescribe lawes to the Romane Church, but from thence hath her vertues and perfections 243 Cornelius B. of Rome 60 Councell at Reius 335 At Tours. 33. Lateran 349 Councell in France, against the K. thereof. 359 Councell generall at Vienna. 371 Councel National in Fracē. 430 Councel general at Vienna. 444 At Parpignan 445 At Pise 459 At Constance 460 Cardinall Albert. 641 Christian Churches of Constan∣tinople. 650 Charles Borgia. 642 Clement 8. Pope 679 He maketh warre vpon Caesar Est 760 Confession taken away by Necta∣rius 92 Confession annicular instituted. 346
Conon Pope 88 Conrade 1. of that name Empe∣rour 250 Conrade the second 261 Conrade the third 272 Conrade a Merchant of Milain, disposeth the Sect of the Fra∣triceilli 384 Conrade the lawfull K. of Sici∣lia, beheaded by the Popes coun∣cell 409 Consecration of water mingled with wine 98 Constance sister of William King of Sicily a Nun, was dispended with for marrying 335 Constātius Emp. an heretike. 226 Constance pilleth Rome 161 Constance Emp. abiureth his he∣resie. Ibid. Constance slaine at the Bathe, 20 Comodus Emp. 44. His death. 45 Count or Earle. 366 Constantine the great, Emperor, desired to be baptised in Iordan. 83 Hee caused a Tabernacle to bee carried in warre 87. He bur∣neth the libell of the Bishops. 92 By his humillitie he raiseth vp the pride of the Popes against his successors 31 Constant. the 4. Emp. 198 Constant the 5 Emp. 215. He commanded Images to be cast out of Churches. Constant 6. Emp. 222
Constant. Pope, 2. of that name, hath his eyes put out 220 Constant. Paleologne the last Em∣peror of Constantinople. 421. murdered at the taking therof. Costātinople builded in the midst of Byzantium 89 Is fired. 112. Is besieged 3. yeares of the Sarazins and A∣rabiās, recouered by the Gre∣cians, 211. Besieged of Baia∣zeth. 222. is taken. Cosroes K. of Persia destroyeth Syria. 185. He would abolish Christianitie. Ibid. He is ouer∣come by Heraclius. Coronation of Clement the fift troubled with the deathes of many. 2018 Cresselius punished for his ambi∣tion 334 Croisades take their beginning. 299 Crueltie of Pope Pius the fourth. 300 Cyrus reedifieth the Temple. 4 Custome vpon wine and salte in France. 112 Cyprian S. his death. 64 D DAgobert instituted a Col∣ledge of faire women. 194 Damasus 2. of that name Pope. 25 Denmarke with his K. conuerted to the faith 121 Danes and Normans do returne into France. 156 Darfosa martyred. 89 Darius Histaspes endeth the Temple 12 Dauphin sold to the K. of Fr. 129 Decadence and fall of the Pope. 259 Decretalls frō whence forged. 60 Decretalls examined 61 Decretalls gathered together by Raymond the Monke. 352 Decretalls attributed to Lucius. 71 Degrees Ecclesiasticall 59 Denis Bishop of Alexandria, & his death 119 Denis B. of Rome and his De∣cretalls 68 Denis a Romane Abbot, made the great paschall Cicle. 173 Denis the woman of great Con∣stantine, martyred 116 Deus Dedit or Dorithe Pope. 186 Deacon and his signification. 14 Didier last K. of Lombards. 221 Dydius Iulius Emp. 45 Dydinus a blind man, a famous Regent in the Schoole of A∣lexandria 244 Digna a noble matron in Aqui∣lea, cast her selfe headlong in∣to the water 153 Dioclesian caused his feet to bee kissed. 76 Dioclesia. & Max. depose them∣selues of the Empire. 78
D. Saunders. 642 Duke Alanson. 640 His death. 645 Duke of Guise slaine. 666 Death of the L. Russell. 658 Death of the Q. of Scots. 659 Dissention in religion. 682 Duke of Parma dieth. 680 Death of Sixtus the 5. 674 D. de Maine. 676 Death of Ch. Burbon. 673 D. of Neuers. 685 Dissention amongst the Prote∣stant Princes. 627 Death of Amurathe. 690 D. Lopez executed. 688 Dioclesian dyeth in a rage. 79 Diuision of the kingdome of Iu∣dea. 3 Diuorce permitted for the long sicknesse of a woman. 257 Doctrine Euangelicall receiued at Ʋalence in Dauphine. 177 Domitian Emperour. 26 Domitian slaine. 37 Domitius Nero. 28 Donation of Constantine. 89.405 Death of the Duke of Guise. 577 Decius Emperour. 58 His death. 59 Diaconesses. 92 Deodatus Pope. 199 E EAster ordained on the Son∣day. 39 To be celebrated in one day in all places. Ibid. Ebion an heretike. 18 Edmond the last King of the Ea∣sterne English men, slaine by the Danes. 271 Edward the 3. King of England elected Emperour. 411 Election of the Pope giuen to Charlemaine. 253 Giuen to the people and Cleargy of Rome. 256 Vsurped by them the Ro. people. 271 To the Popes Elders. 5 Election of the Emperours giuen to the Germaine Nation. 277 Emperour kisseth the Popes feet. 219 Empire Westerne endeth. 153 Empire Romane decayeth. 141.187 Empire of Constantinople trans∣ferred into France. 218 Empire diuided betwixt two Em∣perours. 79 Empire of the West diuided. 262 Empire in discord. 303 England first keepeth the Lent fast. 194 Euensong of Sicily. 362 Estate of France. 619.623 Estates of the lowe Countries. 620 Estates of Almaine. 692 Euangelists which. 14 Euaristus martyred. 74
Eucharist called oblation 37 Giuen into the hand of the recei∣uer. 91. carried to such as were nigh dead. 80. A booke tou∣ching the Eucharist generally receiued 245 Elutherius Bishop of Lyons, and his dreames 78 Eugenia daughter of Phillip king of Alexandria martyred 76 Eutalius Priest, cause of the 4. Schisme 137 Euaristus B. 30. Martyred. Ibid. Elutherius Pope 43 Eutichian K. of Rome. 71 Eutychians and Arrians reiected from Constantinople 79 Exarches in Italy 176 Exarches cease in Italy. 211. Is giuen to the Pope 218. & as∣ked againe by Constantine. Excommunication conuerted in∣to abuse 257 Excommunication written with Inke mingled with wine in the Challice. 239. For temporall goods 329 Exorcists 91 Eusebius Bish. of R. 18 Euerguacenes 143 F FAbian Bishop and his election miraculous 56 Martyred with his wife Darfosa Ibid. Fable of the Stigmates of S. Frances. 389 Fausta maintaineth her husband Costantine in superstition. 100 Faelix Bishop and his Decretalls and martyrdome 82 Faelix Bishop of Rauenna hath his eyes put out 202 Faelix and Elephandus condem∣ned for heresie, which they re∣pent 226 Faelix 5. renounceth the Pope∣dome 480 Ferrara vsurped by the Ʋeneti∣ans 110 Feasts denounced to the people. 93 Feasts of all Saints instituted. 112 Feasts of the Sacrament called Feste Dieu 121. Confirmed. 149 Fastings 139 Feast of the speare and nailes. Feast of the transingration. Feast of dedication 716 Festus gouerneth Iudea 19 Flagellers or whippers 117 Flaunders made a Countie. 290 Flower-delyce of France. 426 Forbidding to eate flesh annathe∣nized 235 Florentines buy their libertie. Florentines interdicted 440 Absolued by Vrban the 6. 446 Florian brother of Tacitus. 70 Ʋsurped the Empire, and is slaine Ibid. Florus mooued the Iewes to war. 18 Fraunce followeth the fashion of the Romane Masse 207
France diuided into certain king∣domes 197 France agreeth in their Eccle∣siasticall singing with the Ro∣manes 256 Frances Dandalus D. of Ʋenice 425 Frances Curiario Ʋicar of the Empire, taken of the Venetians and slaine in prison 452 S. Frances canonized 383 Frances Petrarke 420 Fratricelli condemned and perse∣cuted 384 Fredegunda sleyeth Chrisperic. 203 Fredegunda flaine in the Church Ibid. Frederic Barbarossa goeth into Italy 329 Hee is excommunicated of A∣lexander the third. 344 Felix Bishop of Rome 71 Formosus Pope 258 Ferdinand. 1. 554 Frederic Barbarossa is surprised by the Souldan, and set at li∣bertie 273 Troden vnder foote by Alexan∣der the third 348 Frederick the 2. declared an ene∣mie to the Church 389 He is constrained to lead an Ar∣mie into Siria 390 Frederick the 2. excommunica∣ted and depriued of his Empire by Innocent the 4. 393 Frederick 2. being angred at the Pope, made many notable per∣sons die 363 Frederick D. of Austrich behea∣ded at Naples, with others. 399 Frederick Count of Misne, elec∣ted Emperour 441 Frederick D. of Brunswic elec∣ted Emp. slaine by the Count de Waldec 317 Frisons receiue the faith 266 Frodesque Saluiat Archbishop of Pise, hanged 479 Fulco succeeded Baudwin in the Kingdome of Hierusalem. 363 Fuscus ouercome by Derpains. 300 Fulbert Bishop of Chartres, made Stirps Iesse 322 G GAmma inuented 284 Galeaze Duke of Millaine 456 Galerius Max. eaten with wormes 80 Gallien Emperour 72 Gallus Emp. he and Vclutian are slaine Ibid. Ganclon betrayeth the Peeres of France 257 Gantier Diuelot slaine in the Church 78 Gautlier d' Annoy an adulterer, scorched and hanged 430 Geneua and Orleance founded by Aurelian,
Geneua ordaines a Duke 80 Geneuiefue the Parisians Dia∣na. 179 Gregorian Calender 642 Refused 647 Gregory 13. Pope dieth 651 Gregory the 14. 677 Gerard Brazut Hildebrands in∣struments to kill Popes 537 Gibelins set vp 357 Gnostiques 35 Godfrey of Bullen king of Ieru∣lem 353 Gratian perswades 3. Popes. 19. to depose themselues. 306 Greekes graunt Purgatory, and the Pope to be primate of the Church 427 Gregory one of the foure Doctors of the Church 206 Gregory calleth himselfe the ser∣uant of seruants 79. And will not iudge an vniuersall Bi∣shop Ibid. Gregory celebrateth the Supper in the vulgar tongue Ibid. Gregory the 2. Pope, opposeth himselfe against the ordinance to burne Images 190 Gregory the fourth accepted not the Popedome vnlesse the Em∣perour allowed the election. 221 Gregory Alias Hildedrand de∣fended Symonie and single life. 345 Gregory the seuēth cast the Host into the fire Ibid. Gregory the 7. a liuely picture of Antichrist Gregory the 7. after his death tormented in hell, doth great myracles 340 Guelphes the Popes fautors, and Gibelins the Emperours. 390 Guilbert Archbishop of Rauenna taken vp againe 16. yeares af∣ter buriall 256 Guido Aretine the first inuen∣tor of the Gamma & the notes 284 Guillaine Pion Duke of Aqui∣taine, founder of the first Mo∣nasterie of the order of Augu∣stine Friars 219 Guillian Orseure shewed that the Pope is Antichrist 227 Guillaine Count de Holland cho∣sen Emperour against Frede∣rick the second. 257. Is slaine. Ibid. Guiniard Bishop of Nantes mar∣tyred 294 Guisards audition 300 Guy de Lusingam last king of Ie∣rusalem. 357 Gaule began to be called France. 188 Gordian Emperour 56 Grashoppers out of the bottome∣lesse pit 461 Guns inuented. 432
H HAalon K. of the Tartari∣ans, ouercommeth the Per∣sians 177 Helchesites heretikes 25 Henry the 8. Emperour, inuen∣ted the combat of tournies. 65 H. the 3. vpon his marriage day draue away all Morris-play∣ers, and such like 284 H. the 4. Emperour, sheweth a deiection of heart vnworthy an Emperour 130 H. 4 poysoned by his sonne, vn∣buried by the space of 5. years. 315 H. the 5. resigneth the inuesti∣tures to the Pope 334 H. Lātgraue of Thuring, elected Emperour, dieth 361 H. the 6. will needs bee crowned at Rome 349 H. the 7 poysoned in an Host. 357 H. the 1. K. of England, depri∣ued of his right by an Arch∣bishop 223 Henry Carperell Prouost of Pa∣ris, a false Iudge, condemned. 422 Heliogabalus Emp. 51 Hilary 1. Pope 157 Herculian Bishop of Peruse hath his head sawne. Heresie of Ebion. 29. Nicholaits. 29. Menander. 29. Basi∣lides. 35. Saturnine. 35. Cerinthus. 40. Valentine. 35 Marcian and Montanus. 35 Carpocrates Gnastici. 35. Cer∣din. 38. Cataphryges. 42. A∣palles. 42. Talianus. 142. Fratricelli. 420. Seuerians. 43 Theodorus. 57. Proclus and Berillus. 62. Noetus and Sa∣bellius. 64. Of the Manichees. 71. Arrius. 95. Pelagius. 82. Acephales. 84. A quaternitie 47. Of many Monkes. 22. Of Iohn Bishop of Constanti∣nople. 302. Athenians and o∣thers. 89. Prifallian. 30.12. Monothelites. 214. Of Con∣stantius. 363. Of Paul the suc∣cessor of Pyrrhus. 249. Of Pe∣ter the successor of Patriarch. 223. Constant. by him abiu∣red. 229. Of Machoris Bishop of Antioche, Monothelite. 215 Heresie of a Councell 309 Heresie pernitious of Transub∣stantiation 359 Herman of Saxe elected Empe∣rour 257 Herod stirreth persecutiō. 2. And dieth by a horrible iudgement Ibid. Herod Antipas beheaded Iohn. 4 Herod Tetrarch banished to Ly∣ons 6 Herodes Agrippa beheaded
Iames. 9. His death 15 Herodias wife of Phillip He∣rodes 4 Houres Canonicall sung by note. 357 Hildebrand causeth eight Popes to die 427 Hildericke king of the Vandales, restoreth the Catholickes. 461 Hirene assembleth a Councell at Nice. 222. Causeth her sonnes eyes to be put out 223 Holland erected into a Countie. 259 Homousis and Essence 99 Hungarie and Boheme become one kindome 371 Honorius King of the Ʋandales persecuteth the Christians, and dieth of vermine 472 Hospitalls 164 Hospitall of the holy Ghost buil∣ded at Rome. 474 Hospitaliers called the knights of S. Iohn of Porsale 321 H. K. of Nauarre. 643 Heluetians 658 Huguenots 667 H. the 3. K. of France 669 H. 4. King of France crowned. 686 He is absolued of the Pope. 691 Hussites do reiect all humane tra∣ditions. 221. Are assaulted by Sigismond Emperour and the Pope. 691 Hypona besieged by the Vandales 346 I IAcobius founded vpon Pope Honorius his dreame. 351 Iacobius of Berne. 494 Idolatrie finds the Pope a defen∣der thereof 209 Idolatry of them of Gaunt. 228 Idolatrie of Chaplets 362 Iohn Baptist preacheth 4 Iohn Apostle and Euangelist dy∣eth 27 Iohn of Antioche heretike and a Iew, compiled the Alicoran. 190 Iohn king of England subiected his Crowne to the Pope. 227 Ignatius cast to beasts 31 Innocent the first 146 Iohn the 1. Pope. 167.2.169 Iohn surnamed Teutonicus, op∣poseth himself against the Popes demaunding of tenthes in Al∣maine. 421 Iohn Duke of Britaine slain with a wall 262 Iohn 22. an heretike 392 Iohn de Roquetaillade martyred. 421 Iohn Colunban and Frances Vin∣cent the first Iesuites 417 Iohn Wickliffe 443 Iohn Gerson 443 Iohn Hus commendeth the doc∣trine of Wickliffe to the people. 426
Iohn Hus and Hierome of Prage go to the Councel and are bur∣ned. 442. Their death. Ibid. Iohn 24. saluted of an Owle, is much troubled. 440. Hee fly∣eth from the Councell of Con∣stance. Iohn Paleoleauge Emp. of Con∣stantinople 400 Iohn Guttenberge inuentor of Printing 455 Iohn Pusters Called Gurman, and Peter Sheffert sell their prin∣ting Ibid. Iohn Huniades escapes from the battaile. 372. Dyeth. Ibid. Iohn Iustinian of Geneua behea∣ded 391 Iohn an English man burnt. 479 Iohn Fissers author of the repen∣tants order 364 Iohn Picus Prince of Miradula. 297 Iohan of Orleance a maide, burnt 448 Ierome died 149 Ierome Sauanaroll burned. 229 Iulius Max. Emperor slaine. 54 Iust. of faith 147 Iulius Philipp. Emperour. 57 Ierusalem diuided into 2. Sects. 4 Is in sedition. 6. Left of the Christians, is besieged. 22. Hor∣rible famine 23 Ierusalem taken 23 Ierusalem changeth the name. 34 Ierusalem taken by Cosroes king of the Persians 121 Ierusalem taken by the Maho∣metists 282 Ierusalem taken by the Christi∣ans 299 Ierusalem raced euē to the foun∣dations 92 Images broken. 57. Taken out of Churches. 29. Restored Ibid. Taken away and burnt, forbid∣den to honor them vpon paine of death. 54. Throwne downe by Sabin K. of Bulgaria. Ibid. Images and paintings abolished in Churches 223 Images set vp by Hyren. 223. Im∣pugned by Charlemaine. Ibid. Imbert Dauphin of Viēna, makes himselfe a Iacobin 426 Indians brought to the Romane Church, promise to keepe the Sacrament of confirmatiō. 439 Indulgences do penetrate euen to such as are in purgatory. 498 Inuention to pray for the dead. 122 Inuestatures agreed to Henry, reuoked 239 Inuestatures resigned to Pope Ca∣lixtus 25 Ionathes high Priest, slaine by Ioseph 49 Ioseph the Historiographer. 26 Iouinian a Christian Emper. 122 Iesuites originall 417 Ireneus is slaine 50
Isaach Exarch ratifieth the elec∣tion of Stephen 123 Italy and Burgoine subiected to Arnulphe 100 Italy the sea of seditions. 224 Italy in great factions 427 Italy gouerned by three Cardi∣nalls, hauing the power of Se∣nators 361 Italy afflicted by the Turkes. 373 Iubile first 299 Iubile remitted to fiftie yeares. 412 Celebrated at Rome Ibid. Iubile of 25. yeares, to 25 yeares. Iubile celebrated by Alexander the 6. 371 Iohn de Austria 623 Iohannes Basilides 649 Iames king of Scots besieged and taken 660 Innocent. 9. 678 His death Ibid. Irish rebellion 630 Iewes and Leonards punished for poysoning waters 406 Iewes crucifie a Christian chude. 466 Iulian Medices slaine in hearing Masse 396 Iustin Emperour 166 Iustin the Pelagian dieth out of his wits 225 Iustinian seduced by Antsenius to depart from his error. Ibid. Iustinian compileth the Romane lawes. 171 Dieth of phrenzie Iustinian Emperor breaketh his faith giuen to the Sarasins. 222 Sent inta exile. Ibid. Kisseth the Popes feet. 230. His head is cut off. Iul.an Emp. 100. His death. 122 K KIngdome of Cyprus. 473. Of Aragon made a pray by the Pope. King of Bulgaria dooth receiue the faith 251 King of the Romans Emp. diuers names, but of one substance. 460 King. Phillip. 2. 635 King of Nauarre excommuni∣cated 657 King Phillip displeased with the Pope▪ 670 He dieth. 708 King of Er excōmunicated. 668 King of France conuerted. 683 L LAntgraues 366 Lambert Bishop of Liege rebuketh Pepin for adul∣tery 274 Lewis 184 Laudo Pope 264 Lansrancus the first author of Transubstantiation 285 Laurence Deacon of Rome suffe∣reth Martyrdome. 68 Laurentius Ʋalla 245 Laurence de Medices excom∣municated 333 Legends of Saints forged 182 Leger Bishop martyred. 320
Leo Emperour burneth Images. 257 Leo Emp. of Constantinople slain in his Pallace 343 Leontius and Tiberius Emperors beheaded 376 Letanies the great instituted. 154 Leuites 5 Libertie to preach the Gospell in France 215 Liberius the Arrian canonized. 256 Lombards raigned in Italy. 262 Lombards haue the Empire con∣uerted to the faith. 279 They occupie the Exarchate. Li∣nus. 20. His death. 25 Libraries 95 Licinius Emperour 81 Longin Gracian the first Exarch in Italy 176 Lotharius dieth a Monke. 277 Lewis Debonaire giueth power to the Romane Cleargie to elect the Pope 345 Lewis sonne of king Phillip first, came to Artois 301 Lewis S. marketh blasphemers with an hotte Iron 299 Lewis Emperour declared here∣tike by the Pope 297 Crowned by 2. Senators of Rome Ibid. Giueth a reason of his faith. 390 Lewis Archbishop brake his neck in a daunce 154 Lewis Duke of Orleance murde∣red at Paris 453 Leo the 10. Pope 153 Lucian the Apostate 30 Lucius king of England receiued the faith 44 Lucius B. of Rome martired. 564 Lucrece daughter, wife & daugh¦ter in law to the Pope 484 Luitprandus king of Lombards, besiegeth Rome 297 Leopold D. of Austriche takes the King of England prisoner. 322 Lupus Bishop of Troy approueth Letanies 167 Luquois entreateth the libertie of their common-wealth. 312 Liuonia or Lisland conuerted to the faith 362 Lēt attributed to Telesephorus. 35 First Lent in England 194 Lotharius Emperour 233 Liberius Emperour 113 Luther. 106. Excommunicated 504 Lewis Beltram Friar 671 M MAhomet an Arabian a false Prophet. 189. Ado∣red after his death. 221 Mahomets Alcaron 190 His Paradise lawes and ceremo∣nies Ibid. Mahomet and the Pope confer∣red together 192 Mahometists take Ierusalem. 282
Maister of the Synagogue. 52 Mancinellus 486 Manes heretike, broiled aliue. 99 Manichees books burnt at Ro. 27 Manicheus againe condemned, are cast out of Rome 151 Mantell episcopall 253 Marke preacheth in Egypt. 15 Marke the Euangelist dyeth. 19 Marcelline offereth a graine of incense to Idolls 203 Marcian heretike 40 Marcion heretike 38 Margarite Queene of Nauarre condemned to perpetual prison for fornication 375 Marriage publike 30 Mariage forbidden to Priests. 91 Mary the mother of our Lord dyeth 15 Martian Emperor slaine. 149 Martine Empresse, hath her tongue cut out 216 Marcell Bishop of Rome 78 Massacre in France 606 Marcus Bishop of Rome 108 Martirs suffer diuers tormēts. 58 Martir the word when vsed. 89 Martirs of the Pope differ from them of the Church 315 Martyrain builded in Ierusa∣lem 89 Maxentius drowned in Tyber 82 Maximian chooseth his owne death 83 Maximilla and Prisca Prophe∣tess 219 Maximin hath his hand and tongue cut off 200 Matild the harlot of Gregory the 7. is called S. Peters daugh∣ter. 305. Shee giueth all her goods to the Pope 319 Marquesse 366 Maurus the Romane, and Fau∣stus the Italian, teach the Mo∣nasticall life. 175 Malcontents 629 Maximilian dyeth 622 Moluchs death. 632 Mulei Mahamet drowned. 632 Monsieurs voyage into Flaun∣ders 632 Mariade lauisitatione 666 Max. taken prisoner 666 M. Cauendish voyage 661 Marcus Bragadinus 675 Mauricius beheaded with his wife and children 182 Macrin Emperour 56 Menāder Disciple of Symō Ma∣gus 14 Max. Emperour 483 Mendicant Friars 384 Messe the word, how it was vsed. 87. His Introite. 150. Aug∣mented. 163. Called the Gre∣gorian office. 167. Inuention of the word. 181. Song after the Romane manner. 112. Cele∣brated in Latin. Ibid. Augmen∣ted with Gloria in excelsis. 220 Metropolitanes and Archbishops 90
Michael Emperour of Constan∣tinople 213 Millaine taken, made subiect to the Empire, reuoulteth. 35. Af∣ter a siege of 7. years, is sacked. 564. Reedified and called A∣lexandria 365 Ministers 14 Myracles lying 200 Myracles & apparitians forged. 322 Mytre of the Pope 468 Monkery planted 192 Monkes heretikes, banished from Rome 181 Monkes blacke priuiledged 185 Monkes of three sorts 124 Monkes may not carry to bap∣tize 182 Monkes may not bee kept in Mo∣nasteries against their wills. 218 Monkes rents 226 Monkes voluptuous. 242. Com∣maunded to marry. Monkes of England haue by gift the 10. part of the kingdōe. 265 Monkes priuiledges 143 Monkes, Venetians, and of the Mount Oliue 437 Monasteries founded 146 Montanus and his heresie. 17 Moses brother of Calapine. 451 Marcus Aurelius 40 Meldriades king of R. 84 N NAples conquered by Charls the 8. 443 The disease of Naples 436 Nero persecuteth the Christians and killeth himselfe 21 Nicasius Bishop of Rhemes slaine 178 Nicholaites 314 Nichomedia the seat for the Ea∣sterne Emperours 287 Names of dignities 252 Nunnes and inuention of theyr habits 337 Nunnes dispensed with to marry. 344 Normanes receiue the faith. 290 Norway receiueth the faith. Ibid Hath a priuiledge to sing Masse without wine Ibid. Notaries and Protonotaries. 54 Nerua Emperour 27 Nicholas 1. Pope 241 O OBseruation of daies. 154. Of betters Ibid. Ocham and Dantes held for heretikes 428 Office of a king 83 Office of a subiect Ibid. Office of a Bishop 91 Office of Priests 93 Office of Deacons 95 Olympus Bishoppe of Carthage, suddenly burnt 89 Order of the holy Ghost 632 Ouids Tombe Orange receiueth the Gospell. 125 Orange sacked 227
Orchanes 2. Emperour of the Turkes 409 Ordinance of Bigamies 166 Of orders 167 Of extreame vnction 174 Of protections 185 To say Masse toward the East. 187 To celebrate prayers of Baptisme and the Supper with an high voyce. 188. Of the feast of Candlemas. Ibid. Of punishing heretikes. 20. Of the 7. Cano∣nical houres. Ibid. Commemo∣ratiō of the dead at Masse. Ibi. Of Lent not vniuersall. 213. To sing the Creed on high. 205. Of offering bread and wine. Ibid. Of lamps burning in Churches. 184. Aultar coucred with cleane cloathes. Ibid. That the Corporall should be kept clean. Ibid. That a Bigant should not be made Priest. 290. Of the ex∣altatiō of the holy Crosse. 287. Of the signe of the Crosse. Ibid. Of burial out of Churches. 223. Of Organs. 231. Of supplications against thunder. Ibid. Of bea∣ring children to baptisme. 274. To kisse the Pix or Masse. 275. That Popes should bee made with consent of the Emper. 28 That Clarkes should bring vp no dogges nor haukes. That a lay man should not lay hands vpon a Clarke 292 Ordinances humane made equall with the word of God. 3018. Ordinance of Pope Vrban 2. 331 Ordinances execrable 318 The order of Clugny 256 Of the Carmes. 399. Of Willi∣am Hermit. Ibid Of the Trini∣tie. 362 Off the bretheren of the hospitall. Ibid. Of the Iaco∣bins confirmed. 372. Of the Caelestines. 391. Of the Paw∣lines in England 400 Order of the Iesuites 406 Foure new orders of such as were crossed. 318 Orobite heretikes in Bohe. 463 Organs first in vse in France. 221 Origines. 54. His fall, his end. 64 Ostragoths made warre with Be∣lizarius. 185 Otho the first 267 Otho the second 274 Otho the third. 300. He causeth his wife and the Adulterer to be burned. 318. He is poyso∣ned 321 Otho the 4. excommunicated of the Pope 365 Othoman the first, Emperour of the Turkes, by litle and litle v∣surpeth vpon Europe. 388. P PAganisme 216 Pallace of Auignon burnt. 209 Paleologue Emperour. 399. He is excommunicated. Ibid.
Palladium carried to Constanti∣nople 103 Pantheon builded 27 Pantheon burnt 26 Pantheon dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and to all Saints. 459 The Papaltie returneth to Rome 437 It decayeth. 444. It was voyd 2. yeares 447 Pope ratified by the Exarche. 224 He is elected without the Em∣rours authoritie. 235. Conse∣crated with a new ceremonie. Ibid. Pope defender of Idolatrie. 232 The King of France holdeth his bridle 224 Pope authorized of the diuel, be∣stoweth the kingdomes of the world 224 Pope condemned by a Pope. 220 Goeth on Procession on foot. 212 Abuseth the Emperour. 226. Cause of schisme, in the Em∣pire. 233. Transgresseth his owne lawes. Is called God. 236 Deposed and againe restored. 266. Entereth by diuellish Art. 221. Slaine in adulterie. 300 Disgraded and after banished. 310. He studieth Necroman∣cie. 399. Appeared after his death. 301. A Symoniake. 312 Chosen by corruption. 317. Is an Apostate Ibid. Pope elected at Rome, an other at Senes. 319. Recouereth S. Peters Patrimonie by Armes. Ibid Called Prince of Sodome, seruant of the seruants of God 179. He is shewed to be Anti∣christ. 138. He will be iudged of no man. 290. Hee may bee deposed by the Councell. 293 Popes imitators of Doiclesian. 296 Excommunicated. 298. Rise a∣gainst Emperours. 301. Doo crowne Emperours, sell pub∣like benefices. 317. Chaunge their names: prooued by the shame fast parts 277 Popes schismatikes ane Simoni∣niakes 326 Three Popes at once. Ibid. Make warre with one another. Ex∣communicate one an other. 327 Papists runne to false myracles. 243 Papinianus slaine 57 Paternus Monke, burnt in his Cloyster for the vow of obedi∣ence. 323 Poulian Pope 54 Probus Emperour 70 Paschal 1. Pope 250. Patricke Bishop of Soissons. 302 Giueth the Countrey thereof to the Church of Rome Ibid. Patrician 226 Paul his parents, and place of his birth 8 Paul conuerted. 9. Led to Fe∣lix.
18. Sent to Rome Ibid. Paul Samosatenian. 68. Con∣demned by the Councell of An∣tioche Ibid. Paul heretike 98 Paul Patriarhe condemned. 114 Parma created Duke 628 Prince of Orange shot. 640 Hee is slaine 645 Poland troubled 666 Patriarch of Constantinople. 65 Prince of Sax. prisoner. 653 Prince of Conde poysoned. 665 Priests reconciled 672 Peter Barrier 683 Peace betweene Fr. and Spaine. Phillip the 3 king of Spaine. 708 Pentecost 83 Palatines 386 Persecution vnder Herod. 2 Persecution in Flaunders 371 Persecutions at Paris. 457 Petrarke 420 Peterpence 238 Peter Lombard 327 Petrus Comestor 327 Petrus Bercoris Ibid. Phillip preacheth in Samaria 89 Phillip Bishop of Alexandria martyred with his daughter. 66 Peter whether he were at Rome. 14 Peter in bonds past thereof. 9 Peter de Bailard heretike Pela∣gian 79 Peter de Ruere spent in 2. yeares 200000. Skutes Pilate cyted to Rome 10 Peregrin a Philosopher, cast himselfe into the fire. 42 Pilgrimages began 111 Printing 455 Pelagius. 147 Phillip de Anioy, the Queene of Nauarres adulterer, broyled aliue 34 Phillip Emperour a Monothe∣lite 357 Pientia builded by Pius second. 200 Platina writeth the Popes liues. 141 He is imprisoned Ibid. Pluralitie of benefices began. 291 Polycarpus 40 Polycarpus burnt 41 Pomeriana receiueth the faith. 322 Porphyrius 53 Pragmatike sanction. 453. Abro∣gated 495 Priest and his signification. 14 Priests communicate vnder both kindes 231 Priests cannot communicate a∣lone 243 Priests of Greece might marry. 195 Priests rents 217 Priests married in France about 900. yeares after the Apostles. 219 Priests married in England, are condemned. 271
Prayers of the Church 92 Prayers for the dead 213 Primacie of the Church establi∣shed by an homicide & a tray∣tor 185 Pius the first 39 Priuiledge of the Temple. 17 Priuiledge of the Roman Church 124 Probus bringeth Germanie into a Prouince 121 Prophets and their interpretati∣on 14 Purgatory inuented 239 Pyrrhus Patriarke, dieth shame∣fully Penitentiaries. 408 Q QVadratus gouernour of Sy∣ria. 201 Quadratus Bishop of A∣thence Ibid. Quatorrian heretikes 47 S. Quintin in Vermendois foun∣ded 245 Quintilianus 21 Quintilius brother of Claudius the Emperour 69 R RAbbi Maisters 14 Rastrix D. of Cleue, hath his eyes put out 290 Reliquaries sold and giuen to the poore 227 Red hattes 468 Relickes inuented by Sathan. 131 Repertory morall 433 Reseruation of benefices 414 Rodolph. 2. Emperour 622 Reformed Church of Antwerpe. 629 Riga 683 Rodoaldus K. of Lombardie slain in adulterie 198 Rome set on fire by Nero. 19. Gi∣uen to Syluester by Constan∣tine. 82. Taken againe by Gen∣seric. 144. Taken of the Hu∣nes. 161. Of the Gothes the second time 172 Rome and Italy returne from the obedience of the Emperour Leo 191 Rodolphus a child, martyred by the Iewes 209 Reconciliation. 45 S SAcrament of the Aultar. 287 Saints liues are forged. 182 Saladin killeth the Caliph. 203 Occupieth Ierusalem Ibid. Salike law 283 Saladins 343 Salue Regina 282 Singing receiued into the Church 140 Sapor king of the Persians 56 Siluester Bishop of Rome 88 Scanderbeg, Seuerus Pertinax. 46 The house of Sauoy made a Coū∣tie 100 Schisme for the Feast of Easter 223
Schisme in the Papaltie. 208 232 Schisme in the Empire. 400 Serena Empresse Martyr. 77 Sergius Pope 205 Seruians killeth Amurathes. Sigismond Emperour 439 Simon Magus. 14. Simoniakes. 13 Scotland receiueth the Gospell. 163 Scotland allied with France. 252 Schoole of Caesaria 121. Ethnike of Laodicea 130 Schooles of two sorts 95 Seuertists 154 Stephen stoned. 8 Spaine followeth the manner of the Romane Masse 301 Stephen K. of Bosne rosted aliue. Smyrna destroyed by an Earth∣quake 385 Swisses called defenders of the Romane libertie 416 Sinagogue hath his maister. 73 Sebastian King of Portugall. 625. His death 631 S. Martin Frobisher 626 S. W. Raleigh 647 S. R. Greenfield Ibid. S. H. Gilbert 646 Seueniaries banished 651 Spanisp Nauie 664 S. F. Drake 665 Sixtus the fift 652 S. Ph. Sidneys death. 619 Sigismond King of Poland. 685 Sinode twise in the yeare 29 Of Bishops at Rome. 440 Touching Images, Soter Pope. 41 Stephen king of Rome 61 T TAcitus Emperour 70 Taborites heretikes. Tancredus 123 Tartars 94 Talianus heretike 99 Titus 25 Temple of Ierusalem ended. 2 Burned. 4. Templers beganne. 307 Templers abolished 396 Tertullian reuoulteth 47 Theodorus Pope 260 Theodocius Emperour 130 Theologie scholasticall 201 Theophilus 41 Tymothe Martyr 22 Thomas Stukeley 630 Tumult at Cracouia 677 Treasure of the Popes 672 The Church troubled 695 Turkes ouerthrowne. 682. 688 Transubstantiation inuented. 275 Is forged 285. Decreed. Practised by Gregory the se∣uenth, and is made the 10 Ar∣ticle of the faith. 345. Honou∣red with a feast 361 Tyber ouerfloweth 309 Tyrannie of the Duke of Guise. Tyberius 3 Traian Emperour 28 Telesephorus Bishop of Rome. 35.
V VAlentine heretike 438 Ʋalerian taken, and his mi∣serie 63 Venice is builded 149 Ʋenetians haue a Duke 297 Ʋictorinus a Rhetorician. 109 Vrban 7.674. His death. 675 Valence Emperour 125 Valentinian Emperour 124 Ʋigills obserued 86. 133 Ʋincent the Historian 127 Vlpianus Ibid. Vniuersitie erected at Paris. 223 At Pauie. 292. At Prage 415 At Ʋienna. 420. At Lipsia. 423. At Thuring 500 Vnction forged by Popes. 48.816 406 Victorian martyred 159 Vandales take end in Affrike. 152. Come into Maurita∣nia. 169. Are excōmunicated. Vespasian 20 Vicegothes conuerted 170 Ʋrban Bishop of Rome 53 Ʋictor Bishop of Rome 45 Virgin what 248 Victor. 2. 290 Vigillius Pope 171 Ʋitalian Pope 198 W WArres proclaimed a∣gainst Spain 691 Waldois 339 Wencelaus Emperour 42 Willielmes hermites 341 White Mantles 450 X XIxtus Bishop of Rome. 67 Xeques Mulei his sonne, turned Christian. 679 Z ZAcharie Pope 215 Zenon Isaurike Emp. 158 Zephirim B. of Rome. 50 Zimglius 56 Zuric. 505. FINIS.
