8410 33150003 28517
❧ By the King. ❧ A Proclamation for the apprehending of the L. Maxwell. WHereas the Lord Maxwell, a Noble man of our Realme of Scotland, being our prisoner in our Castle of Edinburgh, for great disorders there committed, hath broken prison, which by the Lawes of that our Realme is Treason, And in his breach hath done violence to the Porter of the Castle, hauing sore wounded him, And likewise attempted to haue deliuered Sir Iames Mac Donnell, a person guiltie of many heynous offences, prisoner in the same place: After which escape he is now (as we are informed) fled into this our Realme of England, and ly∣eth lurking in and about our City of London: Hauing had heretofore good proofe of our peoples loue and deuotion towards vs, in their readinesse to discouer and apprehend any per∣sons guiltie of Treasons against Us and our Estate, Wee haue thought it fit to publish vnto them the escape of the said Lord Maxwell, and the cause thereof; And to require and charge all Lieutenants, Deputie Lieutenants, Iustices of Peace, Maiors, Sheriffes, Bayliffes, Con∣stables, Headboroughes, and all other our Officers, Ministers and louing Subiects, to doe their best endeuour to discouer and apprehend the said Lord Maxwell, and to deliuer him, if he shall light into their hands, to some of our Officers, and to giue knowledge thereof to Us or our Priuie Councell. And to the end they may the better finde and discouer him, they shall know him by these signes, Hee is about the age of three and twentie yeeres, tall and slender, of a whitish com∣plexion, his face full of pockhooles, his nose short and low in the middest, a little haire on his chinne of a white colour, the haire of his head somewhat darker, and his legs are very long and small. Giuen at our Palace of Westminster the nineteenth day of December, in the fifth yeereof our Reigne of great Britaine, France and Ireland. God saue the King. ❧ Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. Anno Dom. 1607.
