b1859 12744630 93208
THE BELLOWINGS OF A VVild-Bull: OR, SCROGGS's ROARING LAMENTATION FOR BEING IMPEACHED OF High-Treason. WHAT a damn'd Fool was I, that I did not run away in time? Could not I have had the Wit of Wakeman, put my ten thousand Bagg of Guineys under my Arm, and Trooped off to drink the Waters of Burboon? A dull Beast! to stay thus to be Nooz'd: I was often told of a Parliament, but by the Popes Toe, I never believed that the King would call one: Now Mr. Courtiers where are you to assist me? You that have made use of my Munkies Foot, to scrape the Chest-nut out of the Fire, you'l behang'd your selves, ere you'l part with your Guineys to help me at a dead lift. I see now I was a mear Ox out up∣on it, to be outwitted thus! How did they promise to stand by me, Yes, yes, so they will, and laugh in their Sleeves, to see me Hang'd. Was it for this, I perverted Justice did things contrary to both the Law of God and Men? Oh, Oh, Oh, a PARLIAMENT, a PARLIAMENT! what a dreadful Sound does that Word leave in
a Guilty Ear. I did not believe they would have proved such a sort of Men, as I find they are: A Probing, a searching PARLIA∣MENT! Would I might Curse 'um sufficiently, and vent my self as I used to do on the Bench, against those little people that used to teaze me. Who would ever have thought, this PARLIA∣MENT would prove what it has done? When my Brother of the North, and I, were sent down from the House of Lords, in a Mes∣sage to the House of Commons, I viewed their Countenances, and my thought they did not frown upon me, I imagined that the bitterness of Death was past, when I was entertained so Civilly; but, by my Bagg of Guineys I was wickedly mistaken! I find a PARLIAMENT is not so easily to be Bribed, tho Mr. Courtier had told me they had once upon a time found out a way to Bribe PARLIAMENTS, but it seems, that Trick would not pass upon this PARLIAMENT, the more's my ill Luck. Oh! Oh! Oh! What will become of me? I can expect no Mer∣cy, because I had none my Self, now all my Crimes will be ennu∣merated against me: Nay, who would think it, I find my own Conscience too like an uncivil Bandogg flying in my Face, and ready to tear out my Throat! I was never more drunk with Wine (and Sir George and my Part∣ner the Goaler, have many times dusted it away) than I am now with Possion. Oh! How I could tear 'um to pieces for thus distur∣bing me. I had hoped by this time to have seen the days of Queen Mary, that I might have pil'd those cursed barking Doggs, that used to torment me, up in heaps like Faggots, and then have set them on Fire: Oh! I thought to have made the World to have Trembled, and to have fill'd the Prison and Goals with them all. I would have bin worse to them than Bloody Bonner. I would have grounded them, could I have had my Will, for taking No∣tice of my Actions on the Bench. But now all these CURRS are got loose and are ready to whor∣ry me. By Heavens! what shall I do? They bring all my Crimes publickly on the Stage, they forget nothing, Pox of their Memories. There is Care, a Divelish Rogue, the Pope, the — and I, will never forget him, he remembers my Box for Suppressing his Pac∣quet, and (if I could I would have hang'd him too, yet,) next to Wakemans Jobb, and the Jury, that was one of the best peices of Service, that ever I did in my Life. There is Smith and Harris, Cry out, no Bail, no Bad. Oh! That I could have stop'd their Mouths with Fire Balls, or have Hang'd them out of the way, as well as Fin'd them, then they had not liv'd to have done me this
mischief. There is one Curtis his Wife too, a Plaguy Jade, whom I thought I had Hamperd pretty well: I Jailed her, and offer'd to bring Knights of the Post to Swear her Husband was Dead, but now I find both He and She are yet Alive. Nay the House will not so much as forget my discharging the Middlesex Jury, against Law or President, nor any other of my Crimes. But have Printed and published them to the World, that I may be seen in my proper Colours! A Plague of my Starrs, that ever I shu'd be Born  a Time of Printing! by Wakemans Soul, I hope he's Frying in Hell, that first invented that Heretical Art; I thought to have sent all those mangy Booksellers, Printers, &c. to the Devil by whole Sale, and to have set up an Inquisition against Printing. If the Rogues were then so bold with me, notwithstanding all my severity, what will they now do? they murther'd my Name before, and wrote Scrggs, when they had some fear of me, but now they write plain SCROGGS, and set it in Capital Letters; they leave my Titles too, and seem to care no more for me, than for a Butchers-Brat in a Hand basket. Now shall I have more Scroggs upon Scroggs, Satyrical Poems, wicked Lampoons, odious New-years Gifts, damnable Looking-glasses, plaguy Memorandums, and such like, bawled about the Town. Thus these Rogues, Villains. Doggs, Rascals and Heretical Currs, will perpetuate my Memory when I would be forgotten. I cannot leave my wonted Language, they have put me into a Fustian Fume▪ worse than when I abhorred Petitioning, and railed so bravely against Petitions. But stay, let me think of some thing to comfort my self; I have some fellow suf∣ferrers 'tis true, but alas! they are scarce taken notice of, 'tis I bear the burthen; O! the People have a dear love for me, I see they stand ready to devour me; some Cordial quickly, Sirrah I am ready to faint, O! my Heart grows cooler, I can Roar and Bellow no longer, a divelish Qualm has seized me. Hah! Impeached of High Treason, what! what! 'tis no jesting matter, a Lord Chief Justice! But what of that? my Gown will not defend me. I thought the Lords in the Tower had been safe enough, and I thought I had pret∣ty well Confounded the PLOT, and affronted the Kings Evidence, but I see a Parliament can do strange things; they have taken off one of the Heads of the Lords already, that I have seen: they will have Justice done, without any respecting of persons. What will they Hang a Lord Chief Justice? aye, aye, they fear nothing, Nay, I am told of Thorp and Trisilian, Emson and Dudly, and such like men: O terrible! O terrible! Trisilan was a Lord Chief Justice, and was Hang'd at Tyburn, a very ill Example. I never thought things would have been brought to this pass; 'tis a Plague I did not fore∣see!
I had many hopes and assurances that this would never be: truly I had imagined farr other things in my Head, but I see I was mistaken, all things in this World look scurvily and ill, and with a dreadful Hue: but my Conscience is also presenting Visions before the Eye of my Mind, and my secret Sins and Debaucheries are se∣in order before my Eyes: Nay, my Memory is also strangely toucht¦ed, and I remember I have read in the Scriptures, such like places, which might have deterred me from my Wickedness. They that plow Iniquity and sow Wickedness reap the same. Job. 4.8. We are wea∣ried in the way of Iniquity and Perdition, and the way of God have we not known. What profit have we received of all our Pomp and Pride? They are now past as a shaddow, and as a Messenger that rideth in Post, and we are consumed in our own Iniquities. Thou shalt do no unrighteousness in Judgment, thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor honour the per∣son of the mighty, but in righteousness shalt thou judge thy Neighbour. Cur∣sed is he that perverteth Judgment. To do justice and judgment, is more acceptable to the Lord than Sacrifice. Rob not the poor, because he is poor, neither oppress the afflicted in the Gate. The integrity of the upright shall guid them, but the perversness of Trangressors shall destroy them. I know your mighty Sins, you take a Bribe and turn a side the poor in the Gate from their Right. Alas! alas! I had quite forgot all these Scriptures; and, see! that I should think of them now. Is there no hopes then? No! I fear I shall not find a Judge so kind to me as I was to Wakeman: Well, I will go and prepare my self for another World, for I have very little hopes of continuing long in this; I have lit∣tle to say for my self, when I come to the Gibbet, my Crimes are so evident, plain and notorious. But I will write my own Narrative, before I dye, that all Corrupt, Evill and Arbritary Judges, may take warning by me, how they dispence Justice and execute Judgment. FINIS.
