B4629A R216296 99828031 32458
A Brief RELATION OF THE Present State OF TANGIER, And of the Advantages which his Excellence the EARLE of TIVEOT Has Obteyned against GAYLAND. Published with Privilege. London, Printed by T. Mabb on St. Pauls Wharff. 1664.
A Brief Relation of the Present State of Tangier, &c. HIS Excellence, the Earle of Tiveot Arrived here safe upon Jun. the 14th. (being eight dayes before the expiration of the Truce with Gayland) where he found that the Deputy Governour had obtained a continuance of the Truce for Two Moneths longer, according to the Te∣nour of the former Articles; which Gayland assured him was done in Civility and Respect to his Excel∣lence: for which his Excellence sent Gayland Thanks, Notifying withall, that it was not in his Power to continue the Truce, unlesse permitted to Fortifie the Town: having expressed Orders from the King his Master for so doing: But however, that in Honour to Colonel Fitz Gerrards Treatie, and to shew his Thankfulnesse to Gayland, he was Con∣tent to stick to every point of the Truce which was for Gaylands Advantage; And yet upon the mayn he was enforced to break immediately. Whereupon Gayland asked Fifteen Dayes to Consult with his Grandees, allowing that in the mean time his Excel∣lence might Fortifie the Places next the Town, which was done accordingly. The prefixed time being Expired, Gayland sent the Sheck of Anger as Son, to have a Conference with his Excellence, wherein he made appear that the Mahometan Law, prohibited them to suffer the Christians to build any Fortifica∣tions in Affrica: But that they were contented to
make a War, and to give good Quarter; whereupon his Excellence Replyed, that The Sword should decyde, whether the Mahometan Law, or his Masters Orders were of Greater Force. That he would neither take, nor give Quarter; withall, that he was Gaylands Humble Servant, desiring them to send immediately, for the Powder that was Stipulated for by the Deputy Governour. Next day, was the Foundation laid of a Horn-work Strong in the Walls; being Canon-proof; strong in the Situation, being on the Castle-Hill, every way Advantageous, and Important, because it covereth the Castle, Fenceth above 600. Akers of Ground; discovereth the Enemie at a great distance; and maketh the place Comfortable: Securing the whole Hill for our Walke, and Ʋse. (being, 600. yards from the Castle) Our other Lines and Trenches were in a few dayes brought to that Perfection, that the Ene∣mie durst not Attaque us. The great Advantage hereof we have Experienced in severall Disputes with the Moores, who on the last of Feb. betwixt 11. and 12. appeared with their whole Army, and took up their Posts; The greatest Forces coming up∣on the West part, towards the Sea; where they con∣tinued Pelting for some hours till they were forced off, with considerable losse, and not one of our Men Killed, or Wounded. The very next day following, and about the same hour, they came on again, but with greater Num∣ber, and Courage; and took up their Posts as be∣fore; pressing towards the New Fort, which was then a Half-Bastion: (built while Gayland and his Armie,
Consisting of about, 8000. Men, look't on) and for a long time continued Shooting, yet killed us but One Man. Their Maine Body stood upon a Hill, hard by us; whence they continually sent Reliefe: But at last, His Excellence, taking a fitt opportunity, Or∣dred a Party of Horse, (Commanded by Captain Witham,) to Sally out, and bring in their Red Stan∣dard, which was Pitched neer our Works: This succeeded according to Wish, for the Horse brought off the Standard, Killed the Bearer, with many more, and put the Rest to Flight, without Suffering any Damage at all. Instantly, His Excellence Comman∣ded the Standard to be Displayed, upon that part of the Fort that was Built: which being seen by the E∣nemie, they drew off in trouble, concluding the losse of their Standard to be Ominous, the like not having been done before. Since this happened, they have not appeared in such great Bodyes as formerly, coming now only in Loose Parties, and Working by Ambuscades; wherof the most considrable, were those of the 13th. and 17th. of March, the former was ve∣ry strong, consisting of choyce Men, and the Chief Leaders; which on the suddain Encountered our Hourse, and great Courage was Expressed on both sides. We lost One man, and Two wounded; but very many of the Moores were Killed and Wounded, and the rest compelled to Retreat. The Second, (March, 27th.) (being Sunday morning) was a strong Ambush, both of Horse and Foot, Planted near Us; But after a Short, and Hott Dispute, the Moores ran; Our Horse fell in among Them, and Slew several, and had done a farr greater Execution, but for the
Rocks and disadvantages of the Ground. Here we had onely One Man shot through the Hand, while many of the Enemie were Killed: Two of their dead, His Excellence Commanded to be brought off by our men, whereof one by several things found about him, appeared to be a Person of Quality. That which makes this Action more Remarkable, was the Signal Humanity which his Excellence exprest towards the Dead Bodies; for after Divine Service Celebrated, (it being Sunday) and Sermon ended in the Camp; His Excellence Commanded them to be washed, while himself stood by; and Two Bieres to be made, and the Dead to be Shrowded in white Linnen, and laid there∣on, and strewed with Flowers with all prudentiall decency: appointing afterward a White Flagg to be carried before the Bodies, after which, Marcht his Excellence on Horse-back, all the Troops attending in Squadrons, with Excellent Order and Modesty; and thus they passed to the utmost of the Bounds assigned us in time of Peace; where the Moores met the Bodies with a White Flagg, and received them with great Expressions of Satisfaction; taking off their Caps and Shashes from their Heads, (a Cere∣mony not used in their Adorations,) in token of their Respect and Gratitude to his Excellence; much amazed at this unexpected Civility; (which up∣braided their former Barbarous behaviour towards those of ours, which have at any time fallen into their hands.) This was done with satisfaction to both sides, and without the least appearance of En∣mity, or ill will: and further to confirm their opini∣on
of his Excellencies Honour and Goodnesse. This Truce was continued till they sought and carried off their Dead Men. Frequent Alarmes we have had; notwithstanding which, his Excellence has not at all omitted to pro∣secute the Fortifications; and it is a great Comfort to see how Chearfully, from the Highest to the Low∣est, every man here puts his hands to the Work, in gathering, and bearing Stones, and assisting in all sorts of Labour, and Hazzard, toward the perfecting thereof; out of a Generous and Loyal Emulation, to Imitate his Excellence; who Works, Eates, and Lodges in the Field, and has scarce been in Bed since the Expiration of the Truce. It is not to be Ex∣pressed with what Zeal, and Alacrity every man here does his Duty, under so Exemplary a Gover∣nour. Neither are the Moores themselves lesse Moved, with the Frank and open Candour of his Behaviour, then they are Amazed at the Irresistible Course of his Successe: To see him carry on his Fortifications and beat them too, at the same time; making it, but the one half of his Businesse to over-throw them; Even when Gayland was with his whole Army in the Field, to take away their Standard from before their Eyes! To Kill many of their Valiantest Lea∣ders, and Rout them upon all Encounters; and last of all, to Conquer them by Humanity, as well as by Force. Briefly, the Miracles, which his Lordship has done, have given these Barbarians a strange Su∣perstition concerning him; Some supposing him to Act by the Devil; or however perswading them∣selves,
that assuredly he is more then Man: Others have taken up a report, that he has made Flying Ships, and Great Guns to run alone, that he never sleeps but leaning against some part of the Works; and that having scaped so many Dangers, and for his whole Life been so Fortunate in Armes, it is in vaine to Resist, and Impossible to Worst him: And one thing more there is, that keeps them at a Distance, which is, their opinion, that the Approaches to this Place are all Mined, and that they cannot any where make an Attaque, without danger of being Blown up. Post-Script. I have just now Received News of a Piece of Moorish Valour, which sayes, that an Am∣buscade of some Hundreds of brave Horse, be∣ing Lodged to watch for some of our Scouts; missing of their Ayme, fell upon a Couple of our Dogs, as they were ranging their wonted Rounds, cut them off, and so Retreated to their Body. FINIS.
