B5420 12293840 58963
Bull-Feather Hall: OR, The Antiquity and Dignity of HORNS, Amply shown. As also a Description of the Manners, Rites, Customs, and Revenues belonging to that inge∣nious and numerous Society of Bull-Feathers Hall. Together with an exact Relation of their manner of going to Highgate with Trumpets and Horn-Musick, and their Pioneers intended for the levying of the Hill. LONDON, Printed for the Society of Bull-Feathers Hall. 1664.
To the Noble Patron, and the inge∣nious Society of BULL-FEATHER HALL. Sir, give me leave to speak but what is true, I dare aver, Horns don't belong to you. Yet thogh they do n't it's not amiss to know What Cuckolds are, tho' none of you are so. Accept these lines then, & the Author says That he wil wear y'r Feather for his Bays
Bull-Feather-Hall, OR The Antiquity and Dignity of Horns amply shown, &c. THe bare naming of Bull-Feathers-Hall, will rather amuse such as understand not what it is, than give satisfaction what is meant thereby. Therefore to avoid pro∣lixity, I shall take in hand the subject matter, to wit, the Horn, and so in short wind up my dis∣course. What the Bull's Feather signifieth, there is none so igno∣rant but may easily conjecture, and none so wise but hath or may have it, to the obtaining of which, jealousy is the readiest way. To shew how far this ingenious So∣ciety is from the least suspicion, they publickly play with those Feathers which are the emblems of other mens aking foreheads. They are wise as the Serpent, that most of all guards and looks to his head, and are withall harmless (or as it is in the Original, hornless) as Doves. Now the truth of it is, there are none Cuckolds but such as think themselves so, which proceeds from consciousness of some defect, and so the word signifieth by three letters therein contained, if you will believe the ancient and Orthodox Expositors of the Word, O cold, O old, K knave, which put together is cold-old-knave, or as others would have it derived from Cock old, according to the French coquage, as much as to say, an aged Cock. This Etymology is drawn bare∣ly from supposition, since the youngest and most lusty
are not exempted out of that number; when the sign is in Capricorn or Aries there is no withstanding the fate of Cuckolding. Coy and squeamish stomachs disrelish sound, solid and wholsom flesh, when a nicety, a codlin, or so forth, they shall greedily swallow. Nor is it the bucksome girle alone, but the seeming chast Diana that transformed Acteon's head, therefore there is no restri∣ction can deter a woman from having two bolts to her door, if she so please; and for that same reason, it is Epi∣demical patience only that must destroy the growth of that budding infamy. It is only the strength of imagi∣nation that doth oftentimes convert the Asse's long ears into horns; thus much concerning the rise of the name, now touching the grounds for which they are said to wear Horns: And truly 'tis no wonder so many have them, since the first lesson they learn is taken out of their Hornbook; the reason I say that they are said to wear Horns, may be drawn from the effect thereof, to wit, plenty; that man need not want that hath an handsome Woman to his Wife, that will be as willing to entertain, as he to conceal and wink at the actions of amorous visitants. Hence it was that the Ancients pi∣ctured Rivers with a man at the head thereof, with an Horn in his hand, intimating plenty flowing through it; Others will have it derived from the Indians, they ha∣ving this custom, that whosoever presented and Elephant to any woman, though married, might freely lie with her, which the Husband took as a great honour, that his Wife's beauty deserved so great a present, and there∣fore kept the horns to be shown, as we do our Coats of Arms. Neither do I know why any should be ashamed of his Horns, since the Gods in former times were pi∣ctured with them, their Statues being made of Ivory. It's storied, that Horns grew on the head of Cippus, which were presently interpreted, that he should be Em∣peror. Moreover, Aries and Taurus, the Ram and Bull are signs in the Zodiack, whereas Ʋrsa Major & Minor, with
other creatures, whose heads were never adorned with Antlers, are content to enjoy the honour of a constella∣tion. Mahomet in his Alcoran declares, that the world is supported by an Ox; it is not improbable but that he meant the people who are called a Beast of many Heads, and consequently of as many Horns. An Ox in former time was held in such great estimation as to be accoun∣ted a mans fellow, and whosoever killed him was ad∣judged worthy of death: what this Ox was, and what moral may be drawn from hence, I shall leave it to others to imagin. Besides, of what great use horned Beasts are to mankind, none will deny, either for food, as the Bull, Ram, Goat, Stag, &c. and their flesh not alone, but the Horns of some are of most excellent use in physick: the Harts Horns, and Ʋnicorns Horns being the greatest cordials that are. Take off your eies from the earth, and take a view of the superficial Heaven, and there observe the Moon Horned, Aries and Taurus hor∣ned, besides Capricorn, &c. all which have their operati∣ons and influences on us mortalls. It is the Moon that makes us become Lunatick, or Horn mad, and therefore Tom-a-bedlams wear Horns about them, as acknowledg∣ing her power: but such of Bull-feathers Hall wear them to give the world to understand how free they are from suspecting their Wives intregrity, making a publick laughter at that which so much troubles others. This ingenious Society doth, as Plempius a famous Physitian did, write of the sight learnedly and elaborately though he himself was blind, or as D. Harvey composed an ex∣cellent Treatise of generation whereas he himself had no Children. But something more of the dignity of the Bulls Feather. Jupiter when he fell in love with Europa converts himself into a Bull, not scorning to wear what he gave to others, although he ventured his taking up for a sacrifice. Mars on such another amorous account turns himself into a Ram. It will not be amiss since we have treated of the dig∣nity of Horns to speak something of their antiquity.
Rabbi Joseph affirmeth, that Cains mark was a Horn in his forehead; Cupid they say for certain tips his bow with horn: and therefore the Ancients report, that in the Chappel of jealousie, the musick of the Quire was Rams Horns and Cornets; the horned Moon, or Diana, had her usual sacrifices of Bulls heads; there are none but have heard of the battering Rams of old, and how the walls of Jericho fell by the sound of Rams Horns: The Spaniard of old made an Office which they held in great honour called Gent. of the Horn, and happy was that Citizen that could be admitted into so high a place. Heralds make Horns a good bearing in Arms, and the Germans fancy above any thing to have them for their Crests; among us it is an ancient custom to have Horns in Halls or Parlors to hang Hats or Cloaks on, and some at this present take great delight to drink out of a Horn, and truly I am apt to believe that Corona which signifi∣eth a Crown, is derived from Cornu a Horn; hence the Italians call the Duke of Venice Crown Corno, and is not much unlike an Horn, Seleucus and Lysimachus gave strict charge that their Statues should have Horns, in memory of the Buls they held by the Horns flying from the Altars. To conclude, in the non-age of the world, there hath been some born with Horns really growing on their heads. Who then but Horn-madmen will be displea∣sed at the sight of a Horn? the way to make it no eie-sore, is to be familiar with it; accustome your selves to it as we do, and you may look upon a Bulls Feather, and yet your eies not water. The men of old pictured Madam Luna with her shooes turning up like an Horn, from whence we draw this moral, that all jealous sus∣pectful and distrusting thoughts that cause the growth of the Bulls Feather, are to be troden under our feet, choosing rather to wear seemingly what we have not, than to carry what we imaginarily have obscurely in our pockets. We take a course to stab jealousie to the heart, that it may not excruciate us with disquieting thoughts; we know that the curbing females of their desires doth but coach them to run headlong into preci∣pices,
and if we fear to be deceived, we teach them but to decieve; and to be sure, where jealousie is Jaylor the wife will not fail to break prison. Jupiter ingeni∣ously confesseth, that it was Juno's suspition that was the cause of his transformation into a Bull, bellowing out his lustful desires; It is very certain, according to the opi∣nion of most Physitians, that imagination produceth real diseases, and by conceiving a thing it seales an im∣pression or idea of the thing imagined, and therefore fancies of being cornuted never trouble our heads, we have a supersedeas against them, and have erected to our selves an Assurance Office for our wives chastities: Pro∣vided, they should get a fall, we must consider they are, not Angels, but flesh and blood, and live a∣mong Englishmen, in Latine called Angli, as if one should say, good Anglers in other mens ponds, there∣fore do not lace them too strait, lest you make them go awry; the tyranny of constraint will never get the monarchy of hearts. Lastly, if it be your fortune that your Horn must be exalted among the rest of your Brethren, be content, since 'twas the decree of Fate; it is not absurd to inhabit where another hath dwelt. An∣toninus that brave Emperor honoured that person for loving too too amorously his Empress Faustina. King Agis was so far from being troubled at Alcibiades that cornuced him, that though it was publickly known, thought himself inconcerned with his Wife's infamy. You see the Heathen wear patiently their Horns, and in that even outvie a Spanish Christian; should it happen to any of us to have Antlers carved to us, we should look upon them no more, than as the merry thoughts of Pullets; and I should think him unwise that would throw away the dainty bit meerly for the resemblance of the bone: if you will not allow of this doctrine, neither permitting Jove your Rival, nor admit of Pythagoras with his golden Ship as Partner in your sheet, I wish you shipt in the ship of fools, bound for Cuckolds Haven, but by the way dasht against the Rocks of suspicion and discontent.
The Description of the Manners, Rites, Customs, and Revenues belonging to that ingenious and numerous Society of Bull-Feathers Hall. THis Club of Bull-Feathers-Hall is compo∣sed of selected Citizens, both ingenious and such whom Fortune smileth on, be∣sides Gentlemen of no mean rank and quality. They meet every Tuesday and Thursday in the evening at seven a clock, in Chequer-Yard in White-Chappel: Their intent of meeting is only to solace themselves in harmless mirth and merriment, and to propagate good society; when met at the time appointed, the Patron in his Crimson Satten Gown, with his Cap furr'd and guarded with a small pair of Antlers, seats himself in his Chair under a Canopy adorned with a large pair of Feathers: then is the Cryer of the Court commanded to proclaim, that every Brother of the Society then present cover his head with Court Caps, and so pay in his Club to the Stewards, which sit on the right and left hand of the Patron; the Table before them is covered with a green Carpet, and before the Patron a large Velvet Cushion, on which lies the horned Scepter and Sword. The Brethren in very neat fur'd Caps, every one diversly a∣dorned with Feathers (as the custom of the Court is to call them) seat themselves promiscuously, or as he finds his inclination leads him to delight in one Brothers society more than another. They drink out of horn, which they call plate, and in the Room (which is very
large, suitable to the Society,) are placed round several sorts of Horns, which they call Utensils belonging to the Court, Their Orders or Laws enacted are very many, and are strictly observed, there are not any of them but what are absolutely necessary, or necessarily convenient; for, cursing, swearing, and blaspheming is forbidden, nay, abhorred and severely punished with a mulct. If one Brother abuse another, either by word or action, he is fined; neither do they tolerate carping at, or upbraid∣ing other mens miseries, or medling with State affairs, and more especially Holy Writ, with many more very requisite. Now if any Brother shall be complained on to the Patron for breach of any Order contained in a long Roll, the Brother offending, is by the Controller brought to the Bar; then is a Jury of three Brethren empannel'd by the Clerk, and sworn by him on a blank book covered with Horn: the witnesses being sworn likewise, they give in their evidence, upon which the Prisoner hath full liberty to tender his defence. By way of digression, it is extreamly pleasant, nay profita∣ble to the understanding, to hear how ingeniously sophi∣stical some will answer the charge drawn up against them, and to observe with what moderation and gra∣vity the Patron weighs each particle, opening and sta∣ting the case to the Jury, who after that withdraw, and according as they find the fact so is the Prisoner fined, which fine is immediately payed unto the Steward, and laid up in publick stock; all which is done with sobriety and without contradiction. There are several Officers belonging to the Court, which are elective or chosen once a quarter, and so should the Patron; but he that now is hath so prudently, gravely and discreetly ma∣naged that honourable place, the society in general hath conferred upon him, that they are not inclinable to a new election. The names of the Officers of Bull-Feathers Hall are these, The Patron. Two Stewards.
The Sword-bearer. The Mace-bearer Adopting Mace-bearer. Master of the Ceremonies. Mr. Controller. Cryer, or Porter. As yet the Revenues of Bull-Feathers Hall is but small, and what doth appertain unto it lieth dispersed. As Horn-fair, the toll of all the gravel carryed up High∣gate-Hill; They have some propriety in Horusey and Cow-laue, a considerable quantity of Plate the Horners owe them: Beyond the Seas Crook-horn, Leghorn, and Oxman town in Ireland pay them constant tribute, nay the Great Turk acknowledgeth himself indebted to them for his Demy-lunes. And truly would every Bro∣ther that is so, or merits adoption into the Fraternity, leave but a small legacy to this Society, their Horn of plenty would exceed all others. The maner of their going from Busby's folly to High-gate. On Monday being the second of May, some part of the Fraternity met at Busby's folly in Islington, where after they had set things in order by a due consideration and consultation among themselves, they thus marched out — ordine quisque suo. First a set of Trumpets, then the Controller or Captain of the Pioneers with thirty or fourty following him with Pick-axes and Spades to le∣vel the Hill, and Baskets withall to carry gravel: what quantity of gravel pits were ordered to be digg'd by that Tun of flesh (alias) the Viceroy of Cornucopia, is yet un∣certain. After them another set of Trumpeters, and also four that did wind the Horn, after them followed the Standard (alias) an exceeding large pair of Horns fixed on a pole which three men carried, with pennants on each tip, the Master of the Ceremonies attending it, with other Officers. Then followed the Flag with the Arms of the Society, with horned beasts heads drawn thereon, with this Motto, To have, and not to use the same, Is not their glory but their shame. After these came the Mace-bearer, then the Herauld at
Arms, with the Arms of the Society, The Coat I can∣not rightly blazon, but I remember the supporters were on the one side a Woman with a whip in her hand, be∣sides that of her tongue, with a menacing look, and underneath half the Motto, Sic volo, sic jubeo; on the other side a man in woful plight, and underneath him Patientia patimur. Then the Sword-bearer, and after him the Patron, on whose right and left hand went the two Stew∣ards in Plush Jackets with large red Scarfs, the Patron in a Crimson Satten Gown; after these followed the rest of the Brethren by two; each in a various fur'd and horned Cap, and were brought up by no mean Officer with a large pair of Horns. The Cryer or Porter being then Marshal went by their sides. In this Equipage they marched, and in very good order, attended by multitudes of peoples, some admiring, as well they might, as being a strange sight and unusual, others spending their judgments, and passing their verdicts according to what their fancies represen∣ted. 'Twere impossible to relate those witty taunts and replications that past interchangeably, therefore I shall pass over all, and only give you an account of trans∣actions at High-gate; approaching near the Gate, the Viceroy of the gravel pits came out to meet them with his Mace and Cap; and after several congratulations reciprocally past between them, made a speech to the Patron at large in a full Horn of plenty. After they had gone through the Gate, they came back, and so round the pond, and then came up to the Gate again, where one made a speech, to this purpose. HARK! Methinks I hear censorious Mimicks say, This is a May-game for some Holy-Day. Each day's a Festival, to them that may With freedome sport themselves on every day: Such are our persons, and our fancies, we Both from confinement, and from Horns are free, Who then controlls our pastime, or it scorn?
The greatest Gallants love to wind an Horn, Besides 'tis customary to some Nations, To take delight in imitating fashions. But should most wear, what is for Cuckolds made, Surely 'twould spoyle the Feather-makers trade: Our Feathers then don't shame us, since the best Fancy themselves they have a fairer crest; Whence observation plainly lets us know, Imagination makes a Cuckold so. The speech being ended, they went to dinner, which was sumptuously and readily brought up at the sounding of Trumpets, and winding of Horns. All things were ordred with such fore-sight and prudence, as it gave a general satisfaction to all. After dinner several were adopted in manner and form following, the Officers of the society in the several and respective places advan∣ced about the room twice, or thrice, singing the song of the Bulls-Feather in these words. IT chanced not long ago as I was walking, An Eccho did bring me where two were talking; 'Twas a man said to his wife, die had I rather, Than to be Cornuted, and wear the Bulls Feather. Then presently she reply'd, Sweet, art thou jealous? Thou canst not play Vulcan before I play Venus: Thy Fancies are foolish such follies to gather; There is many an honest man wears the Bulls Feather. Though it be invisible, let no man it scorn, Being it's a new Feather made of an old Horn: He that disdains it in mind or heart either, May be the more subject to wear the Bulls Feather. He that lives discontented, or in despair, And feareth false measure, because his Wife's fair,
His thoughts are inconstant, much like winter weather; Though one or two want it, He shall have a Feather. Bulls Feathers are common as Ergo i'th' Schools, And only contemned by those that are Fools: Why should a Bulls Feather cause any unrest, Since Neighbor's fare alwaies is counted the best. Those Women who are fairest, are likest to give it; And Husbands that have them are apt to believe it: Some men though their Wives they seem for to tedder, Would play the kind Neighbors & give the Buls Feather. Why should we repine, that our Wives are so kind, Since we that are Husbands are of the same mind; Shall we give them Feathers and think to go free, Believe it, believe it, that hardly will be. For he that disdains my Bulls Feather to day, May light of a Lass that will play him foul play; There's ne're a proud Gallant, that treads on Cows leather, But may be Cornuted, and wear the Bulls Feather. The shortest, the tallest, the foulest, the fairest, The fattest, the leanest, the common'st the rarest; When they and their Ducks are all merry together, Will be using tricks to advance the Bulls Feather. A King and a Cobler, a Lord and a Loone, A Prince and a Pedlar, a Courtier and Clown: Put all their degrees and conditions together, Are liable alwaies to wear the Bulls Feather. Though Beer of that Brewing I never did drink, Yet be not displeased, if I speak what I think; Scarce ten in an hundred, believe it, believe it, But either they will have it, or else they will give it.
Then let me advise all those that do pine, For fear that false jealousy shorten their Line: That Disease will torment them worse than any Feaver, Then let all be contented, and wear the Bulls Feather. The Gentleman that is to be adopted, is arrested by the Sword-bearer in the Patrons name, to be of that society. The Master of the Ceremonies immediately placeth him in the Adopting Chair, where being sat, the Controller cryes three times, Ceremonies, at which all the Brethren are bure. Then doth the Master of the Ceremonies, take off his hat, and in stead thereof plac∣eth on his head a cap, and on a blanck-book Horned all over, gives him this Oath following: The Oath that is given a Brother at his adoption. In the Patrons name of the Bulls-Feather, And the society met together: I thee adopt, and on this book dost swear Truth to the smock, and what's to it most near; And when thy natural strength thou find'st decay, And on Veneral Viols canst not play, With fiddle stick and finger I command, You frig and digitize with cap in hand, And then a leg in querpo shalt thou make; This shalt thou do for Madam Venus sake: Lastly observe, thou shalt esteem none other Equal to this our Club, so welcome Brother.
After this there is another name given him, and so presented by the Sword-bearer and Controller to the Patron, who with much gravity receives him. At which all the Brethren make acclamations of joy: His name is entred, and the Orders given him to read. To conclude, this ingenious society every quarter keep a feast, choosing then new Officers. They are not so pro∣fuse in expence, nor extravagant in their mirth as to render them incapable or forgetful of doing works of charity, for on every such feasting day they give 12 do∣zen of peny bread to the poor. FINIS.
