D1453 12123766 54478
THE Compleat Ambassador: OR TWO TREATIES OF THE INTENDED MARRIAGE OF QU: ELIZABETH Of GLORIOUS MEMORY; Comprised in LETTERS OF NEGOTIATION OF Sir Francis Walsingham, her Resident in France. TOGETHER With the Answers of the Lord BVRLEIGH, the Earl of LEICESTER, Sir THO: SMITH, and others. Wherein, as in a clear Mirror, may be seen the Faces of the two Courts of England and France, as they then stood; with many remarkable passages of STATE, not at all mentioned in any HISTORY. Faithfully Collected by the truly Honourable, Sir DVDLY DIGGES Knight, late Master of the Rolls. LONDON: Printed by Tho: Newcomb, for Gabriel Bedell and Thomas Collins, and are to be sold at their Shop at the Middle-Temple Gate in Fleetstreet, 1655.
To the Reader. READER. YOu are here presented with a PEICE, never intended for the Press, which hath slept long amongst the Papers of Sir DUDLEY DIGGES, late Master of the Rolls; a Personage of known Wisdom and Integrity, and who understood well the value of this Manuscript, which had nothing forged or supposititious in it. There is no kind of Writing, that men do generally with more greediness look into, then LETTERS; especially, if they be Letters of State, from Great and Wise Persons, and in a Wise Time, as these are. And that appears in the Two Volumes of Letters, lately printed under the Titles of CABALA, and Secrets of Empire; which have been very well resented: and, though indeed, they have no Coherence of Time or Matter, but are a Rapsodie of the dispersed thoughts of the Dead, upon several occasions; yet (like a Prospect of Various Objects) have delighted the Curious Eye. This Collection, being a continued Ne∣gotiation of Sir FRANCIS WALSINGHAM, during his three years Residence (as Ambassador) in that Mysterious Treaty of Queen ELIZABETHS Marriage, successively, with the two Great Brothers of VALOIS, wil without doubt meet with an equal, if not a better reception; and not onely please the Judicious sight, with its Order and Uniformity (like a large Prospect at sea;) but may be of great use to those
Gentlemen that shall be bred up to serve Princes hereafter in this kind of Honorable Imployment. And though the English have been hitherto so reserved, as not to make pub∣like the Treaties and Negotiations of their Ambassadors abroad; so that we have hardly any notion of them, hut by their Arms, which are hung up in Inns where they passed; yet the French and Italians (who think themselves as wise, and as good Polititians) have frequently done it; which we see and read with delight, as giving a better ac∣count of Affairs, Times and Persons, then any History can do; unless men of Action, and great Statesmen, could find leisure (as CAESAR, and some others did) to set down (with integrity) the several Passages of their Times. The Persons who acted this Scene, and who speak by their Letters; are, the QUEEN her self, LEICESTER, BURLEIGH, WALSINGHAM, and Sir THOMAS SMITH; such a Iuncto (for abilities) as were sufficient to govern the whole world: but the chief ministerial parts lay upon BURLEIGH and WALSINGHAM, two such Ministers of State, as no age in this Nation hath produced their Equals. Of her Royal-self (whom all EUROPE did either honor or fear) I shall onely say, That as she had the judgement to make good choice of her Servants, though she rewarded but sparingly (like her Grandfather HENRY the seventh) yet she had the Fortune to find them more loyal and secret then those Princes that succeeded her, notwithstanding their great gifts, and effusion of the Treasure of the Crown, which now (with their bodies) lies buried in the Dust. And if at any time it concerned her to be well served, it was in this great Treaty of a League and Marriage with FRANCE; where she had to do with as cunning a Lady as her self (the Queen Mother) and with the King her Son, CHARLS the ninth, the deepest Dissembler that ever wore Crown.
For the Match it self, whether it were really intended by the FRENCH, I make some doubt of the first; namely, that with the D of ANjou, afterwards HENRY the third; but do rather think it was set on foot with design to amuse our Queen, and the Protestant Princes of FRANCE, and to breed a Confidence the better to draw them into the Net at Paris, I mean the barbarous and bloody Massacre on St. Bartholomews Eve, 1572. being the second year of this Negotiation; and by reason of the close carriage there∣of, could never be discovered by our quick-sighted Am∣bassador, with all his Spyes and Intelligencers, till he was almost overwhelmed in it himself. For the second Treatie, which was set on foot in the year 1581. with Monsieur the Duke of ALANSON, I do conceive that it was really intended by the FRENCH, and by the chief of the ENGLISH Councel, except LEICESTER (who had pretensions of his own;) but for her own Mind, what that really was, I must leave, as a thing doubly inscrutable, both as she was a Woman and a Queen. Concerning that Immortal hatred that grew between her and the Queen of SCOTS, occasioned by difference in Religion, contrary State-Interest, Neighboring King∣doms, Emulation of Greatness, and perhaps of Beauty too; and wherein all the Princes of Christendom did in∣terpose, some one way, and some another (as will appear by these Letters) I can resemble it to nothing better, then the Poets faigned quarrel between JUNO and VENUS, which did so often trouble the whole Family of their Gods; and the Scots Queens assuming the Arms of ENGLAND, in the time of her first Husband (though she afterwards excused it as an act of constraint, she being under obedience) was that Manet alta mente Repostum. That injury which could never be forgiven, till it was ex∣piated with her blood.
And though these Things were the main part of the Ne∣gotiation, yet there falls in other important Matters, con∣cerning the Protestants of France, and Germany, the business of Ireland, and the Low-Countreys; the Eng∣lish Fugitives, controversies about Merchant Affairs, &c. All so well digested, and delivered in so plain and clear a stile, without any pomp of Words, or ostentation of Wit, as renders the PEICE much more valuable to those that know a good Hand, when they see it. And if a man could be beholding to his Cyphers, as Sir ROBERT NAUN∣TON saith, speaking of these very LETTERS in his Frag∣menta Regalia, they would have told pretty Tales of the Times: but I must leave the decyphering part to those that have more leisure and dexterity that way, and conclude all with this reflection upon our Ambassador, which will fall under the careful observers eye; how vigilant he was to ga∣ther true Intelligence; what Means and Persons be used for it; how punctual he was in keeping to his Instructions, where he was limitted; and how wary and judicious where he was left free; still advancing, upon alloccasions, the Re∣putation and Interest of his Great Mistris, with a most lively and indefatigable Devotion. October, 16. 1654. A. H.
A TABLE Of all the Letters contained in this Book. INstructions for Sir Francis Walsingham, sent Ambassador in∣to France 1 Sir William Cecil Lord Burleigh to Sir Francls Walsing∣ham 5 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil ib. Q. Elizabeth to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 6 To the Earl of Leicester 7 The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham 9 The Queen to Sir Henry Norris ib. Doubts of Sir Francis Walsingham 17. &c. Sir William Cecil to Sir Francis Walsingham 18 Instructions by the Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 2 To Sir William Cecil ib. To Sir Walter Mildmay ib. Sir Henry Norris and Sir Francis Walsingham to the Queen 22 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 26 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 28 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester, 28, 29. Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Walter Mildmay 30 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 31 Monsieur Pinart to Sir Francis Walsingham 32 Sir William Cecil to Sir Henry Norris and Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 33 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 34 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 35 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Walter Mildmay 38 Sir William Cecil to Sir Francis Walsingham 39 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil ib. The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 42 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 43 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 45 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 47
Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 48 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 50 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 51 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 52 Sir William Cecil to Sir Francis Walsingham 53 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 55 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 56 The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham ib Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 57 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord of Burleigh 58 Instructions of the Queen concerning the Match with France 62, &c. L. Burleigh to Sir Fr. Walsingham 66 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 67 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 71 The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. L. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 72 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 73 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 76 The Q. to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 78 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 79 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 81 Lo. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh ib. Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 82 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester ib. The Q. to Sir Francis Walsingham 83 L. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 87 L. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 88 The Q. to Sir Francis Walsingham 93 L. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 94 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh ib. Earl of Leicester to Sir Fr. Walsingham 96 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester and L. Burleigh 97 The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 100 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 101 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 103 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 104 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 105 The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham 106 L. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 108 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 109 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 110 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh ib. The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham 111 Earl of Leicester and Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 115
Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 115 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 116 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 117 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 118 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 119 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 120 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 121 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 123 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 127 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 129 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. L. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 134 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 135 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord of Burleigh 136 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 137 L. Burleigh to Sir Fr. Walsingham 138 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 139 L. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 140 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 141 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 144 The Q. to Sir Francis Walsingham 145 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 146 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Instructions for Hen. Killegrew Esq Ambassador in France during the absence of sir Francis Walsingham 147 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 149 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 150 Sir William Cecil to Sir Francis Walsingham 151 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh ib. Lo. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham twice 152 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 153 Instruction for sir Thomas Smith Ambassador Entraorninary in France 154 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh twice. 160 Lord Burleigh to Sir Thomas Smith 161 L. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 163 L. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 164 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham twice 165 Sir Thomas Smith and Sir Francis Walsingham to the Queen. 166, 169 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 172 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 173 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 174 Sir Thomas Smith to the Queen 176 The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham 180 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 182 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 184 The Q. to Sir Thomas Smith and Sir Francis Walsingham 185
Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 187 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 188 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 189 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 190 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh ib. Sir Tho. Smith to the Lord Burleigh 191 Sir Tho. Smith to the Lord Burleigh 193 Sir Tho. Smith to the Lord Burleigh 198 Sir Tho. Smith to the Lord Burleigh twice 199 Sir Tho. Smith to the Lord Burleigh 200 Sir Tho. Smith to the Lord Burleigh 202 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh ib. Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 203 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 204 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh ib. The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham 205 Instructions for the Earl of Lincoln, Ambassador extraordinary to the French King 206 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 212 Earl of Leicester to sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 213 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 214 Conference betwixt Duke Montmorency and some of the Queens Councel ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 216 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester ib. Sir William Cecil to Sir Francis Walsingham 217 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester ib. Sir William Cecil to Sir Francis Walsingham 218 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 219 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 221 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 222 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 223 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 224 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil 225 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester, ib. The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham 226 Q. Elizabeth to Sir Francis Walsingham 228 Sir William Cecil to sir Francis Walsingham 230 Sir Tho. Smith to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Tho. Smith 231 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Tho. Smith 232 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir William Cecil ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 234 The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham 235 Sir Tho. Smith to Sir Francis Walsingham 236 Sir William Cecil to Sir Francis Walsingham 237 Sir Tho. Smith to Sir Francis Walsingham 238 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Tho. Smith 239 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Tho. Smith ib.
Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Tho. Smith 240 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Tho. Smith 243 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 245 Lord Burleigh, Earl of Leicester, Sir Francis Knowles, Sir Tho. Smith to Sir Francis Walsingham 246 Lord Burleigh to sir Francis Walsingham 250, 251 Earl of Leicester to sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Tho. Smith to sir Francis Walsingham 252, 253 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lords of her Majesties Councel ib. The Queen to sir Francis Walsingham 259 Sir Tho. Smith to sir Francis Walsingham 262 The Queen to the French King on the behalfe of the Vidam of Chartres 263 Lord Burleigh to sir Francis Walsingham 264 Earl of Leicester to sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Tho. Smith 265 Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Tho. Smith 267 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 269 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 270 Answers to the French Ambassador 271 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 273 Sir Tho. Smith to sir Francis Walsingham 274 Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Tho. Smith 275 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Tho. Smith 276, twice Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Tho. Smith 278 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 281 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 282 Sir Tho. Smith to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. The Lord Burleigh to sir Francis Walsingham 283 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 284, 285 Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Tho. Smith 86 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 287 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Tho. Smith ib. Earl of Leicester to sir Francis Walsingham 288 Lord Burleigh to sir Francis Walsingham 289 Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Tho. Smith ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 290 Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Tho. Smith 291 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 292 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 293 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 294 Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Tho. Smith 295 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 296 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 297 The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Sir Tho. Smith to Sir Francis Walsingham 299 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 301 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Tho. Smith ib.
Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 302 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 303 Sir Francis Walsingham to the L. Burleigh 304, 306 Sir Francis Walsingham to Sir Thomas Smith 307 Sir Fr. Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 308 Sir Francis VValsingham to the Lords of the Council. ib. Sir Thomas Smith to sir Francis Walsingham 310 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham ib. Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 311 Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Thomas Smith 312 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 313 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 314 Sir Thomas Smith to Sir Francis Walsingham 315 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 316, 317 Instructions for the Earl of VVorcester. 318 Earl of Leicester to Sir Francis Walsingham 322 Sir Thomas Smith to sir Francis Walsingham 324 Sir Francis VValsingham to the Earl of Leicester. 325 Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Thomas Smith 326 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 327 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 328 Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Thomas Smith 329, 331, 332 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 333 Sir Thomas Smith to sir Francis Walsingham ib. Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 334 Answer of the Queen to the French Ambassador comcerning the Duke Alanson 335 Lord Burleigh to the French Ambassador 39 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 343 Sir Francis Walsingham to sir Thomas Smith 344 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Earl of Leicester 345 Sir Thomas Smith to Sir Francis Walsingham 346 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 346, 347 The Queen to Sir Francis Walsingham 348 Answer to the French Ambassadors ib. The Queen to King Henry of France 351 Instructions for Sir Francis Walsingham, in his second French Ambasiy, 352, 353, &c. For a League with France. 355 Sir Francis Walsingham, to Sir Henry Cobham, and Mr. Sommers 356 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh ib. Sir Henry Cobham, to Sir Francis Walsingham, 357 Francis of Valois, Duke of Anjou and Alanson to Sir Francis Walsingham 358 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 359 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Queen 360 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 363 Lo. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 372
Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 374 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 375 Sir Francis Walsingham, Sir Henry Cobham, John Sommers to the Lord Bur∣leigh 376 Lo. Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 377, 379 Sir Francis Walsingham, Sir Henry Cobham, John Sommers to the Lord Bur∣leigh 380 Memorial for Mr. Sommers 384 Private Memorials for him 385 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 386 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Queen 387 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 388, 389, 390 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Queen ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh twice 392 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 392, 394 Sir Francis Walsingham, Sir Henry Cobham, John Sommers to the Lord Bur∣leigh 396 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh ib. Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 397 Points accorded, and not according upon the League Offensive and Defensive 400 401, 402, 403 Sir Francis Walsingham, Sir Henry Cobham, John Sommers to the Lord Bur∣leigh ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 407 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh ib. Sir Francis Walsingham to the Duke of Anjou 409 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 410 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 412 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 413 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 414 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham, Sir Henry Cobham, and John Som∣mers 419 Lord Burleigh to Sir Francis Walsingham 422, 423 Answer to the Commissioners concerning the League Offensive ib- Sir Francis Walsingham to the Queen. 426 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 428 Conference betwixt the Queen Mother and Sir Francis Walsingham 429 Sir Francis Walsingham to the Lord Burleigh 434, 439 Sir Francis Walsingham, Sir Henry Cobham, John Sommers to the Lord Bur∣leigh ibid.
NEGOTIATIONS OF STATE AFFAIRS, BETWEEN The Lord Burleigh, and Sir Francis Walsingham, in the Reigns of Qu: Elizabeth, and Charls the 9. of France. Anno Dom: 1570. Instructions for Francis Walsingham Esquire; sent by the Queens Majesty to the French King, for the Matters following, the 11 of August, 1570. in the 12 year of Her Majesties Reign. ELIZABETH R. FIrst, you shall conferr with our Ambassador Sir Henry Norris knight, upon this Charge now committed unto you, and as you two shall think best, to proceed therein for our Service, so we are well content to allow your doings; and for the repair and delivery of our Letters to the French King, and to the Queen Mother, with such other circum∣stances thereto belonging; you shall also follow the advice and discretion of our said Ambassador. The charge which we doe commit to you, resteth only and principally upon this speciall Matter following; whereunto we will that you direct your whole actions. We desire that the Accord betwixt the King our good Brother, and the Prince
of Navarre, Prince of Condé, and the Admirall, with the rest of the Company, being the Kings Subjects, might be made as favourable for the reasonable con∣tentation and surety of the said Princes and their party, as may be possible to the maintenance and continuance of them in the liberty of their Consciences for the cause of Religion. And because we consider that there is no small labour made by some directly to impeach this accord, and by some others though not openly to withstand is, yet by doubtfull dealing in the granting to their Requests to ruine the said Prin∣ces and their party in the end: We finde it the more necessary for us to use all good means to countervail such contrary labours, and to procure not only a good Accord, but therewith a continuance thereof, as a matter which in our Consci∣ence and Honor we think good both for the King and his whole Estate. And therefore after you shall understand the state of the Negotiation of this matter by the Deputies of the two Princes with the King, and wherein it shall be profi∣table for them that our Ambassador and you shall deal with the King or Queen-Mother in our Name; Our meaning is, you shall in this manner, or the like, de∣clare our Intentions, as Grounds whereupon you may lay the rest of our Reasons and perswasions that shall be thought good to be propounded to the King. First, you shall say that we earnestly request the King to set apart all manner of Jealousie that either hath been, or may be insinuated to him, of our meaning in this cause betwixt him and his Subjects: for that we mean as well, and so al∣wayes have to him and his Estate, as if we were his naturall Sister, and never had any intention to maintain or comfort any of his Subjects against him to move any trouble to his estate, or to diminish any parcell of his Crown. And yet you shall say, That we will in this sort be plain with him, thinking yet best to agree with good Friendship and Honor, that we could never be well satisfied or content in our minds, to have the said Princes and their party, for professing of the Reli∣gion whereof they have freedom granted to them, to be overthrown or distressed by means of partiality of their private Enemies, as long as they never required in substance any other thing of the King, then a permission to enjoy the benefit of the former Edicts granted unto them for the exercise of their Religion. In the which we doe also consider that they had been so long suffered as a great por∣tion of people of his Realm had been in their young years therein nourished and established, and without opinion of damnation of their souls, they could not change the same, so as we pray the King to take this our plain dealing in good part, and to interpret of our advice that we are bold to give him, as one that mea∣neth first and principally best to him and his estate, and no otherwise to his Sub∣jects, then shall in our Judgment further the quietness, repose, and augmentation of him in Honour, Wealth and Surety. You shall next to this say, that we have partly considered of such Petitions and Demands as we be informed his Subjects have in most humble sort required to be granted to them: And we note the substance of them to consist specially upon these points. The first, that they may be restored to his favour and grace as most humble and faithfull Subjects; a thing most meet for a King to be gran∣ted both readily and bountifully, and consequently to serve him with their lives, lands, and goods: a thing also for a King most profitable to imbrace & accept. And the next, that they may be permitted to serve almighty God by exercise of Chri∣stian Religion, according to their Profession, and to quietness of their Consci∣ence; a thing also in the sight, of God most commendable, and needfull of all Christian Subjects. And last, that they may have assurance hereof in some bet∣ter sort, then by former experience they have had, a matter of most moment to be regarded for a full perfection of all the rest, and without the which the rest are of no account.
In these Suits most humbly presented, of Subjects to a most Christian King, of so great a multitude of People, consisting of such sundry kinds and estates, of Princes of his blood, of noble Captains, of learned men meet for Govern∣ment and Counsel, of valiant Souldiers, of great Burgesses, rich Merchants, yea of Women, Children, and all inferior sorts almost innumerable, we can∣not see, but the more speedily, the more bountifully and assuredly the King shall deal with them, as a Father with his Children, the more shall be his own quietness, his comfort, his riches, his strength, as we doubt not but he seeth without Declaration; and glad we are to hear it commonly reported, how well disposed he himself is to receive them to his favour: And therefore you shall say, it needeth not to discourse with him, though he be young in years, what in∣finite dis-commodities and lamentable mis-haps hath within a short time grown to his Estate, by denying to his Subjects of their reasonable requests. And though there be per case by some hard hearted persons, cavilations found to re∣prehend some part of their requests in particular, yet we require him to think how meet it is for him, the Soveraign Prince, not to want profit and honor of so general a Peace in his Kingdom, by re-uniting to himself of such a multitude of serviceable Subjects, which indeed is of such a moment, as no cavilation would be admitted against any particular point that may stand with his Estate, and accelerate the Peace. But to consider the King being the Soveraign to com∣mand, and they his Subjects to obey, and so by nature alwaies to live in fear, are to be rather comforted with a large grant to their requests, and a full satis∣faction of assurance, then by denying any Portions of their demands, to be nourished in doubt and anguish of mind; whereby neither part should rest in as∣surance, neither the King, for he had denyed, nor the Subjects, for they could not obtain; and so as it hapneth in sickness, the recidivations might be most peril∣ous. And after you have dealt with the King for furtherance of any particular impediments, you shall also say, that we do promise the King, and will be con∣tent to make any assurance, that he shall require meet to be made betwixt Princes; that if it shall please him to be a gracious Lord unto them, at this time, in their requests, and not to abridge the same to their misliking, whereby they may gather doubtfulness and fear of continuance of that which shall be granted them; if any of them shall contrary to their promises and submissions, attempt any thing directly or indirectly to the trouble of the Kings Estate, and contrary to the duties of true Subjects, we shall not only condemn them in our own judge∣men and so pronounce them to the world, but shall also, as the King shall find it meet, prosecute them as common enemies to our selves. And for any particular matter, that you shall be by the Deputies of the Princes requested to further, you shall do well to be instructed how to maintain their Demands, which shall be committed to you with such reasons as may be agree∣able to be mentioned by you, having respect that you shall deal therein for us, being a Queen and a Monarch with a like Prince. And if any on the Kings behalf shall object to you, that our dealing for those Princes and their company, being subjects in this sort, to have liberty granted to them for exercise of Religion in other sort then the King himself, and the common Authority of the Realm doth profess, is not agreeable with our own actions and proceedings against our Subjects that have lately sought in like man∣ner liberty to use the Roman Religion contrary to our Profession; you may answer thereto very well, that if they mean this by a late rebellion stirred up this last year, in a part of our North Countrey, by the Earls of Northumber∣land and Westmerland. First it is very true, that they only coloured outwardly their rebellious attempts, with a pretence of Religion. And you may say, see∣ing
the matter is objected, that it is well known, and you are warranted to avow it, that the principal cause of that Rebellion was wrought (you will not say by the Queen of Scots) but sure you are, by her Ministers both here in England and Scotland, and by some of the principal parties of the Nobility in Scotland, that do hate Roman Religion. Besides that, it is evident, that the two Earls that were the heads thereof, be∣fore they did begin their Rebellion, did at no time shew themselves unwilling to exercise the rights of the Religion established by Law in this Realm; but as they gave their consents when the order thereof was first established in Par∣liament, so did they ordinarily resort from the beginning of our Reign in all open places to the Churches and to Divine Services in the Church, without contradiction or shew of misliking. Thirdly, if either they, or any other of our Subjects, would make request to be at liberty to acknowledge the Authority of the Church of Rome, as the Pope would challenge it in this Realm, and as by his Bulls and Decrees he doth declare his meaning, how he would exercise it to the ruine of our Crown, it is so manifest, and that even by late experience notoriously well proved, that such a provision to be granted, induceth necessarily the party to be criminal of treason and as in no wise any such permission can be by us granted to any Subjects within our Realm; without we would therewith also, yield our Right and Royal Title to the will of Traytors, wherein manifestly appeareth a notable difference betwixt such a permission as the Kings Subjects do require for exercise of their Religion, which also hath been by the Kings Authoritie granted heretofore to them, and the permission that were to be granted to any of our Subjects, that would exercise the Roman Religion in our Realm, and obey the Commandments, Decrees and Bulls of the Pope; for we never could perceive, that the exercise of the Religion professed by the Princes, and their adherents in rance, did any way prejudice the Kings Title and Right to his Crown, but that the Professors thereof did alwaies with all humbleness and constancie, acknowledge and maintain the same, without adhering to any other Power or Authoritie; but we see it manifest, and have lately proved it, and duly punished it, in such as seek to erect up the Authoritie of the Pope in our Realm, and do directly and manifestly not onely impugn our Estate Royal; but labour to remove us from the Throne of our Kingdom, whereunto Al∣mightie God hath placed, maintained, and preserved us; a matter so manifestly full of danger, as neither we may yield unto, no, nor none of our good Sub∣jects will never assent thereto, but in that quarrel will adventure all their lives, lands and estates, as of late against the Rebellion that was coloured with a pre∣tence of Romish Religion, we did sufficiently prove generally in all parts of our Realm, and in all Estates and persons by the readiness of their service. And thus you have a general note how to direct you in the prosecution of the purpose intended by this your journey; not doubting, but both in this, and all the rest of your Charge, you will joyn your self with our Ambassador, who for his Acquaintance and his Experience, can very sufficiently inform you how to deal. If any thing shall be moved to you for the Queen of Scots cause, you may say, that before your departure, and within two or threes daies after that Mon∣sieur de Poigney had been with us, we had certain intelligence from Scotland, that the Lord Levinston, which was sent from the Queen of Scots, to solicite the leavying of Arms, and to bring some of the Nobilitie to confer both with us and her for ending of the troubles, had been with the Duke of Chastelhe∣ranlte, the Earl of Argile, and others joyned with them before the 20 of
the last moneth, for so his own Letters do testifie to our Cousin the Earl of Sussex our Lieutenant, upon our borders towards Scotland; and that he found them well content with the Articles accorded by us with the French Ambassa∣dor, and the Bishop of Ross, and that he was well forward in his Commission, so as we do look now daily both for a general ceasing of Arms there, and for the access of the Noblemen on both parties of that Realm here, to treat and conclude upon the Queen of Scots cause. And if any further matter be moved unto you in this, you shall say, that you have no more to say therein. When you have been with the King, and entred so far into this Charge as our Ambassador and you may see likelihood of the end hereof, we would be advertised with all speed possible. And if our Ambassador and you think that the hastie yielding of the Deputies in their negociation, may bring peril to the cause, we think it good that they might be induced to stand somewhat hard therein, as policie may serve them, without making to them any further aids of money. But as yet, we do rather give them some countenance to use more earn∣estness for their own suretie. Cecil. To the Right Worshipful my very loving Friend, Mr. Francis Walsingham Esquire. SIr, the French Ambassador hath sent hither a Servant of his, to demand audience of the Queens Majestie, who reporteth, that he is to advertise her Majestie of the conclusion of the Peace which was published on Thursday last: And for that I could not as yet this morning speak with her Majestie, I thought good to give you signification thereof, to the intent you might stay, until I have herein spoken with her Majestie; and by my next Letters advertise you, whe∣ther her pleasure be, that you should wholly stay, or otherwise go on your jour∣ney with some other Instructions. And so I wish you well to do, from Chenys, this Sundaie morning the 13 of August. 1570. Your assured William Cecill. To the Right Honorable Sir William Cecill Principal Secretary to her Majestie. According to your Honours order, I mean to stay till I hear further from you, how her Majestie meaneth to dispose of my service; and so in the mean time leaving to trouble you, I most humblie take my leave. From Lon∣don the 13 of August, 1570. Your Honors to Command, Francis Walsingham. To our trusty and well-beloved. F. Walsingham, Esq. presently sent unto the French King. ELIZABETH R. TRusty and well-beloved, we great you well; having this daie received Letters from the French King, by his Ambassador, making mention of to∣wardness of a Peace made with his Subjects; so as the Ambassador affirmeth,
that he taketh it to be assuredly published at Paris, the II of this moneth; and yet because otherwise we do not make full account thereof, but think it meet you shall keep on your journey, with this order, that if it be not accorded be∣fore your coming, then you shall proceed as before you were appointed; and if it be concluded, then shall you deliver these our Letters which we now send, directlie to the French King, by which we do signifie unto him, how we had dispatched you before, to move him to make some good end with his sub∣jects; and now hearing by his Ambassador of the conclusion, we cannot for∣bear, but charge you to proceed, specially to congratulate with him for so hap∣py a benefit, as by his reconciliation of his Subjects to him, we certainly are perswaded that God could not give him a greater. And so our pleasure is, you shall use all good language to express the joy thereof; and to offer all manner of endeavour that is in our power, to further the good keeping and continuance thereof. And in like manner we would have you, by means of our Ambassador, to cause the Admiral and his party to understand our intention in the send∣ing of you this time, making it appear to them how careful we are of their well∣doings, and shall be willing to do any thing in our power reasonable, to continue to them the fruits of this Accord: And to let them also understand, that the special sending of you over at this time was chiefly for their cause. Given under our Signet at Henly the 15 of August, the 12 year of our Reign 1570. A Copy of the Letter sent to Master Secretary, touching the negotiation had with the King the 28 of August, 1570. SIr, it may please your Honour to advertise her Majestie, that the King ac∣cepted in very good part her Congratulation, as from his good Sister and Neighbour, who hath alwaies wished his well-doing and prosperity (for these were his words) after Congratulation done to the King. The Queen Mother, having inquired of me of the well-doing of her Majestie, asked me how the Queen of Scots did. I answered her, that at my departure, for any thing that I knew to the contrary, she did very well; then she proceeded to enquire of me touching her present estate: I answered, according to the tenor of my Instru∣ctions, in what state she stood at my departure, wherewith she seemed to rest very well satisfied: And then she fell to protestation, that for her own part she was so well perswaded of the Queens Majesties merciful disposition, as she knew right well, that if she did deal any thing hardly with the Queen of Scots, it rather proceeded from some of her Ministers, then from her Majesties self. I replied, that I was glad to understand, that she conceived so well of the Queen my Mistress's good disposition; so was I sorry, that she should think that she would be, by any of her Ministers or Councellours, drawn to any thing, ei∣the towards her, or any other, that might not stand with her honour; for that her skill and years was now to direct, and not to be directed: I desired her therefore, in her Majesties name, that she would evermore reserve an ear for her (a thing that would not in equity be denied to the meanest person in France) who in all her actions hitherto towards the Queen of Scots, had dealt with that regard to her honour, as she was right able to justifie herself both towards the King her good Brother, as also toward all other Princes. Then she made great protestation of her indifferencie, and that she is no less affected in good will towards her Majestie, whom it pleaseth saith she, to do me the honour as to call me by the name of a Mother, then to the Queen of Scots her Daughter
in Law: And therefore, in wishing her liberty, I do it, saith she, as much for the Q. your Mistress quientness sake, as for any other respect, which without her libertie can hardly grow unto her. This Sir, in effect, was the whole course of the speech that passed from her in that behalf, which she had then with me apart; the King being then in talk with my Lord Ambassador. Then she caused the King to deal with me in that behalf; to whom I shewed the state of her cause, according to the contents of my Instructions, wherewith he seemed to be satis∣fied: He told me, that he wished that the Queen his good Sister, according to her merciful inclination, would have some compassion of her cause, and grow to some speedy conclusion in that behalf. I told him, that I doubted not but that her Majestie would for his sake do that which should be to his contentati∣on so far forth as might stand with her hononr and safetie: Then he protested, that otherwise he would not desire it. Thus having imparted to your honor the effect of my Negotiation, to the end you may advertise her Majestie, I most humblie take my leave. From Paris the 29 of August, 1570. Your Honours to command. F. Walsingham. I have caused by my Lord Ambassadors means, according to her Majesties order, Monsieur Cavanes, one of the Commissioners for the Princes, to ad∣vertise them of her Majesties intention of sending me into these parts, as tending chiefly to their benefits, which thing he hath alreadie advertised; and as I learn there cometh forthwith a Gentleman from the Queen of Navarre, and the rest of the Nobilitie, the King here being made privy thereof, to give her Majestie thanks for the great favour shewed them in this their troubles. Thus Sir, having advertised you of the Accomplishment of that which was appointed to me to be done by vertue of my Instructions, to the end you may impart the same to her Majestie, I most humbly take my leave. The Copy of my Letter to the Earl of Leicester. RIght Honourable, and my very good Lord; for that I know my Lord Ambassador here, imparteth unto your Lordship, the present state of things here, I shall need the less to trouble your Lordship in that be∣half. Touching my Message of Congratulation, the King accepteth the same in very good part; he professeth good will towards the Queen my Mistress, and touching the Peace, he protesteth to keep and observe the same inviolably, which his proceedings hitherto doth very well confirm the same. The mutinous Messiems of Paris, he hath fundry times since his repair hither, very sharply re∣buked, and charged them with contempt; he adviseth them to take another course, and saith, he will be known to be a King: And therefore for that his meaning is that the Edict should be duly observed, he commandeth them straitly to look to the due observations of the same. The like advertisement hath he given to the Presidents of his Parliament here, who seem as yet to stand in some terms with him: For whereas the King would have them sworn to the observation of the Edict, they refuse the same — alledging, that in the entrance into their Government, they ordinarily take an oath to observe all such Edicts, as by the King shall be published; what will be the issue of the refusal, I know not. The King telleth them, that the passions
of some of his Councellors hath been of more value then his Authoritie; and therefore he assureth them (which he confirmeth with many an oath) that unless they turn over another leaf, he will provide him of new Presidents, and extend such punishment towards them, as their contempt deserveth, and may be ad∣monishment to others to avoid the like. As, I can gather in the time of my short abode here by such a Conference a I have had with some of judgement, I find the grounds of the continuance of the Peace to be in number five, his own disposition, necessitie, pleasure, the Kings misliking, with certain of his Council, and his late favouring of others. His disposition of Peace, is not grown to-him of late, but hath been from the beginning, as those that have well observed him do testifie; and therefore there is the more hope of continuance of the same. His necessity hath two parts: first, he lacketh treasure to maintain the charges of further Wars. Secondly, those that have served him in these wars, are grown so weary of them, as men judge, that hardly they could have been drawn to con∣tinue them any longer. Pleasure and Warrs are direct contraries, and he being so much inclined to the one, as he is an enemy unto the other, it is thought therefore, that hardly any thing will bring him to do that that may hinder his plea∣sure. His misliking towards the house of Giuse continueth, who have been the nourishers of these wars: And though of late the Cardinal of Lorrain hath had access to the Kings presence, yet is he not repaired in credit, neither dealeth he in Government. His favour to Montmorencie, a chief worker of this Peace increaseth, who now carrieth the whole sway of the Court, and is restored to the Government of Paris; besides, he hath procured the displacing of Monluc, Monsieur d'Escars, and la Valet, and procured to be placed in their rooms, &c. These, my Lord, be the grounds that I can gather of the new accord, the doubts of the not continuance are in number three: First, it is thought that this Marriage with the Emperours daughter, may draw him from this peaceable inclination. Secondly, the great conference that is between the Q. Mother and the Cardi∣nal breedeth some doubt of some practise to impeach the same. Lastly, it is a common fear, that Monsieur can hardly digest to live in the de∣gree of a Subject, having already the reputation of a King: he seemeth yet to run one course with the King in liking and misliking; but so to continue it, is al∣together thought unlikely. I have been desirous underhand, to search out somewhat touching the thing your Lordship gave me secret informations of, yet I can learn nothing there∣of; though that would be dangerous, yet I pray God there be not a thing at∣tempted of more danger, which may with more ease be brought to pass. I leave your Lordship to consider, by that which hath been shewed, both hope and fear of the continuance of this peace: What will be the issue of this Trage∣dy, I pray God that fall out that may be to his glory; and so committing your Lordship to his tuition, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the 29 of August, 1570. Yours to Command, Francis Walsingham.
To Master Secretary. SIr, being in doubt whether I might return before advise given or no, my Negociation being done; in the end, I concluded with my self, that it was better to stay and to attend her Majesties order, then to return home at all ad∣venture: This therefore shall be to desire your Honor, that I may by your good means understand her Majesties pleasure in this behalf. Touching the state of things here, I forbear to write unto your honour, for that I know my Lord Ambassador hath fully advertised you: And so leaving further to trouble you at this present, I most humbly take my leave. To our trusty and well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esq present in the Court of France about our affairs. ELIZABETH R. TRusty and well-beloved, we great you well; we perceive by your Letters written from Paris the 29 of the last moneth unto our Secretary, how di∣ligently and orderly you have performed the Message and Charge committed unto you, which we take in very good and acceptable part; being glad to under∣stand your abilitie and fitness to do us further service hereafter. And where, among other things, you desire to know our pleasure for your return unto us, or further stay there. Forasmuch as we have made choice of you to be our Am∣bassador Resident with our good Brother the French King, instead of Sir Henry Norris, whom we are very shortly to revoke, we would be very glad, so it would stand with your commoditie, and without returning back hither, you did remain there still for that purpose; which if you can do, upon signification thereof unto us, we shall give order for our Letters of Credence to be addressed unto the said King, and to be sent forthwith unto you, for your placing with him as our Ambassador Resident there: Howbeit, if the necessitie of your bu∣siness be such, as you must of force be driven to return over, and to settle your things here, before you can be able to do us service there, then are we well con∣tented, if there be no other remedie, that you repair over some short while, to prepare your self to return back again for our service, with as convenient speed as may be. Given under our signet at Rycot the 7 of September the 12 year of our Reign 1570. To our Right trusty and well-beloved Sir Henry Norris, our Ambassador Resi∣dent with our good Brother the French King. ELIZABETH R. TRusty and right well-beloved, we greet you well; whereas Monsieur Moulenet being lately with us, did not only bring several Letters from the French King our good Brother, and the Queen Mother; by which the said King and she expresly required us to use towards the Queen of Scots, all honest and favourable treatment due to a Queen of her quality, and to set her at liber∣tie, and aid her to be restored to her Realm with Authoritie due to her; but al∣so according to the credit given by the said Letters, he the said, Moulenet did at length with very earnest speech deal with us therein, alledging, that in this do∣ing we should much satisfie the King his Master, and procure to our self great
honor; adding many other Allegations to induce thereunto to the maintenance of the said Moulenets speeches and negotiations. Thereunto we have made some brief Answers, as the time then served, and as we thought meet to satisfie them. But yet finding them to continue in their earnest solicitations, and in the end earnestly requesting our Answer to the French King, we told them, that the time did not then conveniently serve us to send such an answer to them (as the case required) to our good Brother, but we would shortly impart our meaning herein more at large by you, being our Ambassador there Resident, in such sort, as we trusted our said Brother and the Queen Mo∣ther should find the same reasonable. And so will we, that you shall with your best opportunitie resort to them both, and declare unto them, that because of the length and varietie of the matters which we have committed unto you to be declared; yet per case it be hard for you to express the same so orderly and readily in speech as you gladly would do, you may require of the King license to read unto them in such sort as you have turned it into French, a thing usual to this their Ambassador, and not to be mis∣liked, especially in you that most herein use their language, and not your own natural; as their Ambassador doth here, to his great commoditie. And this being granted, when you read it, our meaning is not, you shall deliver the same out of your hands to be kept or copied, unless it be very earnestly prest by them. And thus it followeth that you shall declare: We have considered of the Letters sent unto us by Moulenet from them both, with also the further explanation of the Contents thereof by him, according to the credit given unto him. The sum whereof, was to require our favour towards the Queen of Scots, in using her with favourable treatment due to a Queen of her qualitie, and aiding her with our power to be restored to her Realm, and obedi∣ence of her Subjects: And though we did suddenly say somewhat to Moulenet on our own part, to have satisfied him, as we have done the like at sundrie other times to their Ambassador here Resident; yet not knowing how they have con∣ceived or delivered our speeches to the King our good brother, nor how there∣with he is satisfied, which we are desirous to do in all reasonable requests, accord∣ing to the good Amitie that is and ought to be between us, we have thought good at some more length, to impart to our good Brother and Queen Mother, both our doing and meanings in all this case of the Queen of Scots, nothing doubting but the same being by them considered with their indifferent judgements, it shall appear that we have done nothing hitherto, in this case, contrary to honour and reason, or otherwise then very necessary and urgent cause hath moved us, or might have moved any other Prince having the like cause; neither yet in deeming the request of our good Brother the King in such sort and condition as it it made, have we given him any occasion of offence towards us. And this to do, we are moved in good will, in respect of the mutual Amitie that is betwixt the King and us, and not of any necessitie we have to be accountable to any per∣son for our actions; and so we trust the King will accept the same in friendly manner. And before he shall know what is to be said on our part, we do earnestly re∣quire them both, as a good Brother, and a good Sister, according to the fer∣vent offers of their good amitie and perfect love made to us, not only by their Letters, but by Messages, that they both will give ear hereunto, as Princes and Persons standing indifferent in this cause, without declination of their af∣fection, or adverting their judgements to the instigations of any particular persons that are more affectionate of nature to the person of the said Queen, then to the truth of the matter; and this being granted, as in honour it cannot be
denied, specially betwixt friends, as we make account of them both in all our honorable causes, we doubt not but we shall well see, that in stead of request or expostulation made to us, we shall be found to have deserved praise and thanks for our doings past, and shall not be disallowed in forbearing hereafter to grant simply to the requests as they are made. And after the King and his Mother shall grant to us this reasonable request, you shall proceed and say, First, we require our good Brother to consider what part of his request hath been al∣readie accomplished of our natural disposition; and next, what part we have not as yet yielded unto; and then also, he shall see uponwhat just reasons we forbear to assent to the rest of their requests, as it is made, where we are re∣quired to use all honest and gracious treatment due to a Queen of her qualitie: The truth is, since her flying into our Realm, where she escaped an evident danger of her life, we caused her to be alwaies honorably attended by per∣sons of Nobilitie, and such as were of the ancient Families of our Realm; we have entertained her at our charges with a company of her own, of such Lords and Ladies as she her self made choice of to remain with her, and appointed her houses of such Commoditie of pleasures and pastimes as the Countrey would afford: And herein being constrained to say somewhat more for our self, then otherwise we would, but to answer calumniations, we are assuredly informed, that for her own Person, her Diet and commoditie of Pastme meet for the conservation of her health, she for the most part when she lived at her own will in Scotland, had no better Entertainment or Diet, but rather many times worse and baser, as it is well known to all persons that understand both: So as for the state, and honest and favourable treatment of her own Person, we are sure no lack can be found—suppressed, or rather untrulie reported of us, wherein we have been much wronged, contrary to our deserts, the King our good Brother, ad his Mother, not a little abused with such untruths. If fault have been found that she hath not been used according as a Q. of her quality, if therein be meant, that she hath not such honour done in the services of her, as are due to a Queen, she herself is to answer to the same, for by her own servants she hath been, and is continually served. And we think not but that they have therein accomplished their duties according to her desire, at the least, to speak the truth, we are crediblie informed, that in Scotland she had commonly less reverence done to her in her services by the self same servants, then hath been by them here. And as to such of ours as have attended upon her, we think they have not forborn to do their duties at all times agreeable to her estate, except per case she her self have of her courtesie at sometimes remitted some part thereof to them. But for our part truly, notwithstanding such great offences as she hath diversly made unto us, we have been alwaes careful of her person to be honorably used, and of her health to be by all possible good means preserved, esteeming it our honor so to have her treated and used, being brought into calamity, and flying into our Realm as she did. But now if the rest that be required, be not granted, that is, to have her aided with our power to the restitution of her Realm; we trust to make it manifestly appear, that to consent thereunto, as is required, were not only a great follie in us, and dangerous to our Estate, but against all common reason, and such an er∣rour, that neither Prince nor private person, having any sense of understanding, would commit, the circumstances being well considered. And though many things be well known commonly to the world, for maintenance of this our judgment, yet the beginning of these things could not be known to the King our good Brother, in respect of his young years, and to the Q. Mother, though they have been well
known, yet either her time since occupied with her own dangerous causes, or the continuance of perpetual informations for the Scotish Queen, or else some part thereof touching the time of her worthie husband King Henry, and her son also King Francis, may per case have brought the most part of things to oblivion, or at least, have altered her judgement, or else move her to give the less heed to them, being now remembred: nevertheless, as briefly as we can, with passing over of a great number of accidents and scruples of offences, and especially such as concerned the time of King Henry, or King Francis the econd, which were of no less importance then the assailing of our Crown and Title, as the world knoweth, we will lay before their eyes these things following, to shew how the acts and dealings of the Scotish Q. towards us have provoked us to deal in another manner with her, then hitherto we have. First, she is the person by whom, and for whom only it is manifestly known, that our Kingdom and Crown was Challenged almost as soon as Almightie God called us by right thereunto. And how many waies that Challenge was furthered and maintained, prosecuted and published, needeth not to be recited, for all Na∣tions of Christendom understand it. And if we should enter to inform our good Brother the King, of the particularities thereof, howsoever the same should touch the time of his noble Father King Henry, and his Brother King Francis, it may be thought he being Son and Brother of such Kings, yet he would in his judge∣ment inwardly with himself think us not well used. But for avoiding of things displeasant, and considering since the same unkindness was shewed in his Fathers and Brothers times, a reconciliation of Amitie hath followed, which we observe firml; we will omit all other parts, and remember only the things done by the Scotish Queen after the death of her husband King Francis, when she was at her own libertie. We sent our Ambassador to her, and being in France, we required, according to a certain Teatie of Peace concluded in Iuly, 156C. by sufficient Commission from King Francis the second her husband, and the Q. her self, under the several hands and seals, aswel of Scotland as of France, to confirm the said Treaty, as was by their Commissioners having Authoritie, covenanted and concluded. In which Treatie was concluded Articles of good Amitie betwixt us and her in our Countreys, and those as beneficial for her as for us. And also a provision and especial Covenant, that she should forbear from thenceforth to attempt or offer us any like wrong by challenging of our Crown as she had done before time. To this our request, delay was made, not with alledging any thing to the contrary of our right or maintenance of her former Challenges. But yet she must now (being a Widow, and sole Governor of her Kingdom of Scotland) in these causes have the presence of some of her Nobilitie or Counsellours of the Scotish Nation; at whose coming she would confirm the said Treatie. This was not much misliked of us: Shortly some of her Nobilitie and Counsellours came to her from Scotland; and then being etsoons required in most friendly man∣ner, to be remembred of her promise by the Ambassador, having Commissi∣on so to do, and offering to deliver unto her the reciprocal of our part under our Great-Seal, it was again deferred, until she should her self return into Scot∣land; which she said should shortly be, and then she would not fail to perform it well, though these delays were not convenient to nourish friendship, but ra∣ther to ingender suspicion, with some other practises then discovered, yet in respect of our natural desire to have her come into her own Kingdom, and then to live neighbourly with us, we forbore to shew any great offence for those great delays. And when she returned into Scotland, we etsoons sent to her, and demand∣ed the same again, with offer of all manner of good friendship, which being again
deferred, upon pretence she was not fully settled in her Realm, we forbore also for that time, though not without great cause of misliking; and then in the mean season following, notwithstanding many good offices used on our part, by sending sundry times both Messages and Ambassadors to visit her, to offer unto her all good offices. It chanced that a young Nobleman, our near Kinsman, brought up in our Court named the Lord Darlie, was secretly intised to pass into Scotland upon other pretences, for private suits for Lands, and such like. And there with∣out our knowledge, according to the same former practises, whereof we were not altogether ignorant, though we would not seem so jealous of the same; he was sud∣denly accepted by that Q. to be affied in contract of Marriage with her, as one thought to be a meet person to work troubles in our Realm for her advantage, yea contrary to the advice of the wiser sort of her Councel; and consequently con∣trary to our will and liking, was married to her in all haste. And after that it was there devised to make him an instrument to work danger to us and our Estate by sundry practises, not only with certain of our subjects, but also with some forein persons, as far forth as the power of the same Q. and her said husband being our borne Subject could extend; In which their doings, sundry their practises were discovered to us, and made frustrate: And yet after that nevertheless, when the said Queen had a Son of that marriage, we were of nature moved to set aside all unkindnesses, and did send thither an Ambassador, a person of honour, the Earl of edford, to assist the Christening of her Son, to whom we also were Godmother. At which time unkindness being known to be between her and her husband, although he had grievously offended us, we having compassion of the unnatural discord betwixt them, and fearing some event thereof, caused our said Ambassador at that time to use all the good means he could with her to repair the same which he was not able to do, such was become her misliking of her husband, although in him on the other side (as we heard say) was found all manner of lowli∣ness meet for him to recover her favour. And then also we required her to per∣form that which in Justice and Honor she was bound to do, and had so often de∣layed; which was, to confirm the Treatie afore concluded, sending unto her at the same time under our hand and seal the reciprocal for our part. But then she began to alledge a matter not before heard of; which was, that from some words in a certain part of the Treaty, it was doubted, that she might be prejudiced in such right as she pretended to be due to her next after us, and the children of our bodie; whereof we being advertised, caused it to be answered, that if there were any such words, we were content they should be rased out of the Treaty, and she should not be moved to confirm any such Clause. But that answer being not accepted, which was very strange and unreasonable; a new matter of delay was invented, pretend∣ing that she would send some of hers shortly into England, to treat with us there∣upon, and so finish that which we did demand; vvhereof indeed nothing ever fol∣lovved vvell, although vve had these great causes of miscontentation, as indeed in∣different persons may well perceive, and did novv clearly see vvhereunto these de∣lays did tend very ungrateful and not vvithout danger, if vve should not regard our self vvell; yet vvhen a miserable calamitie ensued shortly after to her, that the King her husband, vvith vvhom of late she vvas grievously offended, vvas cruelly strangled, and horriblie murthered, and the principal murtherer named the Earl Bothewell, having a vertuous lavvful vvife (of a great house) living—because sud∣denly her husband being first immediately upon the murther committed, and directly and openly imputed to him—advanced by her to high degrees of ho∣nor and estates of lands, vvho nevertheless vildly misused her, to the great grief of all her subjects and friends; vve vvere stricken vvith invvard compassion of this her great extream miseries and infamie, vvhich vvas spread upon her, and sent to
her special Messengers, not then to request her (as vve had done before) to confirm the Treaty, but to have regard unto her honour, and to relinquish such an odible person, being the known murtherer of her husband, an unlawful person to be mar∣ried to her; and generally so evil a man in all vices, as he had the common name to excel all others in iniquitie, wherein no advice of ours could prevail. But in the end he being hated of all her Estates, and seeking by force to subdue them that intended to prosecute the Murtherers, was forced to flie the Realm: And leaving her lamentably in the field desolate, she was conducted from thence to a place of restraint, where she refused to renounce the said Murtherer, whilest she was there∣by in present danger to have her life taken away from her by furie of her Nation, as she well knoweth: We by speedy Messages, and other kind of earnest means used towards them that were most irritated against her, saved her life: A bene∣fit such, as she never received the like of any worldly creature; and full glad we were, that God gave us such power and disposition of mind, to bestow so great a benefit of her, who nevertheless had offered us the greatest worldly in∣juries that could be devised. It followed, that when she had found means to escape to her libertie, whereof we were very glad, she sell again, by Gods suffering, in∣to a second calamitie as dangerous as the former; for having attempted, by force, to overcome the party that adhered to her son, that was then crowned, and ac∣cepted King by the States of the Realm, and that also with her consent, as they affirm, her party was overthrown in her own sight, and she thereby forced to escape, by flying with a very small number. And being hardly pursued, she was driven for safety of her life to enter into a simple vessel, and crossing over an Arm of the sea, came into England, unknown in the Port where she landed; yea, she herself dissembled her person for a time. But yet shortly after being discovered who she was, and we hearing thereof, within three or four daies (for sooner we could not, in respect of the distance of the place) set forth by Com∣mandment to have her comforted, and honourably used: And afterwards warned certain persons of honor and credit to attend and wait upon her, to bring her from the borders of our Realm, where she was in manifest danger of her contrary part of Scotland to be suprized: And granted her to remain further within our Realm, in a Castle of an ancient Nobleman, with all her company that escaped with her, and with some others that did also follow her; and there she had such enter∣tainment (altogether upon our charges) as was meet for a Queen, and for a person brought into such calamity, or for one that had notoriously challenged our Crown, and would not perform that she was bound to do for our satisfacti∣on. After she had been there some time, and that she had now through her whole Realm been newly charged with the former crimes, as to have been directly the procurer and deviser of the horrible murther of her husband, to have married the principal murtherer, to have defended and succord all the rest of the mur∣therers, whereof some of the principal were her own servants, with a number of infamous crimes: We caused her to be friendly dealt withal, to understand what she would have us to do for her, that with our honour we might do—to relieve her of the infamies wherein we were nearly touched, even in the inward part of our heart, considering the fresh death of her husband was not yet punish∣ed, he being next Kinsman both to her and us living, on the King our Fathers side, and on hers also. After many things propounded, at length she agreed, that her cause of Criminations should be tryed as one that was not guilty of the prin∣cipal crime, the murther, and that we should have her allegations for her defence; whereunto we assented, assuring her, that if by any means it might appear, that she was not to be duly charged to be a deviser and procurer thereof, as she was charg'd, her accusers should be with all severity punished, as reason was. And she should
have our aid to be speedily restored to her State; but what followed hereupon, and what was the cause why she did not cause her Commissioners to answer to the matters produced against her, we do omit for this time, having been heartily sor∣ry, that where so many matters were produced, to charge her to be culpable, and she by her Commissioners thereof made privy, did not suffer the same to be fur∣ther tried of what value they were to have such credit as they did pretend: And in this great matter, being so hainous, it is well to be considered of our good Brother and Sister, to what respect more of her honor, and care of her, then of our self, we hitherto forbore to notifie abroad the mutitudes of the Arguments produced against her; by which if we had been by any waies disposed to hinder her, as per case some of her friends would have thought of us, we could have made, and yet can make no small advantage to abase her estimation to the whole vvorld, and yet publish nothing but the only rude and bare arguments and mat∣ters as they have been manifestly and orderly produced, leaving to the vvorld to consider of the same as should seem most profitable. But herein have we esteemed more her honor, then our ovvn profit, having an intention to overcome evil, if it might be vvith good; and the rather, for that Almightie God hath so fortified our estate othervvise vvith his blessings, and so abased hers vvith the lack thereof, as, vve thank him, vve have no need of such means to abase our Enemies, or evil vvillers. And thus far did things pass until this last year, in vvhich time, vvhilest vve vvere occupied and travelling at her request vvith the States of her Realm, vvho had accepted and acknovvledged her son as their King, to come to some Conformitie vvith her for her return into her Realm, and for a concord to be made betvveen her and her States; she again had, vvithout our knovvledge, en∣tred into a secret dealing of marriage vvith a principal Nobleman of our Realm; and not contented therevvith, vvhen vve did mislike it, she by her Ministers en∣tred into such an intelligence vvith certain of our Noblemen in the North part of our Realm, as they novv since Michaelmas, burst out into an open Rebel∣lion, making their outvvard shevv of intent, to change the state of Religion, contrary to the Laws of our Realm; but in very deed, as manifestly it is to us more known, and truly discovered, their meaning was chiefly to set up her, not onely in her own Countrey, but in this our Realm. And though it pleased God to animate all our Subjects generally of all Estates so to accord to serve us in the speedie suppression hereof; yet her manner of unkind dealing against us in this dagerous sort is not the less to be weighed in respect of that which was by her intended to our utter subversion; a matter worthie consideration of all such as have States and Governmet, and that mean to preserve them from sub∣version by such Rebellions, wherein the verie Crown of the Prince is sought. And thus having as shortly as so many matters of so many years continuance could suffer, passed over no small number of unkind and dangerous enteprises against us; and contrariwise, of our manifold kind and aboundant benefits to∣wards her in all her necessities, we doubt not but now, if the requests that are made to us to aid her to our power, to restore her forthwith to her Realm, shall be applid to the former things preceding, no indifferent person of any judge∣ment will, or can think it in conscience reasonable to move us to commit such a dangerous folly, as to be the authour our self to hazard our own Person, our State, our quietness of our Realm and People at one instant, without further consideration how we might preserve the same, as God hath given them unto us, and not to be lost (as it were wilfully) and with contemning or neglecting of the wisdom that God hath bestowed upon us, to possess and to maintain our
Crown and Dignitie with publike peace and quietness amongst our Subjects: And therefore, although now lately in this time of Rebellion, whereunto we well understand that she hath a party, we did cause her to be removed further into our Realm, from the parties where the Rebellion was stirred, and there for∣bad resort to be made unto her, as before was common for all persons, but of her own Countrey and ours, we see not why this our dealing in so dangerous a time should be blamed, being assured that no Christian Prince in like case, would have done less. And therein we durst appeal to the judgement of any Prince or Potentate in the world that will profess any indifferencie in judgement; yea, we dare think, that even herself and her most affectionate friends cannot think us here to have dealt unreasonably. The like might be thought also, in that we have of late restrained one, whom she used as her Ambassador, being a Bishop, whom we used almost as one of our own, for her sake, upon due information that he hath been a principal motioner and nourisher of this late Rebellion, by divers means: A matter to be as much allowed for us to do, in the stay from subversion of our Realm, as were to stay and restrain one that would bring more fire to a Citie, which he hath already set on fire. In this sort we have so nearly represented to the King our good Brother, and the Queen his Mother, some part of such cir∣cumstances of the Queen of Scots cause, as we doubt not but reason, honor and good will shall move them to conceive of us, as we should be the like to conceive of them, if they had the like cause with any other Prince, as we have with the Queen of Scots, having thought meet to omit a multitude of other circumstances, tending also to this end▪ because we would not extend this our letter to overmuch length for wearying the King with Declaration thereof. But if the King could but imagine, or the Queen Mother for him, how some other Prince might have attempted the like dangers to his Estate and Crown, and continued the like offences towards him, where he had shewed kindness, we are assured they might think it somewhat in us, if we should, after the truth de∣clared, move the King for any particular respect of a third person to consent to that, which should plainly after hazard his Estate, being our Friend; and by some such imagination of a like cause, we think their judgements shall be best directed thereof: Sorry would we be that any like indeed should happen unto him, to in∣form him how to judge in our case. When you have thus done, if the King or his Mother shall object any thing hereupon, as it were in excuse of the Queen of Scots, or intreating further for her, you may say in answer,—That whatsover it shall please them to move unto you, you will make report thereof, and doubt not, how∣soever the Queen of Scots doings have deserved other dealing, yet our natural inclination towards her, is by our doings so manifest, as in any reasonable re∣quest; we doubt not, but we should be found reasonable to have regard to the King our good Brothers motions and requests, that may stand with our honor and safetie to accord unto; and so we trust the K. meaneth, not to propound any thing unto us, otherwise then in good terms of friendship, whereby alwaies they that are to make demands or requests to their friends, do regard how they may stand to the safetie of their friends; and so hath Moulenet and the French Ambassador certified unto us, that the intention of our good Brother is to no other end. You shall also inform the King, that after we had given order to cause thus much to be written, his Ambassador came to us, and signified the good will of our good Brother, in imparting to us the double of such answers as he had made to the Demand of the Queen of Navarre, and the Prince of Navarre,
and Conde and others, for the which his dealing with us in such friendly sort to make us participate of his doings we heartily thank him▪ and as we an∣swered his Ambassador so you may say also to the Queen, That except we might understand what the said Queen, and the rest, with others have to say to this offer, we cannot give any resolute judgement thereof. But we think the King shall do a godly act, and both honourable and profitable to himself and his Country, if he shall give them assurance of their lives; So as they may change that common opinion which is in the World, that they have their lives more safe whilest they take up Armes, then they were in time when the peace was granted to them, such hath bin the insolency of evil ministers to break the Kings commandement and endanger the Credit of his word and promise; And in our opinion nothing is so hard in all this matter, as assurance to them to enjoy that which shall be granted, and if our Credit or opinion with them may help them—to accept the Kings favour, so as we might see in what sort they might—therefore be sure notwithstanding the interruptions of evill ministers, we would be glad to be the furtherer of so good an act, as thereby the King might have an universall quietness in his Countries. The Ambassador also now moved us that we would take Care that no aid of Armor or Weapon should be by us or our license Conveyed to Rotchel, to the maintenance of the Kings Subjects there, whom he nmeth Rebells, whereun∣to our answer was that we did direct no person thither, or licensed any to carry any thing thither that might offend the King. But generally we must per∣mit our subjects as Merchants to resort for their trade to all places indifferent in France, wishing that they might find like trade in others parts for their ne∣cessitie as they do by likelyhood in Rotchel, and that we would not doubt but they would follow their Comodity in other places and not at Rotchel; for ge∣nerally Merchants follow where gain is most with surety and friendly usage, and so you may make report to the King. Lastly the Ambassador moved us in the Kings name to understand whe∣ther he might assure the King that we made no leavie of Souldiers in Al∣maigne, as it was commonly reported, whereunto we answered that presently we made none, but yet we have such friendship with sundrie Princes of Al∣maigne, as if we should have need to require any numbers for our service, if any unkindness by force should be offered us by any our neighbours we can speedily thereof be furnished, and for the state of our Realm we are deter∣mined indeed to prepare a force both by Sea and by land; whereof if the King shall hear, we require him to conceive no jealousie of our evill meaning to∣wards him and his Countries, trusting that from him no occasion shall grow to alter our Amitie. Given under our signet at our Honour of Hampton Court the 23 of Febr. 1569 in the 12 yeare of our reigne. A Note of such doubts as I desired to be resolved of by her Majestie before my entring into my charge. WHether I should treat onely with the King; and in Case the King either with sickness, or to follow his pleasures, refer me over to his mother or to Monsieur his brother, Whether it be her Majesties pleasure I shall treat with them. For that the King giveth a deaf eare to a long negotiation, whether having occasion to deal with him from her Majestie in some matter of weight and length, I shall not exhibite the same to him in writing, declaring first by
mouth the effect thereof, and if I shall exhibite it in writing whether her Ma∣jestie shall not think it most expedient to deliver the same either in Italian or Latin for avoiding of such Cavelling as may be made upon the translation to French, whereof Sir Henry Norris hath had experience. How far forth, and in what sort from time to time I shall deal with the Re∣bells that presently are retired into France, or hereafter shall retire. How I shall behave my self in any publick Assembly towards the Ambassador, aswell of Spain as of Portugall, either in taking or giving place. To my very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Esq appointed for Ambassador to the French King. SIr I send you herewith the Queen Majesties instructions as they are finished; and her Majesties pleasure is; that you should not forbear your journey but proceed; and if on the way you come to certain knowledge of the Kings speedier entrie into Paris—meet to accelerat my Lord of Buckhurstes com∣ming thither, her Majestie would have you send some in haste back. And so not well able to write any further, but to end with my heartie wishing you a prospe∣rous journey to your hearts desire, 23 December 1570. Yours assuredly William Cecil. Instructions iven to our trusty and wel-beloved servant Fra. Walsingham Esq presently sent to be our Ambassador Resident with our good Brother the French King, the 19 of December 1570. ELIZABETH R. FOrasmuch as we are already determined to license our trustie and wel-beloved Sir Henry Norris Knight, who hath of a long time served us faithfully as our Ambassador with the French King our good Brother, to repaire over unto us, and to leave that place; and that we have made speciall choice of you upon a singular liking of your vertuousand good conditions to serve us in the same place, wherein we trust our expectations shall be well satisfied of your fidelitie and diligence. And for the rest also we doubt not but by the experience which you shall daiely have, you shall be able to accomplish that which shall be requisite: and for the better instruction of you, we have thought meet to cause to be delivered unto you in writing these few things hereafter following by way of memoriall. After you have delivered you letters, and and bin presented to the King by our foresaid Ambassador whom you shall suceed, for the doing whereof our said Ambassador can sufficiently direct you, and will we doubt not, but make good recommendations of you to the French King, to the Queen, Mother and others such as shall be thought meet; we will that you shall use such speech unto them, that it may appeare that your special Charge is to be a Minister for the conservation of the good Amitie that is betwixt us and the King, and Conse∣quently to preserve Concord and mutuall entercourse betwixt the Subjects of both our Countries, according to the good Treaties that remaine betwixt us for that purpose: and therefore considering you are so determined for your dutie sake to us, and for the good that may ensue thereof, you shall require them if at any time any thing to the contrarie shall be conceived of you (as we trust shall not, because you mean to give no occasion) yet it may please them before any
such judgement be conceived of you, it may be in some wise declared as they may understand our answer, wherewith you doubt not but to satisfie them. Your office consisting of sundry parts, the first and principall shall be to con∣tinue there aswell to execute our commandement, and to deliver our letters and messages upon matters occurrent, as to require and to receive answers; and to the best that you can, to procure thereupon reasonable and speedy resolutions, as the nature of the matter, shall import: for the well doing whereof, we must re∣ferre you hereafterwards to such particular directions as we shall send you by our speciall Letters, whereby you shall be best directed in manner to proceed. The second shall be, to have continual regard to all manner of their doings there, aswell private as publick, that may be prejudiciall to us or our estate: And there∣fore after good consideration and knowledge thereof had, to advertise us dili∣gently and secretly; and to this end, you shall do well to require of our said Am∣bassador (your predecessor) some good information by what means you may at∣tan to the knowledge of things needfull and requisite, and whom you may best trust and use to attaine to the more certenitie; and if any thing be discovered unto you at any time, that shall seem of importance, that the information there∣of may well abide the time of your advertisement to us, and to answer again, we leave it to your consideration and discretion to omit no time convenient, but to resort to the King, or some other, as you shall think meet, to declare what you understand and mislike, and in what sort it is hurtfull to the Amitie betwixt us; And therefore to require some information, or some plain answer, meet to be imparted to us, for discharge of your duty. And that in this be∣half you shall not use, by way of complaint upon any light intelligence, but you do first by conference of things together, find the matter to be true and worthy of complaint, least hereafter lesse regard be had to you, when you shall have just cause to complain. The third is, to have regard to such suites, as our Subjects (using the trade of Merchandise within those Realms) shall have cause to make; that they may have by your soliciting readie expedition, with justice, upon causes of depredations or arrests, or any such injuries or molestations; and therein to solicite such of the Kings Counsell, as you shall find to have charge thereof; letting them to understand, that besides the bond of Justice, whereunto they do direct the King such favourable expedition of our Subjects, shall provoke us and our ministers to do the like, and shall also breed mutuall love betwixt the Subjects on both parties, and give cause to a more frequentation of inter∣course of Merchants, being a thing beneficiall to both the Realms. And be∣cause you shall be the more able to understand, and to treate in your confe∣rences & negotiation upon any thing generally touching the Amitie betwixt the King and us; or more particularly, for the deciding and determining of any causes that may come in controversie for the trade and intercourse of Merchandise be∣twixt the Subjects of both our Countries & kingdoms, you shall do well to have with you some Copies of the treaties now remaning in force betwixt us and the King, by the which you shall be very well informed & directed, as by certain rules how to treate and deal in all causes that may there come in controversie, and thereby be bound to require due observation as cause and matter shall require. We doubt not but you do consider, how profitable a thing it is for quietness of us and our Realm, to have that party in France which hath professed reforma∣tion of Religion, to be maintained and contained in the favor, which the King hath granted them by his Edict; And therein vve vvould have you at all times (when occasion shall be given you) let it appear to the King, that vve think nothing can procure more assurance of inward quietness in his Realm, then the due observation
of those things which he hath granted to his subjects in his Edict; and you may say that he hath more cause by experience to believe us therein, then any other Prince that is his Allie besides us, that shall be of a contrary mind. And so experience hath taught us already to think, and may well ascertain him, considering he hath seen and felt the continuance of the troubles of his Realm, whilst he followed the advise of other Princes and Potentates, and disswading him from granting such favour as he hath done to his subjects. And in any other thing wherein you shall be able at any time to further and advance the obser∣vation of the matters of the Edict in favour of them of the Religion, we would you should endeavour your self in such sort as may stand with our honour. And of this our intention we will that you give understanding to such of the princi∣pals of that part as have interest therein, which you shall best do by the advise of your predecessor, who has best acquaintance with these persons. Lastly, for cer∣tain matters lately treated of here by the French Ambassador as touching the Queen of Scots cause, and the preparations of ships and men of war made in Brittanie, you shall at your coming to our Ambassador, learn in what state he hath left those things, and how he hath answered the King, and so you may persist in the same course untill you shall be by us otherwise directed. We have by our Letters to our foresaid Ambassador willed him to make de∣liverie unto you of all such our Plate as he had delivered unto him at his entrie into his charge, which you shall receive of him by Indenture, if you shall have need thereof. Where we meant that you should have accompained the Lord of Buckhurst in his journey to the French King, & so have bin presented with him to the said King; now that we cannot understand the certainty of the said Kings entrie into Paris, at which time our meaning was and is that the said Lord of Buckhurst should be there, we would not that you should abide any longer but proceed in your journey; and if on your way you do perceive that the Kings entry will be now in the beginning of Januarie [our will is] that you shall without attend∣ing any longer for the coming of the said Lord of Buckhurst, proceed by our Ambassadors means to be presented to the King, and to take the place of our ordinarie Ambassador, so as our former Ambassador Sir Henry Norris may re∣turn at his Commodity. We would have you inform your self, by the judge of the Admiraltie of all causes depending betwixt our subjects and those of France, up∣on pretence of depredations, that you may the better answer complaints which either ours or the others shall make. And farther we would have you to acquaint your self by his means, with a complaint lately exhibited by the French Ambassador in the name of the Mer∣chants of Roan, and what answers hath bin made to the same, by such as we did ordain to devise the same, whereof the said Judge was one. You shall also receive a complaint which certain of our Merchants of London trading to Roan do presently make for the Innovation of certain taxations by the Magistrates of Roan upon the goods of our said subjects, contrarie to the common use, where∣upon you shall (being well informed) of the inconveniencie thereof, and the in∣justice; sollicite the remedie thereof, so as time shall conveniently require. William Cecil. Ended the 22 of December 1570.
To the right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Earle of Leicester. MY very good Lord, I write unto you at this present rather to use this as an earnest of my diligence hereafter to follow, then for any good matter that I have to write. Passing through Canterbury, I visited the Cardinal, and delivered unto him your Lordships Letters, who gave me as much light as he could touching the present state of France, concerning the matter whereof it pleased your Lordship, to give me a watch-vvord, there passed nothing betvvixt us. The picture your Lordship desired, I vvill take order shall be sent to you vvith vvhat convenient speed may be, beseeching your Lordship vvherein my poore service may stand you in stead, to use me with such boldness as I may thereby assure my self that your Lordship maketh accompt of me; and so further leaving to trouble your Lordship at this present, I most humbly take my leave, at Bullen the second of Ianuary 1571. Your Lorships to command, Fr. Walsingham. To the right Honourable Sir William Cecill, her Majesties principall Secretary. SIr, I arrived here at Bullen the first of this month, where I could learn no∣thing worthy the advertisement, for you know, Sir, that frontier news are never of any great value; onely this I learned of the Governours Son in law here, a Gentleman of good accompt, and one of the Order, who accompanied with divers other Gentlemen came to visit me from the said governour Monsiuer de Calliac, who told me that the Kings entrie is deferred untill the middest of Febr. but hereof for the observing of the time, here is no more assurance than there was before of the first of Ianuary. Leaving Bullen, I have not forgot to enform your honour of the great exa∣ctions used by the Inn-keepers at Gravesend, Canterbury, & Dover, in the prices of Victualls, whereof besides mine own experience, I learned by certain strangers that passed over with me, they are so great as in no Countrie is used the like, where all things bear so unreasonable prices in the market, and the people so free from impositions of the Prince. Surely, Sir, it were well done that there might by your good means and furtherance, some order be taken for the Re∣dress hereof, aswell for her Majesties honour, as for the ease of the poore tra∣vellers. Thus Sir, having no further matter worthy the advertisment, I leave to trouble your honour, most humbly taking my leave from Bullen the second of Ianuary 1571. Your Honours most bounden, Fr. Walsingham. To the right Honourable, Sir Walter Mildmay, one of her Majesties privie Counsell. SIr, you know that Frontiers are commonly better furnished with fables then of matters of truth, and therefore I leave to make you partaker of such brutes as are here occurrent; at the Governours hands here I was well received,
who is one that hath alwaies shewed himself well inclined to our Nation in these times of jealousie and unkindnesse, that hath raigned betwixt the two Coun∣tries. Touching my own particular, if my charges continue as they begin, whereof there is small hope to the contrary, except there be some extraordinary conside∣ration had of me by your good means in transportation, my allowance will not suffice to beare half my charges; I would therefore most humblie desire you at the time of the receipt of the bill to weigh it accordingly. Before my departure, I was earnestly requested by Mr. H. Cobham to re∣commend unto you, a cause in controversie between him and Mr. Cartwright, committed to your hearing and redresse, who desireth your convenient favour, which I beseech you, Sir, the rather he may receive for my sake. And so leaving further to trouble your Lordship at this present, I commit you to Gods prote∣ction. From Bullen the 2 Ianuary 1571. Your Lordships to command Fr. Walsingham. To the Queen most excellent Majesty. MAy it please your most excellent Majestie to be advertised; receiving your Highness Letters of the 16 of Ianuary, and perceiving your gracious pleasure touching my Revocation, I cannot but aswell for this, as your most fa∣vourable acceptance of my service during my residence here, in most humble wise acknowledge those favours of you; And after having conference with Mr. Francis Walsingham, at good large, further of your Majesties meaning, we both sent to the Court to demand Audience, but the King being then newly removed from Chantilly, and the Queen Mother repairing hither to Paris, our Audience was by her deferred untill the Kings coming to Madrid, where the Court being setled the 21 of Ianuary, we were requested in the Kings name to come thither, the 25 of the same; and repairing thither at the pointed time, we were entertained by Monsieur de Lause, who by the Kings appointment dined with us. After dinner being once ended Chevalier de Sener was likewise sent from the King to accompany us; so after we were advised by Sir Gihoronovi Gondi to repaire to the Kings presence, and staying a while in the Chamber of presence, being curteously intertained by the Duke of Nevers and the Nobilitie; The King came forth. Then I Sir Henry Norris, drawing near to him, said; That her Majestie perceiving nothing more necessarie to entertain the good Amitie and intelligence between Princes, then their devotion of good Ministers, had chosen this Gentleman, Mr Francis Walsingham, being discended of a good house, approved vertue, and like sincerity, to succeed me, and to reside your Majesties Ambassador near his person; not doubting, but according to your Majesties charge given him in that behalf, he would use all means possible to en∣tertaine the good and neighbourly Amitie between your Majestie, and likewise the continuance of the entercourse and traffique between your Realms and Sub∣jects; which I praied God long to continue, to his glory, to the increase of your Honours, and tranquilitie of your Realms, and all Christendom. Also I declared that your Majestie had sent certain Letters unto him, his wife, and mother; whereupon the King giving you most hearty thanks, of your choise of a Gentleman so well qualified, and desirous to continue that thing which he so much wished, he required me to cause the Gentleman to come to him. Then I
Francis Walsingham being thus presented by Sir Henry Norris, after ordinary salutations done, I delivered your Majesties Letters, which after he had caused to be read by his Secretarie Pinart, I shewed him the great charge you gave me so to direct my course in this service, as might best tend to the maintenance of the good Amitie between your Majesties; as also the free traffique and In∣tercourse between the Subjects of both your Realms, which thing aswell for duties sake towards your Majestie, as the reverence I beare him, and the great benefit that would grow to both your Realms, I said I would not faile to observe with what care and sincerity I might: And therefore desired him that I might come to my answer, which I doubted not should be such, as he should rest there∣with satisfied, and I justified. To this, after enquire made of your Majesties health, he answered, That he he could not but conceive great hope of continuance of Amitie betwixt her Ma∣jestie and him, for that you had made choise of one to supplie this place, so well inclined to entertain it, as he hath given him to understand by his Ambassador, that I was; he said therefore that I was very welcome, and should at all times receive at his hands, for your Majesties sake, gracious Audience; for the which I rendred him most humble thanks; and told him, That I hoped that I should do nothing unworthy the good opinion he had conceived of me, And touch∣ing the gracious Audience promised, I doubt not but that his Ministers both heretofore had, and hereafter should receive the like at your Majesties hands. Those ordinarie Ceremonies ended, being requested by the Deputies of the Princes of the Religion, to recommend their cause at this present; for it is generally conceived that the Ambassador sent hither from the Princes of Ger∣many, who besides congratulating the Marriage, recommended the observation of the Edict, which was a thing procured by your Majestie, as with whom you have some secret league, do concurre in all things that tend to the advance∣ment of Religion, me thought I could do no lesse but say somwhat in that be∣half, both for that I thought the opinion conceived of the League and concur∣rencie worthy the nourishment; as also for that by your Majesties instructions, I am appointed to do any thing that may advance their cause, so farre forth as may stand with your Honour; and to that end your Majestie may judge, whither I kept my self within that compasse. I thought it my dutie to send you the effect of that I said, whereby if I failed in any thing, being by your Majestie admoni∣shed thereof, I may hereafter avoid to offend in the like. I declared unto him, that your Majestie willed me to signifie unto him, that you (as his good and loving sister who wished unto him all prosperitie, and thinketh none so great as quietness of Government,) do not a little rejoyce to heare of the great care he taketh for the due observation of the Edict lately pu∣blished, as that thing which maketh him honourable, and of great reputation with all Princes, that are not carried away with passion; and that you do not a little wonder to see his Majestie in these young years, able (through his great foresight and wisdome) to quench a fire of so great a Consequence and danger as lately was kindled and dispersed through his whole Realm, and now through Gods goodness, and his good order was at this presence utterly extinguished: an example for the rareness thereof, worthy to be honoured in him, and followed in all other Princes who preferre good Goverment, and the pre∣servation of their Subjects, before tyrannie and destruction of the same. I told him further, that your Majestie hoped that he now findeth a difference between the advise of those Princes his neighbours, that advised him to continue the Warres, to the hazarding of his State, and destruction of his Subjects and yours,
and other Princes, that exhorted him to the contrary, who judged alwaies Peace and concord tending most to his safetie and their preservation. And therefore for that experience, now (the best means) hath taught him to know the inconveniences of the one, and the profit of the other, your Majestie doubt∣eth not, but as of his own inclination he hath alwaies bin given rather to peace, to preserve his subjects, (a property of a good and loving Prince) then by sword and violence to consume them (a thing most fit for a Tyrant.) So he will continue the said course that tendeth most to the due execution of his said Edict, the only meanes to preserve quietness that now reigneth in his kingdome; This course unto God so acceptable, for himself so honour∣able, and for his subjects so profitable, if any should seek to impeach, for that it is most commonly seen, that good purposes (aswell in Princes as privat men) have many hinderers, be he either a subject unnaturall, or a neigh∣bour evill affected, as envious at his repose: Your Majestie offereth your self with all aid and power to assist him to your uttermost, against all such as shall seek or hinder him in so good and godly a purpose; And as your Majestie resteth herein affected towards him, so you doubt not but God who hath wrought this godly inclina∣tion, will raise up other Princes to assist him, and to be likewise affected towards him in this behalf: And that therefore your Majestie prayeth God to blesse him in this course, and to remove from him all such as shall hinder him in so noble an enterprise; to whom your Majestie wisheth as prosperous successe, as ever Prince had that occupied his place and Seat. To this he answered, that he had right good cause to accept in good part your Majesties advertisement, whom he must needs acknowledge to have al∣waies as his good Sister and as on carefull of his well doing, advised him to that which was best, both for himself and his Country; he willed me therefore to assure your Majestie, that the onely care he presently had, was to enter∣tain the peace, whereof the Q. of Navar and the Princes of the Religion could well be witnesses as also generally the whole Realm; To this I replied that I could not fail to advertise your Majestie both of his well accepting of your advertisment, as also of the good inclination towards the sincere observa∣tion of the Edict, which newes I did assure would be to your Majestie most welcome. After I had thus ended with the King, and finding the Queen his wife ab∣sent (who by report the night past had a fit of a fever) I signified unto him that I had further Commission from your Majestie to present unto her your Letters, and shew unto her notwithstanding you Majestie had made choise of a personage honourable to congratulate their Marriage, whose comming onely staied upon the certainty of his entrie, yet your pleasure was that in the mean time I should have also executed the said office, which I would have gladly done, if it might have bin without her trouble, whereunto he an∣swered, that the night passed she had the fit of a fever, which he thought would not long cotinue. But hoped that within four or five daies she would be in that good state of health, as I might have accesse unto her, unto whom he assured me that both your Majesties Letters, as also the office of congratulation, whereunto I was appointed, should be accepted in very good part, as from their good and loving Sister. This is the effect of my speech unto the King from your Majestie, the which ended, making our reverences we were conducted by Monsieur de
Lasac to the Queen Mother; and because incontinent after dinner, we un∣derstood by Sig. Gondi, some alteration of wonted custom; and that we should for the Solemnitie, visit apart the Queen Mother and her two Sons; we thereupon resolved to keep one course in our several speeches to them, and coming to the Queen, I Sir Henry Norris declaring the qualitie of the Gentleman your Majestie had sent to be presented your Ambassador Re∣sident, his good inclination towards the continuance of the Amitie between your Majestie and the King her Son; she eftsoons answered, that she no∣thing doubted of your Majesties good election; she required the Gentleman to come to her. Then I Frncis Walsingham, after due salutation, presented your Majesties Letters, and used to her speeches, as before to the King, concerning your Ma∣jesties charge given me for the entertaining of the good Amitie between the King her Son and you. I also recommended unto her the observation of the Edict, being so requested to do by the Deputies of the Princes of the Religion; as also so to do the like to the Kings Brethren: My speech therefore from your Majestie unto her in this behalf was, that you were glad to hear that she had not only the reputation and honour to be a chief maker of Peace and Union late∣ly accorded, but also to be a chief Conserver of the same; wherefore, as one that wished unto her all honour and reputation, you could but wish unto her preservation in this course, so much to her honour, to the Kings safety, and to the general benefit of his Countrey. Whereunto she answered, that she could not but accept in very good part, both recommending your choice so well inclined to entertain the Amitie between your Majesties, as they were fully assured thereof by their Ambassador Resident in England, doubting not but such effects should follow, as should redound to both your Majesties contentations. Being thus licensed of the Queen, we were streight brought to Monsieur de Anjous Chamber; where I Sir Henry Norris, declaring this Gentleman to be sent by your Majestie to succeed me, was not only commanded by you to entertain the good Amitie, but likewise to bear that respect unto him, and the Duke his Brother, as towards your good Cousins and Parsonages of great ac∣count and value. The Duke thanking me for this my good relation, requested the Gentleman to come unto him. Whereupon I Francis Walsingham, approaching near unto him, making reve∣rence, I shewed him, that you willed me to do your commendations to him, and further to tell him, that your were glad to understand that he did so honor∣ably concur together with the King his Brother in sincere and due observation of the Edict, whereby he did not only get generally with all men the honour to be reputed a Prince of courage in time of war, but also of Councel in time of peace; which courage you doubted not but he would continue, in respect of the good will he bare to the King and his Countrey, and the regard that he had of his own honour. And further, I shewed him that your Majestie gave me command∣ment during my charge here, to behave my self towards him and the King his Brother with that good respect as was fit for me towards your Cousins and Princes of that qualitie that they were of. Whereunto he answered, with great courtesie, that he thanked your Maje∣stie for your commendations, as from a Princess of that honour you are, and whom he so much reverenced. Secondarily, for the good encouragement you gave him to be a good instrument for the observation of the Edict, which thing he was bound to do in respect of his dutie towards the King and his Countrey; so shall your advertisement be of no small force with him in
who is one that hath alwaies shewed himself well inclined to our Nation in these times of jealousie and unkindnesse, that hath raigned betwixt the two Coun∣tries. Touching my own particular, if my charges continue as they begin, whereof there is small hope to the contrary, except there be some extraordinary conside∣ration had of me by your good means in transportation, my allowance will not suffice to beare half my charges; I would therefore most humblie desire you at the time of the receipt of the bill to weigh it accordingly. Before my departure, I was earnestly requested by Mr. H. Cobham to re∣commend unto you, a cause in controversie between him and Mr. Cartwright, committed to your hearing and redresse, who desireth your convenient favour, which I beseech you, Sir, the rather he may receive for my sake. And so leaving further to trouble your Lordship at this present, I commit you to Gods prote∣ction. From Bullen the 2 Ianuary 1571. Your Lordships to command Fr. Walsingham. To the Queen most excellent Majesty. MAy it please your most excellent Majestie to be advertised, receiving your Highness Letters of the 16 of Ianuary, and perceiving your gracious pleasure touching my Revocation, I cannot but aswell for this, as your most fa∣vourable acceptance of my service during my residence here, in most humble wise acknowledge those favours of you; And after having conference with Mr. Francis Walsingham, at good large, further of your Majesties meaning, we both sent to the Court to demand Audience, but the King being then newly removed from Chantilly, and the Queen Mother repairing hither to Paris, our Audience was by her deferred untill the Kings coming to Madrid, where the Court being setled the 21 of Ianuary, we were requested in the Kings name to come thither, the 25 of the same; and repairing thither at the pointed time, we were entertained by Monsieur de Lause, who by the Kings appointment dined with us. After dinner being once ended Chevalier de Sener was likewise sent from the King to accompany us; so after we were advised by Sir Gihoronovi Gondi to repaire to the Kings presence, and staying a while in the Chamber of presence, being curteously intertained by the Duke of Nevers and the Nobilitie; The King came forth. Then I Sir Henry Norris, drawing near to him, said; That her Majestie perceiving nothing more necessarie to entertain the good Amitie and intelligence between Princes, then their devotion of good Ministers, had chosen this Gentleman, Mr. Francis Walsingham, being discended of a good house, approved vertue, and like sincerity, to succeed me, and to reside your Majesties Ambassador near his person; not doubting, but according to your Majesties charge given him in that behalf, he would use all means possible to en∣tertaine the good and neighbourly Amitie between your Majestie, and likewise the continuance of the entercourse and traffique betwen your Realms and Sub∣jects; which I praied God long to continue, to his glory, to the increase of your Honours, and tranquilitie of your Realms, and all Christendom. Also I declared that your Majestie had sent certain Letters unto him, his wife, and mother; whereupon the King giving you most hearty thanks, of your choise of a Gentleman so well qualified, and desirous to continue that thing which he so much wished, he required me to cause the Gentleman to come to him. Then I
Francis Walsing being thus presented by Sir Henry Norris, after ordinary salutations done, I delivered your Majesties Letters, which after he had caused to be read by his Secretarie Pinart, I shewed him the great charge you gave me so to direct my course in this service, as might best tend to the maintenance of the good Amitie between your Majesties, as also the free traffique and In∣tercourse between the Subjects of both your Realms, which thing aswell for duties sake towards your Majestie, as the reverence I beare him, and the great benefit that would grow to both your Realms, I said I would not faile to observe with what care and sincerity I might: And therefore desired him that I might come to my answer, which I doubted not should be such, as he should rest there∣with satisfied, and I justified. To this, after enquire made of your Majesties health, he answered, That he he could not but conceive great hope of continuance of Amitie betwixt her Ma∣jestie and him, for that you had made choise of one to supplie this place, so well inclined to entertain it, is he hath given him to understand by his Ambassador, that I was; he said therefore that I was very welcome, and should at all times receive at his hands, for your Majesties sake, gracious Audience; for the which I rendred him most humble thanks; and told him, That I hoped that I should do nothing unworthy the good opinion he had conceived of me, And touch∣ing the gracious Audience promised, I doubt not but that his Ministers both heretofore had, and hereafter should receive the like at your Majesties hands. Those ordinarie Ceremonies ended, being requested by the Deputies of the Princes of the Religion, to recommend their cause at this present; for it is generally conceived that the Ambassador sent hither from the Princes of Ger∣many, who besides congratulating the Marriage, recommended the observation of the Edict, which was a thing procured by your Majestie, as with whom you have some secret league, do concure in all things that tend to the advance∣ment of Religion, me thought I could do o lesse but say somwhat in that be∣half, both for that I thought the opinion conceived of the League and concur∣renie worthy the nourishment; as also for that by your Majesties instructions, I am appointed to do any thing that may advance their cause, so farre forth as may stand with your Honour; and to that end your Majestie may judge, whither I kept my self within that compasse. I thought it may dutie to send you the effect of that I said, whereby if I failed in any thing, being by your Majestie admoni∣shed thereof, I may hereafter avoid to offend in the like. I declared unto him, that your Majestie willed me to signifie unto him, that you (as his good and loving sister, who wished unto him all prosperitie, and thinketh none so great as quietness of Government,) do not a little rejoyce to heare of the great care he taketh for the due observation of the Edict lately pu∣blished, as that thing which maketh him honourable, and of great reputation with all Princes, that are not carried away with passion; and that you do not a little wonder to see his Majestie in these young years, able (through his great foresight and wisdome) to quench a fire of so great a Consequence and danger as lately was kindled and dispersed through his whole Realm, and now through Gods goodness, and his good order was at this presence utterly extinguished: an example for the rareness shereof, worthy to be honoured in him, and followed in all other Princes who preserve good Goverment, and the pre∣servation of their Subjects, before tyrannie and destruction of the same. I told him further, that your Majestie hoped that he now findeth a difference between the advise of those Princes his neighbours, that advised him to continue the Waves, to the  of his State, and destruction of his Subjects and ,
and other Princes, that exhorted him to the contrary, who judged alwaies Peace and concord tending most to his safetie and their preservation. And therefore for that experience, now (the best means) hath taught him to know the inconveniences of the one, and the profit of the other, your Majestie doubt∣eth not, but as of his own inclination he hath alwaies bin given rather to peace, to preserve his subjects, (a property of a good and loving Prince) then by sword and violence to consume them (a thing most fit for a Tyrant.) So he will continue the said course that tendeth most to the due execution of his said Edict, the only meanes to preserve quietness that now reigneth in his kingdome; This course unto God so acceptable, for himself so honour∣able, and for his subjects so profitable, if any should seek to impeach, for that it is most commonly seen, that good purposes (aswell in Princes as privat men) have many hinderers, be he either a subject unnaturall or a neigh∣bour evill affected, as envious at his repose: Your Majestie offereth your self with all aid and power to assist him to your uttermost, against all such as shall seek or hinder him in so good and godly a purpose; And as your Majestie resteth herein affected towards him, so you doubt not but God who hath wrought this godly inclina∣tion, will raise up other Princes to assist him, and to be likewise affected towards him in this behalf: And that therefore your Majestie prayeth God to blesse him in this course, and to remove from him all such as shall hinder him in so noble an enterprise; to whom your Majestie wisheth as prosperous successe, as ever Prince had that occupied his place and Seat. To this he answered, that he had right good cause to accept in good part your Majesties advertisement, whom he must needs acknowledge to have al∣waies as his good Sister and as on carefull of his well doing, advised him to that which was best, both for himself and his Country; he willed me therefore to assure your Majestie, that the onely care he presently had, was to enter∣tain the peace, whereof the Q. of Navar and the Princes of the Religion could well be witnesses as also generally the whole Realm; To this I replied that I could not fail to advertise your Majestie both of his well accepting of your advertisment, as also of the good inclination towards the sincere observa∣tion of the Edict, which newes I did assure would be to your Majestie most welcome. After I had thus ended with the King, and finding the Queen his wife ab∣sent (who by report the night past had a fit of a fever) I signified unto him that I had further Commission from your Majestie to present unto her your Letters, and shew unto her notwithstanding you Majestie had made choise of a personage honourable to congratulate their Marriage, whose comming onely staied upon the certainty of his entire, yet your pleasure was that in the mean time I should have also executed the said office, which I would have gladly done, if it might have bin without her trouble, whereunto he an∣swered, that the night passed she had the fit of a fever, which he thought would not long continue. But hoped that within four or five daies she would be in that good state of health, as I might have accesse unto her, unto whom he assured me that both your Majesties Letters, as also the office of congratulation, whereunto I was appointed, should be accepted in very good part, as from their good and loving Sister. This is the effect of my speech unto the King from your Majestie, the which ended, making our reverences we were conducted by Monsieur de
Lassac to the Queen Mother; and because incontinent after dinner, we un∣derstood by Sig. Gndi, some alteration of wonted custom; and that we should for the Solemnitie, visit apart the Queen Mother and her two Sons; we thereupon resolved to keep one course in our several speeches to them, and coming to the Queen, I Sir Henry Norris declaring the qualitie of the Gentleman your Majestie had sent to be presented your Ambassador Re∣sident, his good inclination towards the continuance of the Amitie between your Majestie and the King her Son; she estsoons answered, that she no∣thing doubted of your Majesties good election; she required the Gentleman to come to her. Then I Frncis Walsingham, after due salutation, presented your Majesties Letters, and used to her speeches, as before to the King, concerning your Ma∣jesties charge given me for the entertaining of the good Amitie between the King her Son and you. I also recommended unto her the observation of the Edict, being so requested to do by the Deputies of the Princes of the Religion; as also so to do the like to the Kings Brethren: My speech therefore from your Majestie unto her in this behalf was, that you were glad to hear that she had not only the reputation and honour to be a chief maker of Peace and Union late∣ly accorded, but also to be a chief Conserver of the same; wherefore, as one that wished unto her all honour and reputation, you could but wish unto her preservation in this course, so much to her honour, to the Kings safety, and to the general benefit of his Countrey. Whereunto she answered, that she could not but accept in very good part, both recommending your choice so well inclined to entertain the Amitie between your Majesties, as they were fully assured thereof by their Ambassador Resident in England, doubting not but such effects should follow, as should redound to both your Majesties contentations. Being thus licensed of the Queen, we were streight brought to Monsieur de Anjous Chamber; where I Sir Henry Norris, declaring this Gentleman to be sent by your Majestie to succeed me, was not only commanded by you to entertain the good Amitie, but likewise to bear that respect unto him, and the Duke his Brother, as towards your good Cousins and Parsonages of great ac∣count and value. The Duke thanking me for this my good relation, requested the Gentleman to come unto him. Whereupon I Francis Walsingham, approaching near unto him, making reve∣rence, I shewed him, that you willed me to do your commendations to him, and furtsher to tell him, that your were glad to understand that he did so honor∣ably concur together with the King his Brother in sincere and due observation of the Edict, whereby he did not only get generally with all men the honour to be reputed a Prince of courage in time of war, but also of Councel in time of peace; which courage you doubted not but he would continue, in respect of the good will he bare to the King and his Countrey, and the regard that he had of his own honour. And further, I shewed him that your Majestie gave me command∣ment during my charge here, to behave my self towards him and the King his Brother with that good respect as was fit for me towards your Cousins and Princes of that qualitie that they were of. Whereunto he answered, with great courtesie, that he thanked your Maje∣stie for your commendations, as from a Princess of that honour you are, and whom he so much reverenced. Secondarily, for the good encouragement you gave him to be a good instrument for the observation of the Edict, which thing he was bound to do in respect of his dutie towards the King and his Countrey; so shall your advertisement be of no small force with him in
that behalf. For my self, he told me, that during the time of my service here, I should receive, for your Majesties sake, any favour he could do for me. And af∣ter we had taken our leave of the Duke, anon we were brought to the Duke of Alansons Chamber, to whom, after we had used part of such speeches as we thought aptest for his capacity; and he making such answer as may be ex∣pected of his young years, we departed from him, returning to the place of our retreat, and so that night to Paris. This being as near as our memo∣ries can serve us of all that in this Presenting and Negotiation hath been either delivered by us, or received from them, the which we humbly submittting to your Majesties wisdom and consideration, beseech the Almighty long to preserve you in all prosperity. From Paris the nine and twentieth of Ianuary, 1571. Your Majesties most humble Subjects and Servants, Henry Norris, Francis Walsingham. To the Right Honorable Sir William Cecil, her Majesties prin∣cipal Secretary. SIr, I have received at Sir Henry Norris hands, aswel all such Copies as con∣cern the Scotish affairs, whereby I may be the better directed hereafter how to proceed therein; as also all other instructions as may concern her Maje∣sties affairs. Touching common matters, I refer your Honour to this in∣closed of common Occurrents. The matters of secrecie here, at the least such and so many as I can learn are these: The Pope, the King of Spain, and the rest of the Confederates, upon the doubt of a match between the Queen my Mistress and Monsieur, do seek by what means they can, to disswade and draw him from the same: They offer him to be the head and chief executionar of the League against the Turk, a thing now newly renewed, though long ago meant; vvhich League is thought to stretch to as many as they repute to be Turks (although better Christians then themselves.) The cause of the Cardinal of Lorraigns repair hither from Reyms (as it is thought) vvas to this purpose. The King as lately he uttered to le Sieur , seeming very much to mislike hereof, utterred these vvords unto him, If this matter go forvvard, it behoeth me to make some counter-league. I find the Germans (saith he) vvell-affected tovvards me; and as for the Queen of England, I knovv she hath good cause to mislike of this League, as I my self have; and therefore (I suppose vvould be glad to joyn vvith me. To vvhom the other replied, that he vvas glad that he savv his danger, for that he hoped he vvould provide for the remedy; and vvished his Majestie that he vvould not forstovv the matter. And therefore advised him, for that the Princes Ambassador of Germany vvere not departed, that the mater might be broken to them; vvhich thing the King thought not convenient, for that that he thought their Ansvver vvould be, that they had no Commission to deal in any such matteer; but rather thought it more meet to send one of his ovvn. Then the other told him, that if he did did send any body, it behoved him to make choice of one that vvas no Catholique, for othervvise he should not be to them either grateful or trustful.
Whereupon the King named Monsieur Biron, though he be not thought to be a Hugonot, yet is he not taken to be your enemie. Whereupon the other an∣swered, that he had made choice of a very fit person. After he had made me acquainted with this matter, he asked me how I thought the King should find the Queen affected. I asked him whether he had any Com∣mission so far forth to deal with me. He told me, no; but he desired me to say frankly my opinion how I judged the Queen my Mistress would be inclined. To whom I answered, that for my own private opinion, I thought not but that her Majestie would very well like of it, First, in respect of the common cause of Re∣ligion. Secondly, in respect of the good will she beareth the King, whose friend∣ship, above all other Princes, she doth chiefly embrace. And lastly, in respect of her own safety. And as for my self, for these respects, when the matter shall grow to some further moving, it shall not lack any furtherance that I can give him. The said party, the day before this Message, came unto me, and told me, that he was wished from I. to give me to understand, that Malicorne (who was sent into Spain to congratulate the Marriage, and is lately returned) re∣porteth, that Iulian Remero at his being here, was dispatched from the Court to Ireland, where he was to do some great enterprise. Further, he reported unto me, that the King here is angry, for that his Congratulation was not accepted of the King of Spain. in so good part as he looked for▪ but seemed to take some exception of the Kings Letters, for that certain words of controversie to be usually put in such Letters as passed between them, were now omitted. And further to the increase of this unkindness, the King of Portugal, to whom the Kings Sister was offered in Marriage, sent an answer by Malicorne, that they were both young, and that therefore about eight years hence that mat∣ter might be better talked of; which disdainful answer, is accepted here in very ill part, and is thought not to be done, without the counsel of Spain. And amongst all others, none taketh the matter more grievously then Queen Mother, who thinketh her self not a little injured for the late friendship she hath professed to Spain. He forgot not to renew the speech that passed between us touching the League, desiring me to use some means to feel how her Majestie is inclined; which I promised to do. And therefore I shall desire you to move her Maje∣stie in that behalf, that I may receive some direction how to proceed therein. And so leaving further to trouble your honor at this present, I most humbly take leave. From Paris the 28 of Ianuary, 1571. Your Honours to Command. Fr. Walsingham. The Lord Seton, who lately came out of Flanders to demand succour (as I am informed) is deferred over for answer untill the Entry be past. He eth here, as I am given further to understand, with good store of Horse and Armour, and very well furnished with money.
To the Right Honorable Sir William Cecill, her Majesties Princi∣pal Secretary. SIr, after the closing up of my Letters, I was certified by a Gentleman that came presently from the Court, that the King is grown very sick of a burning Ague; whereupon it is thought, that the time appointed for the entry should be put over until after Easter. I will seek by what means I can for the certain∣tie, and so afterwards advertise you. So leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humblie take my leave. From Paris the 28 of Ianuary, Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. RIght Honourable, and my very good Lord, touching the present state of France I refer you to the common Occurrents here inclosed, and leave un∣to you by them to judge what likelihood there is of continuance of the Peace lately here amongst them accorded. The best ground of continuance that I can learn, by those that can best judge, is the Kings own inclination, which is thought sincerely to be bent that way. Touching his affection towards the Queen my Mistress, if outward entertain∣ment may be a just argument of inward affection, then surely there is great likeli∣hood of continuance of Amitie and Concord. For first, I was in all those places where the King had Governors, very well received. Then at the time when Sir Henry Norris and I were appointed to have access to the Court for my present∣ment (which was at Madrill) we were invited to dinner presently upon our Arri∣val there; Laufay by the Kings appointment received us, and brought us to the place where our dinner was prepared, where we lacked no store of good meat; immediately after dinner, Chevaleir Thaers, sent by the King, came and told us, that he was readie to give us audience; to whom we repaired, and were most gra∣ciously received at his hands, who made great demonstration, by outward speech and countenance of great good will towards the Queen my Mistress. Besides my ordinarie speeches, concerning her Majesties charge, to behave my self in such sort as might tend to the best continuance of Amitie between their Majesties, I recommended the Peace, being so requested by the Deputies of those of the Religion, which he seemed to accept in very good part. Having thus ended with his Majestie, finding the new Q. not there, for that it was given out she was sick of a fever. I declared unto him, that I had Com∣mission from the Queens Majestie, to have presented unto her her Majesties Let∣ters; as also to have used some office of Congratulation of the late Marriage be∣tween them; notwithstanding that her Majestie had made choice of a Personage of calling honourable, to do that office, whose coming stayeth only upon the certaintie of the knowledge of his Majesties entry; for that by the Q. Majestie my Mistress, he is appointed to honour the same. The King alledged sickness for excuse, and told me, that there should be another time appointed me, for the execution of her Majesties Commission in that behalf; which both of him and her could not but be accepted in as good part as it was meant. Having thus ended with the King; whereas before it was customably to be
found (as I learned by Sir Henry Norris) to have present at the Audience both Queen Mother and the Kings Brethren in place with the King, we found now each of them to keep their several Estate, and so were driven to repair unto them all severally to their Chambers; and though from her Majestie I had no further Commission to have done any Message, but to the King, and unto the two Queens, yet for that at my last being there, exception was taken at me, for omitting my dutie to Monsieur; and besides, being requested by the Depu∣ties of the Religion, to recommend the observation of the Edict unto them severally; therefore after access had to Queen Mother, my Letters being delivered and certain ordinary speeches used, with the recommendation of those of the Re∣ligion, I repaired to Monsieur, who very courteously, and with good counte∣nance received me. To whom my speech from her Majestie was, that she willed me to present unto him her commendations; and further to say unto him, that she was glad to understand that he did concur together with the King, in that good and honourable meaning of the observation of the Edict, whereby he did not only win generally the reputation and honour to be thought a Prince of courage in time of War, but also of Councel in time of Peace; which courage she doubted not but that he would continue, in respect of the good will he bear∣eth to the King and his Countrey, and the regard he had to his own honour. Whereunto he answered, with great courtesie, that he thanked her Majestie, First, for her commendations, as from a Princess of honour that she was, and whom he so much reverenced. Secondarily, for the good encouragement that she gave him to be a good instrument for the observation of the Edict; which thing, as he was bound to do, in respect of his Duty towards the King and his Countrey, so should her Majesties advertisement be of no small force with him in that behalf. For my self, he told me, that during my service here, I should receive, for her Majesties sake, any favour that he could shew me. Having thus done, I repaired to his Brother, to whom I used, besides Commendations, some short Speech in recommendations of the Edict, for man∣ners sake. I do rather, my very good Lord, dwell upon those particularities, in respect of your Lordships request. In observing Monsieur, I had at this present, by reason the place served very well for the purpose, good occasion to view him; in stature, by judgement of others that viewed us talking together, he was esteemed three fingers higher then my self, in complexion somewhat sallow, his bodie of very good shape, his leg long and small, but reasonably well proportioned; what helps he had to supply any defects of nature, I know not: touching the health of his person, I find the opinion diverse, as I know not what to credit; and for my own part, I forbear to be over curious in the search threof, for divers respects; if all be so well, as outwardlie it sheweth, then is he of bodie sound enough. And yet at this present, I did not finde him so well coloured, as I esteemed him to be at my last being here. Since my Arrival here, there hath been great search made by divers means, how I am inclined to Monsieurs attempt. My general answer is, that I left my private passions behind me, and do here submit my self to the passions of my Prince, to execute whatsoever she shall command me, as precisely as I may, not presuming to do any thing further then I shall be commanded. And as for her marriage, whensoever it shall please God to incline her to that Change, I should forget my dutie towards her and my Countrey, if I should not like very well thereof, though my present calling requiret me to do no more neither in that
nor in any other thing further forth then I am prescribed. This answer seemeth very well to satisfie those that would further this matter, for that I vvas fore∣judged to be a very passionate Enemy. Touching the pictures your Lordship desired, they can by no means be gotten, for no man may make any counterfeit of the King or his Brother, vvithout license; if he do, the punishment is great. Thus having imparted to your Honour that which at this present I thought worthy the advertisement, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the 28 of Ianuary, 1571. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honorable Sir Walter Mildmay of her Majesties Privy Councel. SIr, I most humbly thank you for your favour promised me, by your Letters of the 16 of this Moneth, touching my allowance for transportation. Surely, Sir, I find my charges daily increase, through the extream prises of things here. The expences of my horses at this instant grow to 4 l. the day, and yet is my daily diet (through the meaness thereof) not such as the place I supply requireth. True it is, the entry causeth the dearth to be so great and some hope there is, that hereafter things will be more reasonable; but in the mean time▪ I find the bur∣then over heavie; and when things shall be best cheap, yet shall I find it heavie enough. But herewith I leave further to trouble you at this instant. The 25 of this instant moneth, I was presented unto the King at Madrill, where he now presently lieth, being received by him with great courtesie and favour, as also by his Mother and Brethren. I leave, Sir, to you to gess the cause of this kind∣ness; and yet I should do Monsieur de la Motte Ambassador with her Majestie, great wrong, if I should not acknowledge some part of this good entertainment, to proceed from the good report he hath made of me, as one that will do what li∣eth in me to entertain the Peace. Touching the state of things here, I refer you to this inclosed Note of Oc∣currents; and though they seem to give some doubt of the Kings sincerity, yet surely, Sir, they that know him throughly, are of opinion, that if the matters grow to new troubles, he will incline to those of the Religion. This Oration, Sir, whereof I send you a Copie, pronounced and delivered to him, and to the Ambassador of the Princes of Germany, hath put him in some good courage; whereas before, by the faction of the Guises, he was put in great fear of the Catholicks, aswel Forraign as at home. Thus, Sir, you see, for that he is not settled in Religion, how he is carried away with wordly respects, a com∣mon misery to those of his Calling. God make those of his calling more truly Religious then we are: To whose tuition I most humbly take my leave, and com∣mit you to God. At Paris the 27 of Ianuary, 1571. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham. Sir, I beseech you, when you have read and perused this Oration, that then it would please you to send the same to Sir N. Thorckmorton.
To the Right Honourable Sir William Cecill, her Majesties princi∣pal Secretary. SIr, it may please you to be advertised, that the last of Ianuary, I received a Letter from my Lord of Buckhurst by one Hollinshed, wherein he gave me his notice of proceedings onward on his journey hithervvard. Whereupon I sent forth M. Beal to the Court, being still at Madrill, to advertise the King and Queen Mother from me. First, that the said Lord of Buckhurst, who was deputed from the Queen my Mistress to Congratulate his Marriage, had sent over thirty of his Train, and that he himself about the first of this moneth, was minded to be at Dover, there to imbark himself and the residue of his Com∣pany. Secondarily, for that I heard the Queens Majestie was sick, whereby it was doubtful when she should be in state able, without her trouble, or some peril, to give the said Lord Buckhurst access unto her, to execute his charge from the Queens Majestie, my Mistress; that therefore I desired to know of his Majestie, and the Queen his Mother, whether there were any hope of her Majesties speedy recovery, whereby the said Nobleman may proceed in his journey, to accomplish his said charge; or otherwise, whether I might not with his advice and favour, write unto the said Nobleman some Letters of stay or return, if he were passed the sea, or onward his voyage, until such time as he should be hereafter further advertised of her Majesties speedy recovery. In answer whereof, I received this inclosed from Secretary▪ Pynart; and for that Mr. Beal, whom he made privy to his Letter, did not see his answer di∣rectly touching that point, which concerned his access to the Queen, he de∣sired to know what was the Kings mind in that behalf. To whom he an∣swered, for that it was doubtfull by reason of the Queens sickness, whether the Lord of Buckhurst, should have any access unto her (the only stay of her Entry and Coronation) therefore the King referreth it to my Lords own judgement, whether he will come now, or stay until the other Entry. I have made my Lord privy of my proceedings herein; as also, what answer I re∣ceived from the King, referring him to do therein, as his Instructions should best direct him. I have made him also acquainted with my private opiion in this behalf; which is, if her Majesties direction may bear it, rather to proceed then otherwise: First, in respect his coming now will be here accepted in as good part as at any time hereafter. Secondarily, in respect of her Majesties charges and his own. Thirdly, in respect that the Governour of Picardie Monsieur de Pane, and other Gentlemen, who are appointed to repair to to Bullen to receive him, should lose their labour, if he should not proceed forward. And as touching the Queens sickness, whereby his access unto her, to con∣gratulate the Marriage growth doubtful (judged here the chief cause of her repair hither) I do not think the contrary, but that her Majesties honourable and good meaning will be accepted in as good part, as if by access unto her he might have executed the same, for that the let and impediment groweth only from God; and for confirmation thereof, there was lately sent an Am∣bassador from Luca, to execute the like office, who by reason of her sickness could have no access, and so was driven to deliver over his Message to the King, which was accepted at his hands very graciously, and so was dismissed, as I heard, rewarded with a very honourable Present. Thus having been
over long in this behalf, I leave further to trouble your Honour, and most hum∣bly take my leave. From Paris the first of February, 1571. The Copy of Secretary Pynarts Letter. MOnsieur je vous a envoye la pasporte que ce porter m' ay demandé de vostre parte. Et j'ay faict entendre a leur Majestes conme vous m' avez mande que le my Lord de Buckhurst devoit arriver au jourdy à Doure, & que desia a∣cuns des gentlehommes de sa troupe estoient passes à Bullougne, & que vous desires d' entendre si les dictes Majesties auroient agreable que le dit Seigneur my Lord, & sa troupe se diminast & que ie vous ferois plasir de vous mander quand feroit l' Entrée, Surquoy les dictes Majesties m'ont faict dire que iceluy. Sr my Lord de Buckhurst & sa dicte troupe seront les tresbiens venus & fort voluntiers venus & receus, mais que la maladie de la Royne avoit esté cause que l'on auise que le Roy seulement feroit sans grand ceremonie son entrée le primier dimanche de Quaresme prochaine, & que le sacre de la dicte Dame Royne & son entrée estoient remis à une autre fois, a cause de sa dicte maladie, dont ie n'ay voulu faillir de vous ad∣vertir, Et saluer pour la fin de ceste-cy vre bonne grace de mes bien humbles recom∣mendations, priant dieu Monsieur vous doner le bon jour. An Chasteau Boulloigne le primier de feuriere, 1571. Vre bien humble avous faire service Pynart. To the Right Honourable Sir Henry Norris and Mr. Francis Walsingham, Ambassadors for the Queens Majesties in France, or to either of them. I Am presently, as this bearer can inform you, unable to regard any matter, and therefore excusable to you both, though I write not any longer Let∣ter, this that I write is in my bed, and therefore unperfect of neces∣sitie. Upon a Letter of yours, Sir Henry Norris sent to me last by Nanfat, which I shewed to her Majestie, touching the advertisement that you had of the French attempts in Ireland. Although her Majestie understood the like from Ireland, and hopeth, when the season of the year shall mend, the same shall be remedied; yet she complaineth hereof to the French Ambassador, requiring to let the King understand that such kind of obliquites do not ac∣cord with the offers of the Kings Amitie, so often by him the Ambassador remembred. And in like manner, her Majestie would that the King should be enformed by you both, if your commoditie may serve, to negotiate joyntly, or else by you Mr. Walsingham, if you be entred into your charge, requiring the King, that her Majestie may know his intention herein: so, as if those attempts be not speedily redressed and stayed by his Authoritie, and according to his friend∣ship, that then her Majestie may otherwise provide for the remedie, where∣of cannot but follow such inconveniences as shall not be meet for their Amities.
You shall not make the matter dangerous of it self, but onely the attempts of such as are his ordinary Subjects do shew a contrary effect of that which it hath pleased the King to offer to her Majestie, and whereof her Majestie took great comfort. I am utterly tired with this writing, and am forced to remit the rest to this bearer. In my bed, at my house of Westminster the 26 of Ianuary 1571. Your assured loving friend at command, William Cecil. Totle Right Honourable Sir William Cecil, her Majesties principall Secretary. SIr, the third of this moneth I received a Letter of yours, directed to Sir Henry Norris and to me; and after that I was entred into my charge, and Sir Henry Norris had taken his leave of the King, I as a thing pertaining to my charge, forthwith sent to the Court for Audience, which is appointed me the 6 of this present; so soon as I shall receive the Kings answer to the message I shall do unto him in her Majesties name, I shall not fail with speed to advertise. If la Roches attempt be done with his privity, as in reason hardly me thinketh, otherwise it nothing agreeth to the great profession of good will he maketh here unto us her Majestities ministers; Which to the outward shevv is done in that sincerity, as he that trusteth least, may right ea∣sely thereby be deceived. And yet vvhen I consider hovv he is not fully re∣stored to the reputation of a King, and that daily many disorders of con∣tempts are here committed, I see some cause of stay in condemning, but hereof by his ansvver, or at least, by execution of that vvhich he shall promise, her Majestie shall—vvhether invvard meaning, or outvvard profession doe agree. I vvas right sorry to understand that the gout hath of late newly assailed you, after so small time of respit: Surely, Sir, seeing that both God and Nature doe so require, you must with importunacie desire her Majesty so to use your service, as you may long serve; of whose lack I pray God she may never have tryall. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour, beseeching him to send you your health, and continuance of the same. I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the third of February 1571. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham. To my very loving friend Mr. Francis Walsingham, Ambassador Resident for the Q. Majesty in France. MAster Walsingham, I thank you for your Letters vvritten at Bullen I doe make no lesse accompt of your good vvill indeed, then you
have offered and assure your self to find to my power as much Friendship at my hands as at any mans hands in England. We have no cause of new matters to write unto you▪ here hath bin and is much speech of the man and matter I talked with you of in my closet at Hampton Court, as yet there is no over∣ture made directly of that side, and till then little will be said unto it; in the mean I pray you inform your self throughly of them, and let me hear some pec of your opinion of them; I confesse our estate requireth a match, but God send us a good one and meet for all parties. My Lord of Buckhurst will set forward in four or five daies after this date: so my good Francis farewell, in some hast this 16 of Ianuary 1571. Your assured Friend Robert Leicester. To the right Honourable my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. YOur Lordships of the 25 of Ianuary, I received the third of February, by the which I perceive the matter your Lordship and I talked of hath bred some speech there with you, and here the matter passeth not in great silence, but is taken to be much more forward then I percieve it is, I meane amongst the Common sort: so far as I can learn, there will be no further overture of this matter then alreadie is, for here they stand upon the repu∣tation, and therefore would be loth to move speech unlesse they were in full hope to speed; The experience of others that have heretofore attempted like matter, maketh them more doubtfull how to proceed; In my poore opinion the Commodities or discommodities of taking or refusing may ea∣sily be seen; and therefore when they are once vveighed, a speedie resolution vvere best to cut off many inconveniences that delay of time commonly bringeth. By my last of the 27 of Ianuary I made your Lordship acquain∣ted vvith my opinion so farre forth as I could enform my self, using such cir∣cumspections in that behalf as is fit for me, considering the jealousie already conceived of me: But vvhen I shall be further enformed, I vvill not fail further to advertise your Lordship. And so for this time having no leisure to vvrite any more at large, I most humblie take my leave, from Paris the third of February 1571. Your Honours to command Fr. Walsingham. To the right Honourable, Sir William Cecil her Mejesties principall Secretarie. SIr, it may please you to advertise her Majestie, that before I had accesse un∣to the King, I sought by vvhat means I could to be informed of the Irish attempts by those of this country. And being given to understand that de la Roch, vvho as I learned by Rogers, vvas the partie that should lead the Souldiers that made the invasion there, vvas here in this Tovvn; I found the means to cause Monsiuer Brickmals, for that he said De la Roch had served under him, to
deal with him, and to aske him, whether he had not bin in Ireland; who answer∣ed, he had not bin there, but in such cold terms he denied it, as he gathered by divers circumstances, and his manner of speech, that true it was he had bin there, which thing he seemed to be loth to affirme, for that (he said) he was well assured that whosoever they were that dealt in the enterprise, the King would disavow them. Hereupon at the time of my accesse, which was the 6 of Febr. at the Car∣dinall of Burbons Lodging in Paris, I thought good to temper my speech accor∣dingly in such mile sort using this speech following: I told him after ordinary commendations done, that though the Q. Majesty my Mistress, was advertised from her Viceroy of Ireland, That one de la Roch his Subject, had landed certain men there, who confederated with certain Rebells in that Island, did commit (by way of hostility) certain out-rages, not answerable to the good Amitie that rested between their Majesties. Notwithstanding her Majestie was so well perswaded of his great good will and sincere affections to∣wards her Majestie; whereof she had received by his Ambassador from him so earnest assurance and protestation, that she could not but do him wrong to think that this disoder should proceed from him, but rather from some evill Minister of his, such as do mislike and envie the good Amitie that presently resteth between them: And therfore so doubted not, but that his Majestie as her good Bro∣ther, unto this good advertisement given, would in such sort extend his Authority for the redresse of this inconvenience, as she might have just cause to think, that the new and earnest lately professed friendship was grounded on sincerity, which could not but bring forth fruits answerable to the said profession. To this in few words he answered, That of his faith he knew of no such matter, and there∣fore willed me to give him the names of all such as I could learn any waies of∣fendors in that behalf; and that he would so punish them, as that her Majestie his good Sister should well prceive what good accompt he made of her friendship. After I had thus ended with him, I repaired to the Q. Mother, both for that she ruleth all here, as also, for that the rest of the Ambassadors here observe the same course, and declared unto her as unto the King, that it was her Majesties pleasure that I should so do; requiring her Majesties name, to be a good mean to avoid all such offences as may any way impeach the good Amitie that presently is between the King her son, and the Q. Majestie my Mistris. I received at her hands for an∣swer, divers good words of assurance and continuance of Amitie, which she pro∣mised to further so much as lay in her power, and that she found the King her Son so well inclined thereto as the Q. my Mistris might full well assure her self, that whosoever should go about to disturbe the same, should receive such punishment, as should be to the Q. my Mistris satisfactions. I thanked her in her Majesties name, and shewed her, that I would not fail to make report unto the Q. my Mi∣stris of this her good affection towards her. Wherefore though herefore she had received good assurance, yet that friendship vvas of that Nature as it is alvvaies desired to be entertained vvith the exercise of mutuall good offices. This Sir, vvas the effect of the speech that passed betvveen the Kings Majesty, Q. Mother, and me, at this present accesse. Novv to the end that there may be some triall vvhether these words were as well meant as they were uttered, I have made choise of one to send to Britain, to search out the names of the offenders, to the end I may present them unto the King, to see whether he will be as good as his word in punishing of them; further by him, that I said I meant to take order there, to be advertised from time to time from thence of such pre∣parations as may any vvay reach to any of her Majesties Dominions, vvhich I see a thing very needfull, because this Tovvn is full of brutes. As I vvas in vvriting, I vvas certified by one, from vvhom my Predecessor Sir Henry Nrris
had his best intelligence, who repaired secretly unto me, and told me this news following. How that the enterprise of Ireland is of great consequency and danger, where∣of though he thought the King was not privie, yet he did assure me that the fa∣ction of Gise were great dealers in it. Further he said, that the Popes Nuntio labored what he might to draw Mon∣sieur into the practise, promising him for the maintenance thereof, to be paid in Paris 100000 for his encouragement; he made no difficulty to bring the said enterprise to passe, in respect of the great intelligence that they have both in England and Ireland; and that the same being won, it would be an easie step to a step of more consequence, meaning England. Lastly, he shewed me, that if he would not accept this enterprise, yet notwith∣standing it was resolved it should go forward, and that the bills of credit for the said some of 100000 are already here; if this advertisement prove as true, as o∣thers that heretofore have bin given by him to my Predecessor, then are they not to be neglected. By another means I was advertised, that Stewkley in Spain presented an in∣strument unto the King there, not onely subscribed with the names of the most part of the Irish Noblity, but also the names of divers in England of good qua∣lity, ready to be at his devotion; I learned further, that of late, fithence the Lord Setons comming hither, there hath bin some greater conference between the Spanish Ambassador, and the Ambassador of Scotland. Further I learned, that the greater part of those that are landed in Ireland, were Levied by the Earle of Argile in the King of Spains name, within the said Earles Government, being promised pay by the said King of Spains Ministers; they were imbarked at the Mule, or streight of Kenutire. One Skeldon, an ordinary servant of the Q. of Scots, arrived lately here with Letters of some importance, as it is thought, for that oftentimes he hath had accesse to the Court. Thus having made your Honour privy of all such things as I could learne, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the 8 of Febr. 1571. To the Right Honourable Sir William Cecil, her Majesties principall Secretary. SIr, I thought good to make you privie to this private Letter, directed privatly to your self, of certain talke passed between the Queens Mother and me, which I desired her by protestation that she should receive at my hands, as from a private person, not having commission as a publike person to say any more then that which concerned le Roches attempt; I protested unto her, that the onely mark that I would shoot at, during my service here, should be to continue so much as might lie in so mean a Minister, good Amitie between the two Crowns as a thing profitable unto them both. And therefore I desired her Majesty, first to consider how necessary it was for the safety of both Realms, to have a firm league concluded between the two Princes; Then to weigh how fit this present was for the same. Touching the first point, I shewed her, that though France enjoyed now through Gods great goodness a generall peace with all his neighbours, yet that it should so continue it was not to be looked for; And that therefore in time of peace, politique Princes were not unmindfull, that after peace wars commonly follow, for that the earth is subject to alterations. In which consideration, they commonly weigh the neighbours, who are by consequence of reason likest to
attempt any thing against them, vvhich they see evidently to be that Prince that is nearest by situation, and in forces mightiest; against vvhom, besides ordinary forces, vvhich they have alvvaies prepared, they seek to strengthen themselves, and the Princes confederats. Novv if your Majesty by this measure of mightiness and nearness measure your neighbours; you shall then find, that it is England, whose conderatie is chiefly to be desired: he that thinketh himself mightiest will be well advised before he deal with each of you. Touching the other point▪ I told her, that I thought this time most fit; first, for that there was in both Princes a like affection, being both of their own pro∣per inclinations peaceably inclined, with conformity of disposition, as one of the best knots of assured friendship. Then, because there reigneth some unkindness between other  neighbours, with whom her Predecessors heretofore had both long and good unity. These circumstances well weighed, I concluded with her, that the time was now fit, and the thing it self most fit to be prosecuted; and that her Majesty was most fit to bring the same to good effect, as she in whom the King (as he had just cause so to do) reposed the direction of his whole Government. To this she replied, That first at my hands, both the King and she did look for nothing else but good offices, tending to the maintenance of good Amity. Secondarily, that as at present they enjoyed peace, so they had good hope of the maintenance of the same generally with all their neighbours. Lastly, that she hoped that the Amity between the Q. my Mistris, was of all parties very sin∣cerely meant. Notwithstanding, if she should desire to enter into some streigh∣ter league; she was of opinion nothing would be more gratefull to the King. To this I answered, that I was glad to receive at her hands so good hope of the Kings inclination in that behalf. This in effect was that, that passed between her Majesty and me. The reasons that moved me to use this speech were these: first, for that Spain seemeth not to be at this present very well inclined towards the Q. my Mistris. Secondarily, for that the King hath no great liking of Spain, as before advertised. Lastly, for that I was advertised, how that the Admirall had advised lately the King and Q. Mother by his Letters, to seek to strengthen himself by confederacy with the Princes of Germany, and the Q. Majesty my Mistris. Sir, having now made you acquainted with my speech, as also with the reasons that moved me thereto, I shall most humblie desire you according to your pro∣mise to advertise me of my errors either in this or otherwise in this my present service, which you shall perceive that I will accept in so good part, as you shall think your advise well bestowed, and thereby to be better able to serve her Ma∣jestie with more skill. In my other Letters, as that vvhich vvas to be shevved to her Majestie, I for∣beare to set dovvn the Popes Nuntios persvvasions he used tovvards a disswading Monsieur from the Q. vvhich were, First she was an Heretique, Secondarily that she was old, by whom he could scarse hope after issue; And lastly that England, which he said he was well assured, vvas the mark he chiefly shot at, might be at∣chieved, and that right easily by svvord to his great Honour, and lesse inconve∣nience, then making so unfit a match. Thus you see Sir hovv they make the accompt vvithout their host; I hope they shall have more vvill then povver to hurt us, and that God vvill still reserve our poore Country for a sanctuary for his poor persecuted flock. To vvhose tuition I commit you, most humbly taking my leave. From Paris the 8 of Febr. 1571.
To the Right Honourable my very good Lord the Earle of Leicester. SIthence I last wrote unto your Lordship, which was the third of this moneth, I have learned nothing fit for your knowledge, saving of some practise that concerneth Ireland, wherein I referre your Lordship to Mr. Secretaries Letters. Touching the other matter, they think here you do but dally, and though no overture hath bin made, notwithstanding I find this already hath bin done un∣derhand, if the matter go not forward, will breed some disdaine, for that they take their peny to be so good silver, as they think them evill used, if it may not passe as current. To the end that there may grow lesse harm thereof (as some there must needs) your Lordship shall do well to hasten it to some  with what speed you may, which I pray God may be as good as ever happened in like case. And so leaving further to trouble your Lordship at this present, I most humbly take my leave, committing you to his protection. From Paris 8 February. Your Lordships to command Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable Sir Walter Mildmay, one of her Majesties, privy Counsell. SIr, I understand by my servant Mills who followeth my suite, how it hath pleased you of late both to recomend the same unto Mr. Secretarie, as also to the B. of London, so that the hinderance I was like to receive by Mr. Haddo's death, is now, Sir, by your good means remedied, whereby I hope my cause will grow both to a speedy and a good end. Sithence I last wrote to you, there hath faln out here no alteration, saving that the entrie which should have bin performed with preat solemnitie, is now like to go forward the 6 of this next moneth, being so published with the sound of the Trumpet, without any great pompe of Ceremonies, by reason of the new Queens sickness, who is now in way of recovery. Of late by her Majesties commandment, I dealt with the King about de la Roches attempt in Ireland, who denieth that ever he was acquainted with the matter; and therefore promiseth to see him or any other that hath dealt in that behalf punished, whensoever I shall enforme him of their names, if the redresse hereof fall out to be better then heretofore was wont to be yielded by his pre∣decessors of like promises, in like cases, it will be but all in words, for such is the expedition of this Court, in promise speedy, in performing slow. At this time surely there are great practises in hand for the invasion of Ireland, wherein the Pope and Spain joyn: And as for the Cardinall de Lorrain, as he may may under∣hand, he faileth not to further the same to his uttermost. I have herein advertised her Majesty what I can learn in that behalf, hoping that there will be good eye had thereto in time, least Ireland, through too much se∣curetie, be neglected, as Callis was. And so leaving further to trouble your Ho∣nour at this present, with my humble commendations to my Lady, I commit you to Gods protection. From Paris the 8 of Febr. 1571.
To the right Honourable Mr. Francis Walsingham, Ambassadr Resident for the Q. Majestie of England. SIr, my Lord of Rutland hath such confidence in your friendship as I think it superfluous otherwise therein then to thank you for the good offers you made him at your departure, whereof he hath made to me on your behalf very good report. In my opinion you shall do his Lordship a great pleasure to take occasion to present him to the King as soon as you may, that he may be known before my Lord of Burkhrst comming. In expressing of his linage you may boldly affirme him to be a kin to the Q. Majestie both by King Henry the eight her Father, and also by the Q. Mother, and he is of the blood Royall in the same degree that my Lord of Huntingdon is, the difference being onely that my Lord of Huntingdon is of a Brother of King Edward the 4. and my Lord Rutland of the Sster of the same King, and indeed thereby he is as near in blood, though further in danger of fortunes wheel, which is busie with carriage of Kings Crowns to and fro. I am not able to write any more by weakness of my bodie presently tormen∣ted with pain, from my house at Westminster the 28 Ianuary 1571. Yours assuredly, William Cecil. To the right Honourable Sir William Cecil, her Majesties principal Secretary. SIr, any that you shall at any time recommend, cannot but receive at my hands any favour, or friendship that I can shew them; But my Lord of Rutland, who besides your commendations and his own calling hath so many good parts in himself that do recommend him, as he may well assure himself of any honour, or aid that I can procure him; Sithence my last which were dated the 8 of this moneth, I have learned nothing to any great purpose. The complaints of those of the Religion have here but a very deaf eare given unto them: The King committeth them over to the Q. his Mother, and to Monsieur his Brother, being himself altogether given to pleasure. To our trusty and welbeloved Francis Walsingham, Esq our Ambassador Resident with the French King. ELIZABETH R. TRusty and welbeloved we greet you well, we have received Letters jointly from Sir Henry Norris our late Ambassador and you, dated the 29 of the last moneth, by the which we perceive in what sort you were presented to the King there by Sir Henry Norris, as to remain our Ambassador. And in what sort you did orderly proceed in declaration of our good will to continue the good Amitie with the King, and to appoint you as minister for the same, wherein we do not mislike of such speech as by our Letter appeared to us, you used to the King to comfort him in the maintenance and continuance of the inward peace of his Realm, according to the benefit of his Edict lately granted to his Subjects for the matter of Religion We have also seen and considerd another matter of
some weight, whereof you willed our Secretary by your private Letters to him to advertise us, concerning some motion made unto you by le Sieurs de upon certain conferences had by the King with him, and therein we find that which you answered to the said Sir, J. A. to be discreet and agreable to our mind, and and if you shall find any likelihood that such a matter may be further dealt in, and that it be meant bona fide to proceed further, we would have you not only as of your self, but as occasion shall be given to further it in our name, for we do hold it so good and beneficiall, as we rather doubt that some impediment may grow to hinder the successe thereof then of any speedie furtherance: And there∣fore you shall do well to look well into the matter what likelihood there may be to have it go forward before you discover our intention to the King, otherwise then as you find necessary to provoke him thereto. By some other your Letters, we perceive that the King there is well content that the Lord of Buckhurst shall come forward notwithstanding the sickness of the Q. and so we would have him proceed notwithstanding the same. After we had caused thus much to be written hereof, we thought good to will you to take some occasion of speech with the King of Spains Ambassador there Resident; and first to let him understand, that now about the tenth of this moneth we have here received a Letter from the Duke of Alva, signifying thereby to us that the matter vvhich he had to impart to us from the King his Master, vvas only an offer from the said King to do any good office that in him might lie to pro∣cure some good end of the cause betvvixt us and the Q. of Scots, vvithout any particular respect to himself▪ but only for the common quietness of us both, and of our Countries. And in this behalf the Duke requireth to understand, in what sort we will have the King to deal, assuring us of the said Kings earnest intention to pleasure us in any thing he may. Of thus much you shall say, vve thought good to advertise the Ambassador, and to let him understand, that vve do very thankfully accept the Kings offer, and would be glad to take the good vvill and friendship, if there vvere any cause thereof in this office, as at this time there is not; for he shall understand, that we have already entred so far into a treatie with the Q. of Scots for all causes and differences betwixt us and her, as there remaineth nothing of any great value or difference betwixt us, so as the finall ending thereof resteth upon the execution of the matters accorded, and some further treatie remaineth now to compound certain matters betwixt her and her Subjects; for which purpose there be commissioners already come hither from her, and a part of the Nobility of Scotland; and such as are to come as Commissio∣ners from the other part, are (as we think) on their journey hitherward. We have also by these last Letters of the Duke in expresse words, that he himself is earnestly disposed to do any thing that may maintain the Amitie that is betwixt the King and us, and particularly that he hath accorded to have resti∣tution made, as our Merchants on both sides have thought it meet, and mean∣eth to send over some speciall person of credit to explain some small differences rising thereof, and to put the whole in execution. These kinds of dealings and offices you may say are very agreeable unto us, who by many means made it ap∣peare, that the late differences have not grown of us, nor as we think) of the Kings own disposition, but by untowardness of ministers; and now whilest we are well content therevvith, vve are sorry to think that certain reports vvhich vve heare of Spain should be true, either in whole, or in part; and as vve vvould be gladest they vvere false, so are vve desirous that vve might knovv them certainly from the King to be false And you shall say, because vve have seen some proof of that Ambassadors good disposition to the Amitie betvvixt the Kings his Master and us, vvherin he is much to be commended, and that he may vvith more expedi∣tion
and readiness by the way of France, certifie the King, and procure some Answer, we have heard and known it to be true, that certain savage Rebels, be∣ing men of no value, had fled out of our Realm of Ireland into Spain, and to co∣ver their lewdness, and to procure both relief for themselves, and such like as they be in Ireland, they do pretend their departure out of the Realm for matter of Re∣ligion; when indeed they be neither of one nor other Religion, but given to beastu∣allity, and yet have they wit enough to shew hypocrisie for their purpose. Si∣thence the first arrival of these, we know also, that an Englishman, a Subject of ours, namely, Stewkley, not unknown, as we think, for his former prodi∣gal life both in Spain and other places; and notwithstanding great favours shew∣ed unto him divers times, upon hope of amendment, and some tokens of his re∣pentance, he did this last summer (pretending to come out of Ireland hither, sud∣denly turn his course into Spain) and as we hear, hath light into the company of the aforesaid Fugitives and Rebels; pretending by his superfluous expences, which is altogether of other mens goods, to be a person of some quality and estimation, and able to do some great thing in Ireland, whereas, indeed, he hath not the value of a Marmaduc in land or livelihood, he hath so solicited the King, or some about him, with vain motions, as it is by him bruted, and other∣wise also with some credit reported unto us, which yet we do not believe, that the K. will send a Captain of his, such a one as Iulian Romero, or such like, with a num∣ber of Souldiers into Ireland, to follow some vain device of those Rebels; whereof we cannot but marvel that the King, or any of his Councel, being of experience, can so lightly give any credit to such a companion as Stewkley is, which could never live long in any quiet condition at home; of whom we are not disposed to say much, because we cannot say any good of him: But may say, it shall be sufficient that his conditions may be only enquired of; and then we doubt not, whosoever shall know them, will take heed how to adventure any thing with him. And yet whatsoever it is, we cannot but find it strange, that he or any such Fugitives, moving matters of attempt as Rebels, either should be allowed or hearkned un∣to: For whatsoever hath been conceived that any person of any degree, being the King of Spains Subject, coming into our Realm of late years, as many have done for safety of their lives, for matter of their consciences (as we alwaies under∣stood) yet we do assure by our Honour, that there was never person of any de∣gree, that did motion unto us any matter offensive to the King or his Low-Coun∣treys, when opportunity served for such purposes, that was ever allowed by us, or any such motion, or that ever received reward or comfort therein, but was re∣jected; such hath been our sincerity in these times, not to give any comfort to the hurt of the King, or of his Countreys. And now if these reports which we hear should be true, we might think our selves evilly recompenced, and should be provoked for our defence to use such means, as otherwise of our selves we did never allow or like: And so we trust in reason the Ambassador himself might think, and—the conservation of the Amity betwixt the King and us, and the restitution of the former—and Trade betwixt our Countreys and Subjects; so we pray him to solicite some Answer in this case. For whilest we should remain in doubt hereof, we cannot but foresee, and to procure how to impeach any such attempts; wherein would appear that whereof we shall be sure that we have some cause to doubt of the Kings good will. Thus you see how we mean to have, by this occasion, some knowledge (if it may be) of the Kings intention, although we meant not to omit otherway to come to the truth hereof, doubting not but you will also use such good means as you can to discover the truth, and not forget the former matter, concerning that which certain of the French Kings
Captains have attempted in Ireland, and the bringing from thence a young Boy, the son of Iames Fitzmorice a Rebel. Given under our Signet at our Pal∣lace of Westminster, the 11 of February, 1571. in the thirteenth year of our Reign. To the Right Honourable Sir William Cecill, her Majesties princi∣pal Secretary. SIr, the 14 of this moneth, I presented the Earl of Rutland to the King at Madrill, taking opportunity thereto, by preferring certain Merchants causes. The King embraced him, and told him, that coming from her Ma∣jestie with her Letters of Commendations, he could not but be very wel∣come, and should receive at his hands from time to time during his abode here, any honour or favour he could shew him; and as I was departing, he called me unto him, and asked me, what was done touching the Queen of Scots matter. I told him, That of late I heard nothing, saving by certain Letters, that there were Commissioners come out of Scotland from both parties; so that as I thought the matter was fallen now to some Treaty. He willed me to recommend the matter in his name to the Queens Majestie, and to tell her, that he doubted not but by her good means, it should grow to some speedy end, as should be to her honour and his contentment; and so pro∣mising his Majestie not to fail in that behalf, I departed for that pre∣sent: I shall therefore desire your Honour to inform her Majestie there∣of; as also, to procure at her hands what answer I shall make in this be∣half. Touching the state of things here, I learn secretly by the F. that the House of Guise seeketh to make a match between the Cardinal of Este and the Kings Sister, for that the Duke of Ferrara hath no issue, and by com∣mon opinion is like to have none; which thing they seek the more earnestly, to impeach the likelihood of marriage between the Prince of Navarre and the said Kings Sister. The 22 of this moneth, my Lord of Buckhurst is looked for here, his lodg∣ing and all other things fit for his entertainment being provided at the Kings charges, if promise be kept. The new Queen is now well recovered, and re∣moveth from Madril to this Town the 20 of this moneth; so that I purpose my Lord of Buckhurst shall have access unto her, whereof she is over dangerous, a thing not very well liked of this Nation. Touching la Roches attempt, I can learn nothing more then that I have ad∣vertised; neither can I learn that in Britain there is any preparation of ships, but of such as belong unto Merchants. And thus leaving to trouble your Honour, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the eighteenth of February, 1571. To the Right Honorable Sir William Cecil, her Majesties prin∣cipal Secretary. SIr, I would be loath in any Letter that is to be shewed unto her Majestie, to make mention of any thing that may any way concern Monsieur, for that her Majestie doth suspect that I am inclined that way in respect of his Religion; and therefore, Sir, I shall desire you to use this Letter as private to your self; and as for
my inclination to Monsieur (for that I hear he may be drawn to be of any religion) I see so great necessitie of her marriage, as if it may be her Majesties content∣ment, and the benefit of the Realm, by judgement of those that are fit to deal and advise in a matter of so great weight, I can be content as becometh me, to subscribe the same. The matters that I thought to make you privie of in this private Letter, are these; First, I understand that Monsieur not long sithence, hath given out certain speeches to those that are nearest about him, that he maketh no great account to match with the Queens Majestie, through the perswasions of the House of Guise and the Spanish Ambassador, who do not stick to use many dishonorable arguments to disswade him from the same: Besides, they use some arguments of danger towards us, making the conquest of England a matter of no great conse∣quence, in respect of the intelligence they have there, no small number of evil affected Subjects, and of those, some of no mean quality. The A. of late had talk with  touching the opinion of the enterprise: he shewed me that he whosoever he was that should attempt the matter, should fail of his reckoning, like him that made accompt without his host. The A himself seemeth to to have no great liking thereof, but seemeth to be very well inclined to∣wards . The Spanish A. to divert them from Flanders, would be glad to set them in hand in England, and yet would he be loath that France should have any fur∣ther interest in England, then it hath. And as for the House of Guise, un∣less they mean to make an unnatural match between Monsieur and their Neece, they would be loath, in respect of her possibilitie, that he should have any further foot in England then he hath; but they both think it ea∣silier atchieved by Marriage, then by Sword, aud would be glad to divert him from the way of likelihood, and to direct him to that way that carri∣eth least possibilitie. These being the things I thought worthy of ad∣vertisement at this present, I leave further to trouble your Honour, most humbly take my leave. From Paris the Eighteenth of Februarie, 1571. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. MY very good Lord, as there is nothing more desired of one sort then two marriages; the one between the Queen my Mistress, and Monsieur, the other between the Prince of Navarre, and the Kings sister; so is there nothing more impugned by the contrary part, wherein the Popes Nuncio, and the Spanish Ambassador, do not fail to do what lieth in them for the impeach∣ment thereof: And in this behalf they want not what assistance the House of Guise and their adherents can yield. For the let of the first, they alledge He∣resie. For the let of the latter, they secretly seek to match between the Cardinal of Este, and the Kings said Sister; for that the Duke of Ferara his Brother hath neither issue, nor by common judgement is like to have any. This is rather intended, then any just cause of hope conceived that it will come so to pass, for that as I hear Queen Mother seemeth not to like thereof. Touching my Lord of Rutlands access to the King and his Brethren, I leave you to the report of his own Letters. My Lord of Buckhurst, about the two and twentieth of this moneth, is looked
for here, who, as I suppose, shall be honourably received, and as honourably used, during the time of his abode here. Thus for the rest referring your Lord∣ship to this inclosed of common Occurrents, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the seventeenth of February, 1571. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham, the Queens Majesties Am∣bassador with the French King. SIr, if my sickness alone were considered, or my irksome business laid thereto perused, I cannot think but you would excuse my not writing with my own hand, or any long Letter by my enditing of the hand of another; and there∣fore now I am enforced for that ittle I have to say, to use another hand. You shall perceive by the Queens Majesties Letters, what I have been inforced with some pain to indite, by reason of my restless sickness and business; and there∣fore I mean not to repeat any part thereof unto you, wishing you to supplie any defects in the manner of writing, with your own natural discretion. This I will add, that I do hear out of Flanders, that one is coming hither named Monsieur Senigam, to make an end of the long talk that hath been of the mutual restitution of the Ships and Wares arrested; and thereupon it may be, that some further Treatie of the opening of the entercouse may follow. It is also written from thence, that one is come to take the place of this wrang∣ling Ambassador, who I think shall be of the low Countries, named Seignieur Front, one of the long Robe, that was here in Commission with the Marquess Vitells. Here do daily come into our Ports, by drifts of winds, certain Hulks of Spain and Portugal, with great riches, which though they are to be stayed, yet surelie▪ I trust, there shall lack no diligence to cause the riches of them to be duly preserved for the owners. And if you shall hear any other report (as it may be) I assure you it shall be against the good meaning of her Majestie and her Councel. For the matters of Spain, besides that which is written in the Queens Letters, I do hear, that Stewkley hath caused one Mr. Huggins to be imprisoned, charging him to the King, that he hath advertised sundrie things of that Court to my Lord of Leicester and me, wherein Stewkley sheweth his traiterous meaning to his Countrey. We find it so hard here, by reason of this restraint, to send any meet person into Spain, to discover things there; and I cannot tell, whether you might find some there that might be trusted, in respect of the common accord of our Re∣ligion, to be used under some other colour of Errand thither, to discover this Kings practises; and if you can so do with any reasonable charge, I wish you so to to, and the same shall be satisfied. Since the writing of the Queens Letter, I find that the E. Morton was come to Barwick the fifth of this moneth, with the rest of the Commissioners of that part, so as I look hourly for his arrival here; and that may you affirm to the satisfacti∣on of some there that be so greedie in the Queen of Scots cause: It is here de∣termined by the Queens Majestie, that there shall be a plain somewhat before Easter, which is desired not to continue long, and so I wish it. I doubt not but by this time, the Lord of Buckhurst hath either visited the King, or known when he shall; and I trust my Lord of Rutland hath been a Courtier
before this time; for whom I dare be bold to thank you, upon the pre∣sumption I have that you shew him friendship, which I know he will of himself deserve; yet I cannot but adde thanks to his deserts, for the de∣sire I have to see good proof of him to the honour of himself, and of his Countrey. I have no other thing, but that this afternoon God hath called to his mercie Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, having been sick not past six or seven daies of a Plurisie, joyned with a disease called Periplen, he doth but lead the way to us, whereof I for my part have had sufficient schooling by my present sickness. I pray you commend me to my Lord of Buckhurst, and whilest he is there an Ambassador, I think you may do well to make him partaker of your charge. From Westminster the February, 1571. Yours assuredlie William Cecill. To the Right Honorable Sir William Cecil, her Majesties prin∣cipal Secretary. SIr, it may please you, to advertise her Majestie, that according to her Com∣mandment, I repaired to the Spanish Ambassador, and declared to him from point to point, so much as is prescribed by her Majesties Letters, especially not forgetting to dilate that point that concerned her Majesties good opinion con∣ceived of him, in respect of the good offices that he had done from time to time to salve the differences and unkindness that depend between her Majestie and his Master. His answer was, in the Spanish tongue, which I understood not, and other tongue then Spanish he would not vouchsafe to speak; and therefore, Sir, I may rather tell you by gess then otherwise. First, he seemed to be agreived, that he never heard any thing of the message he sent about three moneths sithence by Sir Henry Norris, which con∣cerned that point; that the Duke of Alva lately hath communicated to her Majestie touching the Kings offers, to be a Mediator between the Queen of Scots and her Majestie; he said, that she did never use Don Francisco, for so he named himself, but by fits, who from time to time towards her Ambassador, had alwaies used himself so sincerely, as they could not but report, that Don Francisco was a Gentleman of great sinceritie: And if it had pleased her Ma∣jestie, to have used him throughlie, he would have done offices worthie of Don Francisco. When I came to that point that concerned the brutes touching the King his Masters intention in attempting somewhat that might not best agree to good Amitie; whereof though her Majestie had cause somewhat to doubt, in regard of his intertaining of her Irish Rebels, and the Countenance given to Stewkley; yet being of her own nature, not easily drawn to condemn upon brutes, without good ground, especially being late∣ly entertained by friendly offers, arguments of good meaning, therefore desired him onely to be a mean to procure at the Kings hand some good as∣surance, that these be but vain brutes; and that his meaning is to continue good Amitie, and to avoid all such occasions as might breed any contrarie ef∣fect. To this (after some time spent in exclamations and admirations) he answered, That nothing could seem so strange unto him, as her Majestie be∣ing
a Prince of that wisdom and experience that she is of, should once give ear to such vain bruits, as thereby to doubt that his Master (considering the long Amitie that hath been between the House of Burgundy and England) would now attempt any thing that might breed any breach thereof. And as for sending to his Master, he said, the way was long, and that it would be two moneths at the least, before he could have any Answer. He said therefore, he would write to the Duke of Alva in that behalf. I shewed, that my Commission was to request to procure satisfaction from the King; and as for the Duke of Alva, her Majestie lacked no means to send un∣to him, no more she did not to send unto the King; but would have been glad, as one well perswaded of him, to have used his help therein, as a thing as beneficial for his Master as for her Majestie. In the end, he said, he would write, but that it would be two moneths before he could receive answer; in the mean time, he wished her Majestie to think of his Master, as she would wish him to think of her: Stewkley he protested never to have heard of. If in the rest he be no sincerer then in this, then is he Don Francisco not so sin∣cere as he protesteth. As for any attempts by Iulio Romero to be done in Ireland, tell your Mistress (saith he) in few words, that you her Ambas∣sador ere knoweth, that they be no Spaniards that have the enterprize in hand. I told him, that whatsoever I knew, he might assure himself her Majestie could not be ignorant of. And whereas, said I, you think that they be Frenchmen, I assure my self to the contrarie, for that the King hath so assured me. He shewed me that he thought the King in that behalf sincere; and that if there were any such matter, it proceeded not from him, but from others. This, Sir, was in effect what I could ghess proceeded between us; never spake I with a prouder man, or with one more disdainful in countenance, and in speech. I suppose he is somewhat disquieted to see the honourable entertainment used towards my Lord of Buckhurst, and therefore think him the rather to be excused; besides, he seemeth to be no better affected towards me, then I am towards him, which is such, and no further forth then may concern her Majesties service; I mean to have little else to do with him. Sir, touching de la Roches matter before my Lord of Buckhursts repair to the Court, we upon conference agreed, that he should make some entry into the matter, and then afterwards cause the King to call me to inform what I had learned touching Roches proceeding in that behalf. And so at the time of access, according to the order agreed between us, being called by the King, I shewed his Majestie, that (notwithstanding he was otherwise informed) the said de la Roch had been in Ireland, and that he had left certain Souldiers there: For whose safety he had brought hither two sons of one Fitzmorice, to be here in place of hostages, who remain now in Brest in Britain, at a Kinsmans of the said de la Roch. And futher I shewed him, that the said de la Roch was lately departed out of the Town; who before his going, secretly gave out, that he was dispatched about some enterprise. I desired therefore his Majestie, that according to his promise, and the great Amitie, he professed to her Majestie my Mistress, he would procure some redress in that behalf, which he with great earnestness pro∣tested to us. I also desired his Majestie, that it would please him to give me leave to deliver to some one about him a memorial, to put him in remembrance thereof, which his Majestie willingly granted, and appointed one Gerlomo Gondi, a Gentleman of his Chamber to be the partie. The like speech I used to the Queen Mother, who gave great assurance, that there should be speedy redress thereof. I look shortly out of Britain to be ad∣vertised
throughly, by a Messenger that I sent expresly for that purpose touching the enterprise; where also I have taken such order, as I shall not fail to be adver∣tised from time to time of such preparations as there shall be made, whereof there may grow any suspition of any intention to attempt any thing that may touch her Majesties Dominions. Concerning the having of any intelligence in Spain, I hope to procure, that one of the Kings Ambassadors men, upon some pension, shall advertise from time to time how things pass there. According as her Majestie hath commanded me, I will not be unmindful touch∣ing the league, hoping not to omit any occasion or opportunitie that may serve that purpose, so far forth as my poor skill and experience may stretch. Touching my Lord of Buckhursts entertainment here, which is very honorable, and such as the like hath not been used towards any other, I refer you to his Lordships own Letters. I find him a Gentleman very wise and discreet, and very careful to do that thing that may be for her Majesties Honour, wherein he spares no cost. And leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave, beseeching God to send you better health, then by your Letters I perceive you have. From Paris the 25 of Febr. 1571. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To my very Friend Sir Francis Walsingham, Ambassador Resident for the Queens Majestie in France. MY Lord Ambassador, I thank you for your Letters lately received from you, the last being the ninth of Febr. wherein you give very good ad∣vice touching the matter of Monsieur; and for my own part, I am of the same mind, to wish sinceritie and honourable dealing in it, that either upon very good deliberation it may be embraced, or in time, and in best sort put from too much entrance; for neither is our case meet to dally, nor his person for to be abused, as he will think if he miss his desire, how fair soever we speak him. Therefore for my own part, I wish all things to be throughly considered of him, that her Majestie may fully understand the condition of his person before∣hand, which is one of the causes that moved me to say unto you, as I did before your departure; for I find matter that is like to come in question, and I perceive her Majestie more bent to marry then heretofore she hath been: God make her fortunate therein to his glory and our comforts. Touching the matter of Ireland, Master Secretary made me privy to your Letters, and you do well to follow the matter earnestly, and to enquire further thereof by all means you can devise; for her Majestie is also advertised, that the King of Spain hath like intention, and almost ready to put his practise in execution; whereupon, her Majestie doth mean forthwith to take some order for that Realm. We have lost on Monday our good Friend Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, who dyed in my house, being there taken sud∣denly in great extremity on Tuesday before; his lungs were perished, but a sudden cold he had taken, was the cause of his speedy death; God hath his soul, and we his friends great loss of his body. The Queens Majestie, God be thanked, hath her health well; and hath sum∣monded a Parliament, which shall begin the 13 of April next. Thus with my hearty commendations, I bid you heartily farewel, this 14 of Febr. 1571. Your assured Friend, R. Leicester.
To the Right Honourable, my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. YOur Lordships of the 14 I received the 16 of this present, and was most sorry (as I had just cause) by the same to understand of the loss of so dear a friend as Sir Nicholas was unto me, whose lack, if it were but pri∣vate only to his Friends, the loss were great; but if it be weighed general∣ly in respect of her Majestie and our Countrey, the want of him will then ap∣pear greater: For, be it spoken without offence to any, for counsel in peace, and for conduct in war, he hath not left of like sufficiency his successor that I know. I will not dwell upon this matter, for that it is no less unplea∣sant for your Lordship to read, then for me to write. And leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the fifth of March, 1570. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honorable Sir William Cecil, her Majesties prin∣cipal Secretary. SIr, as I wrote unto you in my Letters of the 25 of February, the Spanish Ambassador came to visit me; who after some superfluous talk of love mat∣ters, entred to talk of the unkindness that reigned between the Queens Ma∣jestie and his Master, expressing with words of great vehemency, the desire that they were drawn to some accord, as a thing to the benefit of both Princes, for (saith he) as the League between the house of Burgundy and England hath been the preservation of both the Countreys; so the breach thereof might make them both a prey to their neighbours. I shewed him, that I was glad to hear that he was of that good opinion, and therefore I doubted not, but that he will use all those good offices that mght salve the unkindness. The first, to cause all those occasions that might breed any suspicion of evil meaning, to be avoided. The second, to procure some grateful Ministers to be sent from the King his Master unto her Majestie, to enter into some Treaty of accord. To the first, he said, that her Majestie, whatsoever was given out to the con∣trary, needed not to doubt of the Kings sincerity towards her. To the second, he said, he saw not how the King could do it with his honor, con∣sidering how the D. Marquis Vitelli and the King his Masters Ambassador were rejected. To that I replyed, the offence grew by two of them, and therefore ungrate∣ful, and most unfit to deal in that behalf. And as for their having no direct Commission from the King, but from him that had bred the offence, in reason he was not fit to be imployed in that care. The end of our talk was, that he for his part, and I for my part, would not fail to think of those things that might best tend to breed reconcilement between our Princes. But, Sir, to the end you may know the ground and spring of this alteration, of so strange, to be∣come so familiar and curteous, you shall understand, that not past three days be∣fore, he presented unto the King, three requests from the D. Alva. The first, for that the D. vvas given to understand, that the Prince of Orange maketh pre∣paration
in Germanie for Flanders that therefore it would please him (in re∣spect of the aid his Master had sent him in his civill troubles) to send him the like number of Reisters, for the better understanding of the said Princes entreprize. The second, that it would please him, that he might leavie here such number of Catholiques▪ as would willingly serve his Master against the said Prince. The third, that it would please him to stay certain ships there a preparing a Rochel on the Princes behalf. To the first the King answered, That his treasures were so near spent, that he took more care how to pay the Reisters (to whom he was indebted for service in the last troubles) then he was well able at this present to provide any succour or aid for the King his Master, and hoped, that seeing his necessity was such, his said Master and good Brother would bear with all. Touching the second, he answered, That if he should condescend to the leavying of such Catholiques as would be content to serve, that thereupon the Hgonots would take occasion to put themselves in Arms, suspecting that the said leavie were but colourable, and a device that might reach to themselves. To the third he answered, That he was informed that the said ships were pre∣pared onely to be revenged o certain of his Masters Subjects that had taken cer∣tain ships of those of the Religion, and had drowned divers of the men, and others they had delivered unto the inquisitors. These answers falling not out to his contentment, maketh him, as I suppose, to think, that the friendship of England is worth the having. The first of this moneth there arrived here the Count Olivares, sent by the King of Spain to congratulate the marriage; his train was onely in number 11. he is reported to be of livelihood fortie thousand Crowns a yeare; his enter∣ment here is nothing answerable to that my Lord of Buckhurst hath receive: I mean to repair to see him, as also to propound unto him if I see occasion thereto, what by her Majestie I was appointed to declare unto the Spanish Ambassador. The second of this moneth, which was the day my Lord of Buckhurst took his leave, there was set up a Bull, which was at Ponte de St. Estienne, of the same day that Feans was, containing the self same matter, which a servant of mine , by reason he saw divers flocking about it, tore it down, and brought me the same, whereupon my Lord of Buckhurst & I, upon conference, before his said accesse, immediatly broke with the King in that behalf. The King called me unto him, and asked me the contents of the said Bull; whereof being advertised, as also I presenting unto him so much of the said Bull as was given me by my ser∣vant, he shewed himself very much moved thereat, in such sort as we might very well see it was unseigned: forthwith he called Lansac unto him, and willed him to take order with the Judge Crimniall, for the searching out of the setter of the same, assuring us, if by any means he could be found, he should receive such punishment as such a persumption required; considering the good Amitie be∣tween him and his good Sister. I shewed him, that if he did not take order in this, the like measure might be measured to himself. He answered, that he did perceive that very well, and that whosoever he were that should seem to touch in honour any of his Cofede∣rates, he would make account of him accordingly. After my departure from the King, Lansac told me in mine ear, That he had gat cause to guesse, that this was some Spanish practise. Thus, Sir, having made you partaker of such things as I thought me for her Ma∣jsty to understand, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the 5 of Mar. 1570. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham.
Post-Script. Sir Mr who willed me to write his name in Cipher, gave me to under∣stand, that a friend of his (who talked with an Italian Bishop of the house of Salmai, who came lately hither from the Pope to congratulate the marriage) did learn by him, that he hath a practise in hand for England, which would not be long before it brke forth: and he further shewed, that one Merchant in this Town hath 14000 Cowns to be employed in that behalf. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. MY very good Lord, I leave to my Lord of Buckhurst to shew you how every way he hath bn honourably entertained; therefore in this behalf this onely will I say▪ That such hath bin my Lords good demeanour, as also, of the Gentleman of his train, as the King and his Court resteth very well satis∣fied, and giveth both him and them great commendations; protesting that sithence his coming to the Crown there was not an Ambassador of like Ho∣nosur here, which I do not learn at those hands that will report otherwise then they hear, to speak that which may best content us; but from them at whose hands I do assure my self to have received the truth; and for the increase of this good report, he spareth to use no cost or liberality to such as (by the King appointment) have given attendance on him. Touching other things, the Duke of Longueville is lately departed from the Court with discontent∣ment, for that the Precedentship is adjudged to the Duke of Nemours; pro∣testing, That so long as the Queen Mother liveth, he will not come to the Court, for he judgeth her to be the cause thereof. I heare secretly, that there is not the best liking between the two Queens, whereof the young Q. is like to have the worst by common judgement; for that here, whatsoever our Mother commandeth, taketh place, and standeth for law. And therefore, if her Majestie desire to take any profit of France, she must onely be the Messias and Mediatour. I could therefore have wished, that her Majestie had amongst other things bestowed some Present upon her. The Kings Request unto the Pope for Count Gallizos delivery, is quite rejected; who protesteth, That if all the Hugonots in France were incamped about Rome, he would not de∣liver him. The King with this proud and disdainfull answer is very much of∣fended; I would he would give the Hugonots leave to make some proof what they could do for his delivery. Touching a Bull set up against the Queen, the Kings discontentment therewith, and certain requests presented by the Spanish Ambassador here to the King, I referre your Honour to Mr. Secretaries Let∣ters; And so leaving further to trouble your Honour, I most humbly take my leave. Paris the 5 of March 1570. To the Right Honourable Mr. Francis Walsingham, the Q. Majesties Ambassador in France. SIr, I would not suffer this bearer passe without my salutations; Master Beal came this morning, by whom, and by your Letters, I have under∣stood from you such things as are of moment, and so have I imparted them to her Majestie, and mean as shortly as I can to procure answer for the return of the bearer: her Majestie, as there is good cause, alloweth
well of your service; and so I bid you well to do, and heartily thank you for your singular care and good will which you shew unto my Lord of Rutland, who ad∣vertiseth me of very countifull.— From Westminster primo Martii, 1570. By your assured, (as I was wont) William Cecil. And as I am now ordered to Write, William Burleigh. Sir Henry Norris maketh friendly report of you to her Majestie, and to all others. I write not to my Lord of Buckhurst, because I think he is on the way. To my very loving friend Sir Francis Walsingham, Ambassador Resident for the Queens Majesty in France. MY Lord Ambassador, since my last Letter, unto you, I have little new matter worth the writing, saving now we are much troubled with the Sco∣tish causes, the Commissioners of both parties are now here; & to write unto you what the end will be certainly as yet, I cannot: we find both sides very stiffe, and hitherto those for the Kings partie very resolute for the maintenance of his Au∣thoritie; her Majesties scrupulosity touching his Title and Government, we part∣ly know. The unworthiness of their Queen to rule she granteth, but the in∣stances of their cause to depose her from her dignity, she can hardly yet be per∣swaded in, so yet she remaineth much perplexed; on the one side, she is loth to set her up, or to restore to her her estate again. On the other side, she is as loth to defend that which she is not well perswaded to have justice with it. Between these, her Counsell chiefly seek for these two things; that her self may be pre∣served in suretie, and the true Religion maintained assuredly: For as the state of the world standeth, and upon through examination of this cause, it appeares, that both the waies be dangerous touching the Q. of Scots; for there is danger for delivering of her to her Government, so is there danger in retaining her in pri∣son, her friends abroad begin to speak proudly for her; we were wont also to have friends of our side if need were, but as farre as I can see, there is none of that side of the sea to be found that be Princes absolute; well, our case is the harder, and we must say, Si Deus nobiscum quis contra nos. Touching this matter, as soon as it shall grow to any likelihood, either of the one side, or of the other, I will advertise you, and withall send you the reasons of the advice. In the mean time, whatsoever you may hear, believe me, there is no man in Eng∣land can tell you which way it will go; yet in respect of the King there, and his continuall dealing for the said Q. her Majestie rather giveth in words more favo∣rable that way then the other. Mr. Norris is arrived here yesterday, being Shrove∣sunday, when Mr. Secretary was created Baron of Burleigh, and I think ere it be long shall have the office of privie Seal, but as yet remaineth Secretary still; and within a day or two Sir Thomas Smith is like to be called to assist him. The Parliament is to begin the 2 of Aprill next, the Queen Majestie, thanks be to God, is in very good health, so are all your friends as you left them, save Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, our good friend. Your wife was here lately to take her leave of her Majestie, who used her very well and graciously. I pray you let us hear as often as you can▪ conveniently. I would gladly under∣stand of some good for the poore Cardinall Chastillion: I desire, and also long
to heare of the Q. Majesties present, how it is liked. Thus with my heatie com∣mendations, I bid you heartily farewell, the 26 March. 1570. Your assured Friend R. Leicester. To the Right Honourable, my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. BY your Lordships of the 26 of February, I find that there is some entrie made in the Scotish matters, and that you see them so full of difficulties, as whether on retaining or releasing there should be more safety, you can hardly dicern things well weighed as well at home as abroad. The common opinion of such as are of judgement here, and wish well unto her Majestie and our Country, is, That if the pretended match between her Majestie and Monsieur should not go forward, then nothing can be so dangerous as her delivery; for here they stand upon this point, that neither the King can be safe, nor the Realm uiet, unlesse Monsieur be provided of some other harborage. The places likely to be attained, and fit for his calling, where they would place him, are two, England and Scotland; if England refuse, then is Scotland more ready to receive him. This well weighed, though your Lorship with the rest of the Comissioners, are both wise and of great experience, notwithstanding so full of danger is the Cause, as no resolution can possibly grow to you, that shall be void of perill. I pray God therefore in this hard case, that that course may be taken wherein is least perill, and most safety for her Majesty. At this present, there is no matter here worthy of your Lordships knowledge, only I am to trouble you with mine own particular estate, my charges grow here to be so great, through the excessive deareness of the place, as necessity forceth me at this present to make my moan unto your Lordship, and to desire your aid, that I may not be (as I am) overburdened; whereby the care how to live, may hinder the onely care I ought to have, how to serve. I have for∣born hitherto to expresse my grief, to the end that my Lord of Buckhurst's report might add some credit to my complaint. And though my service cannot deserve so much as I am allowed, yet my place, and my estate requireth consideration to be had of the present time; for otherwise, I shall not be able to do that which shall be for her Majestites Honour and service: when men of live∣lihood were imployed in this calling, alwaies change of time, bread change and of Allowance. If any time therefore required consideration, this chiefly; for that ne∣ver was the like dearth here; and if any mans estate was to be weighed, none more then mine, that am far inferior in ability to any other that ever supplied this place. I will not longer entertain your Lordship with this private cause, but commit it to your good consideration, assuring my self of any furtherance that you can give me. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the 9 of March. Your Honours to command Fr. Walsingham.
To my very loving friend Mr. Francis Walsingham Esq the Q. Majesties Ambassador in France. SIr, I have received your Letters, both by Mr. Wigmore and Beale, as by Hrcourt I did late advertise you. And having made her Majesty partaker, both by hearing them read, and by her own reading, I am in this sort directed to answer you. To the first of the second, that is, to that of the 13 of Febr. brought by Beale, her Majestie maketh good accompt of the person of him,  mean the 36T s 4 t 10 30-0  by the intelligence which he gave you; but it breedeth some doubt in her, that the certainty can be no otherwise understood, in that it is informed you, that the practise continueth by late dispatching of an Englishman of high stature, and lean of visage; wherein is such incertainty, as no man can thereby attain either to discover the practise, or withstand it, by ap∣prehending the party: and surely, Sir, her Majesty cannot but think, but they that can attain to the knowledge of the practise, may aswell attain to the know∣ledge of the parties name; for they that are trusted with the matter, may be trusted with the persons; and so her Majestie wisheth you to endevour your self, with such as you shall think good, to come to the knowledge of some persons, by stay of whom such a matter might be deciphered. For mine own part, I think it likely that these practises are devised, but without more apparence I see no evident reason to move me, that in the time when the Queen of Scots her self, and her Factors, are in hope to be delivered by treatie, and with the favour of our Queen, there should be any attempt otherwise for her escape; wherein, how cunning soever men be in device, yet the execution standeth upon many adven∣tures, and any mischance hapning, might breed ruin to the whole enterprise. I have been acquainted with many of these like advertisement. But surely, I never found any substance in them in the event; but yet with them, and without them, I ever find it good to be circumspect. I write not to have you for∣bear from hearing and reporting of any the like, but my experience serveth to move you to procure the givers of such things, to discover the matters more certainly, and so they are of more value. The message sent you from Rochel, of some dangerous intent upon Ire∣land from Spain, hath more apparence; for that we also hear it from Spain confirmed, and it is the same that before I advertised you concerning Stukelie. I also smell some purpose of the Count Lodowicks coming with his ships to∣ward the Low-Countries, to accompanie the designe; for his brother the Prince of Orange, whereof I would look for some better successe, if I had not under∣standing thereof so many waies; for the force of that enterprize should consist in suddenness and secresie, which are not like to take place. Thus much for your first Letter. Now to the second brought by Wigmore, the Q. Majestie liketh well of your proceedings with the Spanish Ambassador there, and marvelleth that he should be so coy with you, considering the reports of his former curtesies; but by likelihood, some other accident moved it, which by you next speech will be better discovered. The cause why that Ambassador could not be answered sooner of the matter whereof he advertised her Majestie from the Duke of Alva, was, for that her Majestie could not sooner hear thereof from the Duke. If you shall find it convenient to impart matters to the said Ambassa∣dor you may let him know of these things following; One Monsieur Senegen a Low-Countrie-man, is comming to end the Treaty for resttution on both
sides of the Merchants goods; There are lately come into the ports of the West, certain Hulks laden from Spain and Portugall, driven by Tempest. And be∣cause they should be well used, the Ambassador here for the King, though in other things he be not used, hath been dealt withall to name certain strangers (Merchants) to resort to the ports, and they have speciall Autho∣ritie from us to put the same in all good safety, and that no dealing shall be by any to the impairing of the said goods; And this speciall favour is shewed, because the time of restitution is at hand. And therefore we mean not to give any cause of quarreling. There were also certain other ships of Warre that came from Spain, being of the company which conducted the Queen of Spain into Spain, which being furnished with Souldiers, were favourably entertained, and permitted to depart at their pleasure. Of these things you may give him knowledge, to make him have a better taste in his mouth; he may perchance contrariwise complain of spoile of his Masters Subjects by Pirats hanting the narrow Seas, and specially about the Isle of Weight: and I cannot deny the spoiles, but surely they are committed by one Lubresst and others belonging to the Prince of Orange, which we cannot remedie; and yet Mr. Horsey is presently dispatched with Authority to set forth certain ships, either to take them, or to drive them from our Coast. I confesse to you privately, they are too much favoured (lucri causa) but you may avow truly, that the Q. Majestie doth in no wise favour them: thus much to your second Letter. Now to some credit given by Mr. Beale concerning , a few words shall suffice, if I cannot judge any thing in a 2 3 4 6 8 the matter is much liked, and all furtherers thereof allowed, and all disswaders not liked; I am commanded thus to write, that if any mention should be made to you there∣of, you should shew your self willing to advertise, and so you shall doe well. The retardation used herein by H. is not liked by A. and the good will of L. in the furtherance is allowed. By this you may perceive how to order your self; and surely this principle I hold, that no on thing shall warrant more suretie and quietness to the Queen Majestie the 3 5 7 in; but the manner and circumstance are of the substance of my principall, and not accedents. Here∣in I deal boldly with you; I find nothing in your writing or doing but allowable, if otherwise I did, I would advertise you for friendship to your self, and for good will to the office you bear. Although I cannot advertise you certainly, as I would, of the grant of your leases, yet I am in that forwardness, as I trust by next writing to send you knowledge thereof. You must hereby be acquainted with the delayes of the Court. From Greenwich the third of March 1570. Sir Thomas Smith I trust shall be admitted to the Councell to morrow, and shortly af∣ter to be Secretary. I pray you Sir commend me to Master Caval∣cant. Yours assuredly William Burghley. Having in this sort ended my Letters, her Majestie repeated again unto me what I should write unto you, of the great matter▪ which I desired might be in a Letter from her self to you, but her Majestie thought it sufficient to be imparted unto you in this sort following; If any person of
value shall deal with you to understand your mind in the case of her Majesties mariage, you may say; That at your coming from hence, upon some common brute of such a matter concerning her Majestie and Monsieur D. Anjow, you sought what to think or report thereof, and this you are assured that at your coming out of England, her Majestie, upon consideration of the benefit of her Realm, and to content her subjects, resolved to marry, if she should find a person in estate and condition fit for her to match withall; and that she meant not to marry but with a person of the family of a Prince; and you may add, that you cannot by any means perceive, that her Majestie is altered from that disposition; so as you may conclude, that if any such matter should be moved to you, by any meet person to deal therein, you will advertise her Majestie there∣of, and so would her Majestie you should do. If God shall order this mariage, or any other, to take place, you may well judge no time would be wasted, other∣wise then honour may require. I am not able to discern what is best, but surely, I see no continuance of her quietness without a Marriage. And therefore I re∣mit the successe to almighty God. This that I write privately to your self,  trust shall remaine to your self, for so do I with your private Letters, that no person seeth them but my self. I am wearied with writing. And the rest of things, espe∣cially our Scotish matters, I referre to Master Beales declaration 3. March 1570. Yours assuredly, William Burghleigh. To  Right Honourable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burghleigh. YOur Lordship knoweth Necessity hath no Law; and therefore I hope that my present request, grounded on necessity, will be weighed accordingly; and surely, if necessity forced me not thereto, I would forbear to do it for many respects. I do not doubt, after my Lord of Buckhursts return, you shall under∣stand, as vvell by himself, as by others of his train, the extremity of death that presently raigneth here; vvhich is such, that her Majesties allovvance doth not by 10 l. in the vveek defray my ordinary charge of houshold. And yet neither my diet is like to any of my Predecessors, nor yet the number of my horses so many as they heretofore have kept. I assure you, Sir, of 800 l. that I brought in my purse into this Country. I have not left in money and provi∣sion, much above 300 l. farre contrary to that accompt, that I made; who thought to have hade 500 l. alvvaies aforehand, to have made my provisions, thinking by good husbandry somevvhat to have relieved my disability other∣vvise: but my accompt vvas vvrong made, and therefore my reckoning falleth short, and so short that unless there be by your good means some consideration had of me, I cannot but sink under the burthen. I have written to my Lord of Leicester; and unto Sir Walter in this behalf; vvho, I do assure my elf, vvill joyn vvith you in this behalf: I most humble therefore beseech you so to take care of me, as I, in caring hovv to serve, may no vvay be dravvn from the same by taking care hovv to live; and cast∣ing my care on you, I leave further to trouble your Honour at this pre∣sent,
beseeching God to blesse you in all your doings. At Paris the 14 of March 157. Your Honours to command Fr. Walsingham. I am sorry to accompany the thanks that I am bound to give your Lordship for obtaining my suite at her Majestie hands, with a new request; and so hard is my case, that even necessity forceth me thereto. And therefore the same be∣ing grounded on necessity, will be weighed by your Lordship I hope accor∣dingly. To the Right Honourable, my very good Lord the Lord of Buleigh. I Thought to send this bearer to attend upon your Lordship, for such dispatch as it shall please her Majestie to make hitherward. I forgate in my last to advertise you, how I had been to visit Olivares, whom I found more solemn (after the Spanish fashion) then wise. I dealt with him about Stenklies attempt, he protested they were but bruites. I shewed him that the Queens Majestie was advertised otherwise, and upon such likelihood, as she had good cause to believe it. For first, (said I) the King giveth him a daily allowance. Secondarily, he hath advanced him to the Honour of Knight-hood. Thirdly, that the said Stenklies should entertain about him certain Engineers. To the first objection he answered, that the King his Master was glad to entertain any Gentleman of countenance, that offered him service, as also to honour them with the honour of Knighthood. I then made him acquainted with the couse of Stenklies life, as also how little he had to take to, and there∣fore willed him to consider how unworthy he was of any honour or entertain∣ment in respect of himself. But (said I) being as he is, a Rebell unto the Queens Majestie, with whom the house of Burgundy hath had so long Amitie, and to be used with that honour and entertainment at his Masters hand, gave her oc∣casion to think that kind of Amitie not to answer best to such good will as out∣wardly is professed and so, &c. At Paris the 19 of March 1571. Your Honours to command, Francis Walsingham. To our trusty and welbeloved, Sir Francis Walsingham Ambassador Resident with the French King. ELIZABETH R. TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well; we have seen the severall Let∣ters, which you lastely wrote of the 5 of this moneth to the Lord of Burleigh our Secretary, together with a Letter sent to you out of Spain, of the 25 of Ia∣nuary; and do like well of your dilligence used herein; and having well considered and looked further into he matter, and comparing your advertisement with others of like sort, and finding the same to be of great importance, we have resolved to send out of hand a Gentleman to the King of Spain, both to decipher by speech with him and by other means to understand the Kings intention herein
and also to deal roundly and plainly vvith him in the matter, and in the mean time vve do give order for all events, for vvithstanding of any enterprize, as vvell by sending of our ships to the sea-coast of Ireland, as by other Forces to be sent into Ireland. And for that much time may pass before vve can have ansvver from thence, we pray you continue your travel and care to understand further, as much as you may thereof, and to advertise, as matter may be further discovered worthy of knowledge. Touching the matter of Credit sent to you from Rochel, where∣of you gave knowledge by Beal, we pray you, as of your self, to learn further thereof, and to discover their intentions, and the likelihood of their intentions, and what are the meanest sums of money to be demanded, and what are best assurance; and assoon as you can to advertise us, without giving any token that you are thus directed to do. For other matters, we refer you to the advertisements of our pleasure, signified lately by the Letters of the Lord of Burleigh. And whereas an ancient, and very good servant of ours, Sir Thomas Cot∣ton Knight, hath occasion to complain, as he informeth, of the evil deal∣ing of one Loen de la Hay, a Subject of the French King; who being once our Prisoner of War, and licensed to depart upon his faith, upon conditi∣on to redeem and send home freely a son of the said Sir Thomas Cotten, then Prisoner, or else within a time limitted, to return again as his Pri∣soner, hath performed neither of both; besides, a good sum of money which he lent to de la Hay at his departure, yet unpaid: We have thought good to recommend the same matter unto you; and for the better instru∣ction therein, you shall receive herewith the request of the said Sir Tho∣mas Cotten, praying you to take some convenient time to open the matter to such of the Kings Councel, or to himself, if occasion may serve, and to such other as you shall think able and well-affected to do any good therein; and to seek by all good means that some reason may be had of the said de la Hay, in this so plain and justificable a case; so as our said Servant may have no further cause of Suit to the King for lack of justice, the partie being well able to pay, as is en∣formed. If you shall have any occasion to deal with the Spanish Ambassador there, you may be bold to shew him of these reports that we hear from Spain; and if he shall hear of any our preparations by Sea and Land, that the same is for our defence; and if we shall be offended, we will use them not one∣ly for defence, but to offend for our Revenge. Given under our Sig∣net at our Mannor of Greenwich the tenth of March, 1570. in the thirteenth year of our Reign. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham, Ambassador for the Queens Majestie in France. SIr, by the Queens Majesties Letters you may understand, how well she liketh your diligence; and besides that which is therein contained, I am commanded specially to write to you, that it is to her related, that certain reports are made there, as she thinketh, by practice from thence of such as do not  in with  that a meaneth , and so much in any place affirme. And if L. shall by any occasion
deal vvith you. A. vvill that you do so assure him; for A. knovveth not of any 0234 colour that doth mislike hereof. Herein I am commanded to to vvrite earnestly unto you, and to vvill you by no means to hinder the proceeding; for it is meant, as to me it appeareth, very earnest, and some offence here taken vvith H. for an opinion of cold dealing. After the sign∣ing of her Majesties Letters, she commanded me, as she reposed trust in me, that I should not be remiss herin. And so I pray you consider there∣of, and advertise me vvhat you hear and find thereof. I make haste to end, because I have many things to do. From Greenvvich the tenth of March 1570. Your assured loving Friend, Will. Burleigh. I have no more leisure but to pray you to commend me to my Lord of Rutland. To the Right Honourable and my very good Lord the Lord of Burleigh. HEr Majesties of the tenth of March I received, the vvhich I per∣ceive her Majestie hath sundrie vvaies advertisements of the Irish enterprize; vvhereof as I had cause before to doubt, so have I novv more cause then before, and therefore am glad to understand that there is or∣der taken for the vvithstanding of all events that may happen in that be∣half. It may therefore please your Lordship to signifie unto her Majestie that the 24 of this moneth, the Archbishop of Cassels sent unto me two of his Servants to know whether he might come to speak with me or no. I an∣swered them, that whensoever he would come he should be verie welcome; and for that he should not lose his labour in coming, I shewed them that he should find me at home both that day, and the day following. So the next day, being the 25. he repaired unto me; his first speech tended to his justifica∣tion, for departing out of Ireland without her Majesties leave; saying, that being deprived from his living, and another substitute in his place, who he confessed to have outraged before his departure, necessitie inforced him to depart, to seek maintenance some other where; and the rather, for that in respect of the said otrage committed, he hath justly incurred the Lord Deputies displeasure. I shewed him, that his confession of his fault, was an argument of penitence. And therefore, that I doubted not, that if he would seek pardon at her Majesties hands, he should find her Majestie graciously affected towards him, who hath alwaies been more naturally in∣clined to remit then to revenge. I asked him, how long it was since he departed out of Ireland. He shewed me, that it vvas about two years past. And after he embarqued for Spain, where ever since his departure from Nantes he hath continued, having received ever after his arrival, very honour∣able entertainment at the Kings hands, who yearly gave him 2000 Docats pen∣sion. He shevved me nothing of his conerence he had at Nantes vvith L. and
the C. neither did I seem to understand any thing thereof, but made alwayes shew unto him, to believe whatsoever he said, as though I had never heard of him before, nor of his proceedings. I proceeded further with him, and asked, when he departed out of Spain. He shewed me about the latter end of Ianury. I told him, that there were brutes given out here, that the King of Spain had some intention to invade Ireland. I asked him, whether before his departure he heard any such matter. Then he brake and shewed me, that about September last, one Stewkley arrived in Spain, who after his access to Madrill, before he had conference with the King, or any great Personage▪ he sent unto the said Archbishop to desire to come and speak with him. To whom he returned answer by his Messenger, that if he would come unto him, he should be very welcome: Whereupon Stewkley repaired unto him; and after protesta∣tions had, how glad he was to see him there, whom he knew to be Catholike∣ly bent, he shewed him, that his intention of his repair into that Countrey, was to deal with the King of Spain, about the reducing of Ireland unto his Government, whereby Heresie might be expelled, and true Catholique Re∣ligion planted; and therefore desired him, for that he was well acquainted with the Cardinal Spinoso, President of the Councel, that he would deal with him, to procure him access unto the King. To whom he replyed, that he thought that the King, in respect of the good Amitie between him and the Queens Majestie, would be loath to deal therein: And further, that he for his own part, though he desired the Catholique Religion to be there planted, yet did he mislike of the means, for that he would be loath to see his Countrey under any other Government then that of the Queens Maje∣stie and her Successors: And therefore he desired him to hold him excused, in that he could not, for those respects abovenamed, be a mean to bring him acquainted with the said Cardinal, President of the Councel. Whereupon Stewkley departed from him, and went to the Duke Feria, and him acquaint∣ed with the cause of his repair thither, and desired him to procure him access unto the King. So the said Duke brought him to the King; whom the King, after conference had with him, used very honourably, and appointed him a very fair house, and gave him six thousand Docats: And besides that, he doth give him daily allowance for the maintenance of his table, which he taketh to be great; for he spendeth at the least Thirty Ducats a day. Two dayes after the King had conference with the said Stewkley, the King sent for the Archbishop; and asked him whether he did know the said Stewkley. To whom he answered, that he never saw him but here in Spain; but by report he had heard, that he had been a Pyrate on the sea, of life dissolute, in ex∣pences prodigal, of no substance, neither a man of any great account in his Countrey; notwithstanding he heard he was a Gentleman born, and descend∣ed from a good House. Then the King told him of the offer, that he had made touching the request of Ireland; assuring him, that he had dealt so be∣fore his coming with the Irish Nobility, as he should find them ready to receive such Forces as he should send. He wished the King not to be so light of belief; for that Stewkley was not a man of that credit with the Irish Nobi∣lity, to be able to bring any such matter to pass, whom they knew to be but a shifter, and one who, for the maintenance of his prodigality, seeketh to abuse all men. With that the King replyed, that besides Stewkleys own report of his ability in that behalf, he was besides recommended to him by his Ambassador, who willed to credit whatsoever he reported. Upon the mentioning of the Ambassador, he made a digression; and told me, that the Ambassador did great hurt in England, which he did not learn by hear
say, but by sight of his Letters; and therefore wished, that her Majestie would not long harbour so ill a gest. The grand Prior was at the same time with the King, and present at the Communication, and said, that the Arch∣bishop would be loath that his Countrey should come under the Kings Govern∣ment, which he marvelled at, considering the Kings liberality bestow∣ed on him. To whom he answered, that so far forth as he might with his duty towards God and his Countrey, the King should find him serviceable at all times towards him; for whose prosperous estate, for that his calling so required, he would pray: And so after this Communication had with the King, he de∣parted. Not long after D. Feria meeting the said Archbishop, entred into talk with him, and asked his opinion of Stewkley. He answered, that he had made the King acquainted with his opinion, and that he feared that if the King do deal with him, he would abuse him. Then D. Feria said, that the likelihoods that Stewkley shewed the King of the enterprize, were such, as there were great cause why the King should imbrace the same. For, saith he, besides the Irish Nobility, he hath won a great number of the Queens Garison to be at his de∣votion, as well Souldiers as Captains. If the King, saith the Archbishop, be∣lieve what he saith, then will there be no great difficulty in the interprize; but when it cometh to the tryal, it will fall out otherwise. Well, said the Duke, I perceive you are not willing it should go forward, and therefore you seek to de∣face this Gentleman, whom we honour here with the name of the Duke of Ireland. To that the Archbishop replyed, that that Title and Calling was more then ever Ireland was acquainted withal; and the more strange it will seem unto them, for that he hath there nothing to take unto. No, saith the Duke I am sure if he might enjoy his own there, it would well maintain that Calling. Surely, saith the Archbishop, if the rest of his talk prove no truer then this, then shall you see the King much abused by him. After this talk passed between the Archbishop and the Duke, Stewkley came and challenged the said Archbishop (as he saith) and told him, that if he were not as he was, a man of the Church, he would be revenged of him for the report he made of him. In the end, after report made of this, talk passed touching Stewkleys proceedings, he con∣cluded, that the cause of his departure out of Spain, was onely that he saw great likelihood that this enterprize should go forward; and therefore would be loath, as one descended from the house of Desmond, to be suspected by his abode there, to be a favourer of the said enterprize, hating nothing more then the name of a Traytor. I told him, that I was very glad to here this talk pass from him; whereof I promised him not to fail, to make her Majestie privy, hoping that he meant sincerely touching the practice. I shewed him, that her Majestie was neither ignorant nor unprovided of the remedy, notwithstanding I did as∣sure him that her Majestie could not but take it in good part, if his meaning and words agreed; both his withdrawing himself from thence, as also, in that he did discover unto me her Minister here, what he knew touching the same. I prayed him therefore to use plainness with me; and told him, that if it fall out otherwise: First, he should be reputed a Traytor, and so little trusted of those whose turn he should seek to serve; it being held for a common rule, That a Traytor to his own Countrey, came never to be true to another. Secondarily, that if he were partaker of the enterprize, the matter was provided for, and so their attempt not like to take effect, whereby he should grow odious to those that he should procure to enter into the same. And lastly, I willed him to consi∣der, what benefit would grow to Ireland, his Countrey, if it should be reduced to the Spanish Government, who doth rule altogether by Tyranny, as divers of
the Countreys where they do govern witness, whereof he as a Traveller could not be ignorant; whereas now, they enjoy as great liberty as any Nati∣on doth; and if there be any defect, it proceedeth frm themselves, who can∣not yield to imbrace such good orders as her Majestie carefully for their bene∣fit hath sought lately to place there amongst them, to reduce them from Bar∣barousness to Civility. He then protested, that her Majestie should find him sincere, though he were out of hope of all favour, in respect of his honour, and the love that he bare to his own Countrey. But, saith he, if it might please her Majestie so far forth to be my good and gracious Lady and Soveraign, as for that my Successor is dead, to restore me to my Countrey and Place, I will then give to you in writing, her Ambassador here, both the manner of the Conspi∣racy, as also the remedy. I shewed him, that I would not fail to advertise her Majestie thereof; notwithstanding, I thought good to desire his return at this present, considering the suspicion conceived of him would breed some doubt of sincerity; for that it might be thought, that his coming home now was ra∣ther to give notice to the evil affected Subjects of his Countrey, how things passed in Spain, then otherwise. He replyed, that if he had meant any such matter, he might have gone directly from Spain into Ireland. Then he told me, that he feared that your Lordship had not conceived very well of him through Huggins report. I made as though I never heard of Huggins; and shewed him, that your Lordship was not one that would lightly condemn any man; and therefore willed him not to doubt, that if you might find him sincere, none would be more ready to further him in getting her Majesties favour then your Lordship. Unasked, he shewed me, that Huggins was returned again to Prison, which thing I seemed not to regard. I asked him vvhen Stewkley vvas to im∣bark. He thought, not much before the end of April. I asked him, vvhether it vvas true, that Iulian Romer vvas appointed to that enterprize. He told me, that he heard so This vvas in effect the talk that passed betvveen us, vvhich I thought good to set dovvn at length, to the end that your Lordship might the better judge, both of the matters, and of the man. For my ovvn opinion, I cannot tell vvhat to think of him; to suspect that he meaneth not good, faith I have these causes: First, I am informed, that tvvo Irish men, sent from him out of Spain, vvere the cause of Roches enterprize. Secondarily, I am also informed, that he vvas sent for out of Spain by the Cardinal of Lorain. Thirdly, for that he vvisheth the young Boy Iames Fitzmrice's son, in Spain, that is novv at Brest in Brittain. Lastly, I do not forget his Nation and Religion. I have placed some especially about him, to vvhom he repaireth, as also vvho repairs to him. I find the Irish Captain here, (vvhom I desired my Lord of Buckhurst to recommend unto her Majestie) ser∣viceable in this behalf. It shall go very hard, but I vvill give a great ghess of the cause of his coming. He desireth to knovv vvithin tvventy daies, hovv her Ma∣jestie inclineth to his request. The onely hope I have of him is, that I imagine that he mislikes that Stewkley should have the glory of the enterprize that they both pretended, and that he first set abroach, and therefore vvould be glad to do any thing vvhich might impeach the same. Novv having made your Lordship acquainted vvith that vvhich passed betvveen us, I attend her Majesties pleasure herein, how I shall direct my self. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the 19 of March, 1570. Your Lordships to Command, Francis Walsingham.
Touching the other matter of credit committed to B. relation, I hope to be able to advertise in what estate things stand within these ten daies. To our Right trusty and well-beloved Sir Francis Walsingham our Am∣bassador Resident with our good Brother the French King. ELIZABETH R. TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well; forasmuch as by the Lord of Buckhurst we do understand in what sort the Queen Mother hath moved unto him the matter of marriage for her son Monsieur D' Anjou with us, and in what sort both the King, her Son, her Self, and Monsieur, being the par∣ty, are desirous that the same might take place, and that for the first entry into the matter in respect of the doubtfulness that is generally conceived of our re∣solute determination to marry, that is by the Queen Mother required, that none might deal there in the same, betwixt them and us, but you as our Ambas∣sador; and that with none of their Councel, but with Monsieur de Foix; we have thought meet plainly to inform you, in what sort you shall deal, not doubt∣ing but you will so use the same to all respects, as may concern our estimation in due honour, according to the place we hold, and for the quality of our per∣son and sex. And because you shall the more orderly proceed herein, we do conceive our answer by way of Articles, which we do understand were by him shewed to the Lord of Buckhurst, in writing; as followeth: The first Article of their demand was, to understand, both very speedily and certainly of the truth of our firm resolution to marry. To which you may constantly answer, that as the Lord of Buckhurst hath al∣ready said; so are we resolved, for the benefit of our Realm, and contenta∣tion of our Subjects to marry with some person of Kingly blood and quality, meet for us and our Countrey; and that we are free from all manner of impe∣diments, to marry where we shall please. And because that we perceive that notwithstanding the like answer hath been made in our name by some other, who hath of late time earnestly required to know our mind in this case; yet it is doubted by sinister reports, that we have not a resolute mind to marry, but that we have a disposition rather to hear of motions and suits for Marriage with Princes, and great Estates, then finally to accept any of them, how honourable or reasonable soever the conditions might be that should be offered. There∣fore you shall in times convenient, and as you shall be by some objections pro∣voked, say, that we are very sorry that our former dealings in like cases of Marriage moved to us from other Princes, hath not been better understood on our behalf, then it seemeth they have been; whereby some prejudice is grown to make more doubtfulness to be conceived in our Answers, then we mean. For the alteration of which untrue conceptions, we cannot but generally answer, ex∣cept it were particularly remembred with vvhat Prince, moving matter of marri∣age to us, we did deal doubtfully. And therefore you shall say, that it is not unknown to the world, for how many Kings, Princes and Estates, motions of marriage hath been made to us; and if the same were well considered, and our answers from time to time truly known, certainly there was no cause to mislike the same, though the motions took no place; neither could any of the parties think themselves touched in honour by this, though their desires took no effect. In the beginning of our Reign, that is not unknown how vve had no dispo∣sition of our own nature to marry, no otherwise then it is manifestly known,
that vvhen the King our dear Father reigned, and many times pressed us earnest∣ly to marry; nor vvhen in the late King our Brothers time, the like vvas re∣nevved unto us; even for such as then presently vvere in real possession of King∣doms, vvhen vve lived but in a private state as a daughter, or as a sister of a King, yet could vve never induce our mind to marry, but rather did satisfie our self with a solitary life. If also it be considered, vvho they vvere that in the first part of our Reign motioned marriage unto us, and hovv inconvenient such a match vvas both for our self, for matter of conscience, and for discontentation of our peo∣ple, as then the time vvas, vve doubt not but vve might challenge to our selves some praise, in that vve yielded not thereto, vvhen all other vvorldly respects of honour, wealth and greatness, besides the worthiness of the person, were evident to have provoked us thereto, But therein, and in all other motions of marriage following, our answers were such, as if they were known with their circumstances, we would not doubt but to have a general allowance and com∣mendation for our sinceritie in dealing; as now it seemeth that the world, which commonly erreth in such reports, hath also erred in this and sundry other things touching us, which time we doubt not shall make manifest; for truly, whilest we continued, as it were, settled by natural disposition in a determination not to marry, we did so also plainly answer all persons, and required that the motions might be stayed; wherewith if the parties or their Ministers would not be satis∣fied, but would continue rather still their motions; what default was this in us? Yea, it is very true, that some parties being answered by our own mouth, and that deliberately and frequently, yet would they not accept the same for a final answer; wherein as we could not but esteem their affection very great towards us, so truly did we give them no new cause to hope of any change of our mind to marriage. Nevertheless, after some course of years passed, we confess that the state of our Realm, the continual urgent and frequent solicitations, not only of our Counsellours, to whom we alwaies think meet to give ear, but also of the whole Estates of our Subjects, being many times assembled in our Parliament, did stir us to some further consideration by the weight of their reass, then naturally of our self we had been induced unto. And therefore we yielded thus far to their importunitie, that for such great ne∣cessities concerning the universal state of our Realm, as were plainlie laid before us, we would not refuse to hear of any honourable motions to be made to us for any person of a Royal blood, that might be meet for us and our Realm; and that we would commend our heart to be directed by Almighty God, to follow that which might be to the comfort of our loving Subjects: And this mind we did continue, and did so far proceed, as reasonablie we might with our honour, and with regard to the estate of our Policie. And howsoever the world may mis-judge of prolongation of such matters by us, certainlie the same was not of any intent in us to continue the same without purpose to conclude: But such were the terms and difficulties in some points necessarilie to be provided, as the lack of satisfaction of us therein, was the onelie cause to us known of the prolongation. All this we find meet at length to impart unto you, to the end that you may also in like manner thereby, with truth, satisfie the hard opinion, that as i seemeth is conceived of us, because it is seen, that many suits hath been made to us, and by great Estates, for marriage, and none hath taken effect. And as heretofore of late years, the solicitation of our loving Subjects general∣lie did induce us, for their sakes, to hearken to motions of marriage, and to incline our selves thereto: So may you for more assurance of our firm determi∣nation to marrie, affirm to them that have judged doubtfullie of us, that we do
now indeed find in our own judgement, upon good respects, the motions of our people, not only necessary for them, our Realms and Dominions; but also con∣venient for our selves, so as a person may be offered to us, agreeable for our honour, and meet for the state and pollicie of our Kingdoms. And thus much may fully satisfie for justification of our doings against sinister concepti∣ons; and also, for a certainty for our determination, being accompanied with a further resolution growing of our judgement otherwise then aforetime. The second points is to know, whether now that we have perceived by the Lord of Buckhurst, the good disposition of the King and the Queen Mother to offer the person of Monsieur, they might be assured of our continuance in this resolution; and whether we will accept this motion in good part, and will be pleased to hear further of it. To this you may answer, That for continuance in our resolution generally to marry, we trust there is no cause to doubt, the things before affirmed being remembred; and how we will accept this offer of Monsieur, we cannot but plain∣ly confess it an argument of great good will in the King, and the Queen his Mo∣ther; considering how that the King is married, there can be no greater nor wor∣thier offer made by the Crown of France, then of Monsieur D. Anjou; and therefore we do thankfully accept it: But whether we shall be pleased to hear further of this motion, is very doubtful for us to answer thereto; not that we are ignorant what answer were meet, but that the interpretation thereof may be conceived otherwise then we mean: And if any impediment shall hereafter just∣ly follow of the cause, without our default, the same might be imputed to us, as others in like cases have been: And surely knowing the wisdom of Queen Mother and her experience in such causes of matrimonie, we would think, that without demanding this point of us, she herself can best tell what is meetest to be further done herein. For now that she knoweth our resolute determination towards marriage, and with what manner of person, it is to be considered by her, that if such things as are requisite for the contentation of both our persons, and for the necessary conditions of the whole cause, shall be found agreeable, then this offer shall not onely be thankful, but by all good probabilitie take the effect that is by the offer intended. And if otherwise, there should any just and neces∣sary impediment happen, either for lack of satisfaction of our own natural ex∣pectation concerning our person, or of reasonable accord, upon the conditions requisite, specially for such as may conserve the state and policy of our Realm; yet we see not, but the good will of either party should be allowed, as well in us for yielding to hear and consider of so honourable an offer as for them that made it. And herein you shall say, that we pray the Queen Mother not to be over curious in requiring so precise an answer, until the matter may be further treated upon and explained; and not to think it any touch to the honour of her Son, to be named a Suitor to us, as others of as great degree have been, though the motions took no effect, rather for other impediments, then for any mislike of the persons. And thus much we would have her perswaded, that as we did at the first honourably forbear to hear of some offers, because the impediments were at the first beginning manifest, although the persons were worthy to be liked. So in this cause, if we did perceive any such impediment of weight and apparence, or that we had conceived by any report, any just cause of misliking of this offer, we would surely deal plainly with the King and Queen Mother, and would most heartily thank them for so honorable an offer, and yet give them ma∣nifest occasion to forbear; And truly we cannot give any ansvver hereto, but leave this point to the vvisdom of Queen Mother, vvho is not ignorant vvhat is be∣longing to such a matter as this is, specially tovvards us, being a Queen never
married, and having Kingdomes to be provided for with reasonable conditions, for satisfactions of our loving Subjects, whom though we know are so desirous to have us marry, as they will not mislike of any marriage that may content us, yet shall we not take such advantage of their free good will but that they shall plainly understand, that we will joyn with our private satisfaction the re∣gard of their quietness and surety. The third is not by us dissallowed, that this matter may be treated upon between you as our Ambassador, and Monsieur de Foix, untill the matter may be brought to more ripeness, so as the King may, with∣out hazarding of his honour, send a Noble Ambassador. And yet you may add as of your self, that you think that the matter would be more readily expedited, for the mutuall understanding of our minds on both parties, by sending of some such speciall person as Monsieur de Foix, upon some other pretence: And if you can so compasse it, we think many scruples would be avoided, better then can be by Letters sent un∣to you; and if Foix may come, then shall you do well to advise him to think of all circumstance aforehand. And yet afterwards the King, if cause shall so permit, may send an honourable Ambassage for such a cause. The fourth request is, that we should send to you certain Articles, for you to declare our intent toward Monsieur, with authority for you to con∣sent thereto, so as the King should first deliver to you other Articles for Monsieur, wherein we cannot but find many difficulties; For how can we tell what were meet to propound, untill we may understand what shall be first propounded by them that make the offer? But if they seem not contented with this answer, that then by your for∣mer motion they will not send any person hither, you may say, that if they will deliver to you their offers and demands, you will promise that the same shall not be revealed to any person but to our self, and one or two about us, whose advice we will use. And if you shall be demanded, what you think would be looked for to be offered, you may say, that you think no lesse can be offered for conditions, then was by the Em∣perour Charles, with King Philip to Queen Mary. And that further, of necessity it must be specially prejudged, that Monsieur shall not have Authority to exercise the form of Religion in England, that is prohibi∣ted by the Laws of our Realm. And though you be not instructed here∣of, yet would we that you should specially open this matter secretly to the Q. Mother; and though we mean not to urge her Son to any change of conscience, otherwise then we wish him to be directed to the best, yet surely we cannot, nor may not give him any authority to have any exercise in facts of such Rites as are prohibited by our Laws. And as for his allowance of our Religion, although we wish he might in con∣science like it (and if he did understand the form thereof, truly we do not mistrust but he would not mislike it) yet we shall onely require his presence in our Oratories and Churches. And this you may say, is one of the matters of greatest importance to be considered by the Queen Mo∣ther. The fifth, that this matter should not be opened to the French Ambassador here Resident, which because it is required may be observed; for surely we neither to him nor to any other use to deal in such matters, but as we are provoked. And yet why it should be kept secret we see not, considering it hath been already moved to us by sundry, and by some that are by na∣ture
bound to the Crown of France, and that do think in their conscience the matter to be both honourable and profitable to the Crown of France. And you shall say to the Queen Mother, that she shall not mislike of us, though we think so well of our selves and our estate, that if God shall or∣der this her motion to take effect, it shall be the best marriage for the honour of the King her Son, for the weal of his Crown, and for the commenda∣tion of the Q. Mother, that any Q. attempted this many hundred years for France. And yet we are content to keep this motion secret, according to the request, meaning to make none other privy to the same, but to such of our privy Councell as are known we have just cause to trust, both for their fidelities and secresie, that is, our Cousin the Earle of Leicester; whom you may say, that whatsoever may be otherwise doubted, we find ready to allow of any marriage that we shall like, and withall marriages with any Prince' stranger, most of all this with the Crown of France; the o∣ther is Sir William Cecill, Lord of Burleigh, and our principall Secretary, and is well known to be a dutifull servant, in any thing meet and a∣greeable for us and our Realm, and so may you make report of them both. The sixth is, that we would not make delay in answer as we doe not. The seventh to understand, whether we can be pleased that Master Ca∣valcant, shall be used any further herein, which we remit to the con∣sideration of the Q. Mother, he being an honest Gentleman, and to our knowledge alwaies disposed to do good offices, betwixt us and the Crown, and therefore not to be dissallowed by us, if the Q. Mother shall like of him. And yet we require you to have regard that his dealings therein, considering that he departed lately from hence, may not be conceived as directed by us. You shall do well to deal warily with the Q. Mother in the matter of Religion, for the D. her Son, not as we would presse him to make a change of his Religion, although we wish it. But that if he should marry with us, that he should not be warranted to do any act contrary to our Laws. Given under our Signet at Greenwich, the 24 of March. 1571. To the Queens Majesties Ambassador in France Mr. Francis Walsingham. SIr, if you consider how weary, I may be in the first and second wri∣ting of the Queens Majesties Letters, to you, not being void of other business, you will allow a short Letter at this time. If I be not much de∣ceived Colly Weston, North-hampton , in this: wherefore you shall do well not to be over superstitious, considering the necessity of this time, and the dangers  wise men there do find this mat∣ter for  not unmeet for C. God onely knoweth the successe. We here, and the good there have a great losse of the Cardinall Cha∣stillon, who is thought to have been poisoned by some French Apostata or Countereit.
I pray you hasten Mr. Cobham towards Spain, and as soon as you can let us know what you shall receive from thence. This case of  is deferred onely to see some event of the matter for 88. for if that succeed not as is now mentioned, the perill is the greater, by . And what is done therein, for sparing of writing, you shall learn by Master Cobham. By your Letter brought by my Lord of Buck. I understad the excesse of your charges there, whereof my Lord of Buckhurst hath not as yet conferred with me, But I will further your relief therein to my utter∣most, and as cause requireth. Commend me humbly to my Lord of Rut∣land, to whom I write but a short Letter. From Greenwich the 24 of March 157. Your assured loving friend William Burleigh. After I had written this, which with the Queens Majesties I meant to have sent by Master Henry Cobham, her Majestie commanded for more haste to send some speciall conveyer with them, and so I send Harcourt. I am in doubt that if this matter for Religion be not well conceived by them there, the adver∣saries to the marriage will take great advantage thereof, and urge the persist∣ing in it of purpose to dissolve the same. So as I had rather the speech hereof might have come from the Queen Mother or the others to you, and so you might answer them as you are warranted, then to begin abruptly of your self. I wish they would give you occasion so to do, which if they doe not, then must you needs open it unto them. March 25 1570. To the Right Honourable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majestie that hers of the 24 of March, I received the 26 of the same: the contents whereof af∣ter I had well weighed, and therewithall considered the great practises that are daily used here, to stop that the match between her Majestie and Monsieur might not take effect, which lacketh not also any such help as may from her own subjects there with you be ministred to breed an opi∣nion in Monsieur that all is but dalliance, and that he is like to march in the end in rank with the number of the forsaken; whereupon as it should seem a few dayes past, he used this talk with Monsieur de Foix, saying, Monsieur, you and others have brought me to yield to this match, but I feare that by the next dispatch you shall well perceive that there is no other meaning in the Queen of England but dalliance, and that you and I shall be sorry that ever we waded so far; And surely said he, for my own part, unlesse I shall find the answer direct, I will never enter farther into the matter. These speeches and practises af∣ter I had well weighed, and seeing the answers in her Majesties Letters very fit and convenient to be made by her in respect of
the quality of her person and sex, had not the world mistaken her former pro∣ceeding in marriage matters. But now in respect of the said mistakings fearing that the same being made according to the course appointed by her Majestie, would have seemed more doubtfull then direct, and so have utterly over∣thrown the matter; I was very much perplexed what course to take, when I my self saw it most safe for me to follow the course by her Majestie pre∣scribed, whatsoever came of it. But when I beheld her Majesty first how she in her own judgement did think it expedient for her to marry: Seconda∣rily that if her Majestie did mean to marry abroad this was the only Gentle∣man fit for her to marry: Thirdly the discontentment of her subjects for not marrying: Fourthly how presently she is beset with a number of forrain pra∣ctices, the execution whereof onely stayeth upon the event of this match, I then resolved that it was most fit for me to forget my self, and to think onely of her Majestie and of her safety; like that Roman, that notwithstan∣ding a Law was made that no man should hazard to come on the Wall without consent of the Magistrate, yet he seeing the enemy preparing for the scale, and that the delay of time in asking the Magistrates consent might have hazarded the losse of the City, preferring a publick safety before his private perill, repaired to the Walls and repulsed the enemy; the matter afterward being called in question, he was acquited of the penalty, and ad∣judged a good member of the City: like consideration made me to take this course following. In my proceeding with Queen Mother somewhat swarving from the precise course of her Majesties instructions, yet notwithstanding keeping my self within the compasse of the same with due regard had both to her Honour and the place her Majestie beareth. Touching the first point I alleadged precisely and wholly what her Ma∣jestie appointed me to say unto her touching the justification of her pro∣ceeding in causes of marriage; whose answer was, that that she did object unto my Lord of Buckhurst, she objected rather as a common opinion con∣ceived, then that her self believed it, being not ignorant that the common sort, that understand not the secresie of Princes proceeding are alwaies draw to believe the worst, But saith she I hope her sincere and direct proceeding in this now offered match will breed due justification of her former proceedings in those marriage causes. Touching the second, I shewed her that her Majestie had conceived by my Lord of Buckhurst that she desired to understand whether the King and she making an offer of Monsieur, the same would be accepted in good part, at her Majesties hand; of this second point I left out these words Whether she would be pleased to hear further of it. In answer of this second point I shewed her, from her Majestie, that she did impute it as an argument of great good will in both her and the King, considering how that the King being married, there could be no greater nor worthier offer made by the Crown of France then Monsieur, and that therefore her Majestie doth most thankfully accept the same; and further that she willed me to say unto her, that if her Majestie did preceive any ap∣parent cause to mislike of the matter, she would then deal plainly with the King in thanking him for his good will, and in desiring to proceed no further: here∣with she seemed to be satisfied. Notwithstanding for that this match did stand upon two necessary points; the satisfaction of both their persons, and necessary accord upon certain con∣ditions, that therefore her Majestie desir'd her (as a Prince indowed with kingdomes, could not but with her own private satisfaction have a due re∣gard
of her subjects repose and safety by way of Capitulation) that if there∣upon there should grow any just cause of breach, yet that friendship and good Amitie might still continue, the good will of either party being to be allowed; their's in making so honourable an offer, and her Majestie in yielding to give eare to the same. To this she replied, that she could have wished that the answer had been more direct, not so much for her own satisfaction as for others in whom there rested as yet some scruple; and the rather (saith she) for that if in the handling of this Matter there be used plainness, Ceremonies being set apart, whatsoever issue the matter taketh, yet friendship could not in rea∣son but continue. Then I proceeded to the third shewing her that her Majestie was well content that I as her Ambassador should treat upon this matter with Mon∣sieur de Foix; which course I shewed her in my private opinion would draw the matter by often sending to and fro to a great length, whereby that ex∣pedition would not follow thereof that were to be wished. And that therefore if that they would not follow thereof that were to be wished. And that therefore if that they would make choise of some speciall person to send over upon some other pretence with full commission to treat hereof, many scruples thereby would be avoided, which otherwise might breed delay of time: And touching the person, I told her none could be more faithfull unto her Majestie then Monsieur de Foix. In this behalf she told me she would first deal with the King, as also touching the fourth point, how her Majestie could not tell what to propound untill she saw what was by them first pro∣pounded who by order were first to propound: and after she had dealt with the King touching these two points, she promised I should the next day have answer by Master Cavalcant, which she performed, whose answer was, that for the more expedition the King and she thought it good to send Master Cavalcant both speedily and secretly over, who should come fully instructed with their resolute intention touching this match, who thinketh that he shall bring with him the Articles they mean to propound unto her Majestie; and further, that if upon his return they find her by her answers fully resolute to proceed, That then for the better ripening of the matter against the time that an Honourable Ambassadge should be sent, Monsieur de Foix should come over upon some other pretence. I forbeare at this present to deal touching Monsieurs having the exercise of his Religion: first, for that they finding her Majesties answers not wholly resolute would have suspected it for a quarrel of breach; Secondarily, for that without all suspition in due place it may be be propounded amongst her Majesties Articles. Touching the first point I forbeare to say any thing for that they mean sometimes (as I learn) to use their Ambassador there Resident with her Majestie, as one whom they esteem and trust. I did not forget to tell her that her Majestie for the more secret hand∣ling of the matter had made choise of two onely Counsellors, unto whom she had communicated the matter; the one the Earle of Leicester, whom she findeth well to allow of any marriage which her Majesty liketh, though otherwise wrongfully doubted, so specially of this that is now in Treaty. The other the Lord of Burleigh, of whose fidelity her Majestie hath had tryall ever since she came to her Crown. o this she answered, that these two Councellors being of her Majesties choise, she would not but very well allow of; and as for my Lord of Leicester she said she had many waies good cause to judge him a furtherer of the
match, and therefore was glad of her Majesties choise, and hoped thereby of the better successe. The last point concerning Master Cavalcant, she said she thought him fit to deal in it as one that before time had done good offices between the two Crownes, and therefore she rather wished him to be admitted a Dealer. I may not omit here to say mine opinion of him, which is that her Ma∣jestie could not have allowed a Gentleman more faithfully inclined to her Majestie, nor more fit for his discretion and secresie to deal in a matter of such consequence. In the end having finished this point, to leave the better taste with her of the matter, I concluded, being so warranted by my instructions, that if this motion of hers should take effect, the like never happened these many hun∣dred yeares in respect of the great profit that would redound to both the Realms. To this she answered, that as she never desired any thing with like earnest∣ness as she did this, so if the same should not take place nothing could more grieve her. For (saith she) besides the great benefit that will grow hereby unto both the Crowns, on the successe of this match dependeth the quietness of all Europe. This being all the talk that passed between Queen Mother and me. I leave to trouble your Lordship any further, humbly taking leave. From Paris the second of Aprill. Francis Walsingham. To my very friend Sir Fr. Walsingham Ambassador for the Queens Majestie in France. I Have upon the receipt of your Letter, written by Sir E. Gilbert, dealt with her Majestie touching your chargeable dwelling there; I trust her Majestie will have due consideration thereof. You shall perceive by her Majesties Letters her further pleasure touching Monsieur, whose cause hath been broken to her by my Lord of Buck, from the Queen Mother: we perceive they deal very daintily, and doubt much her Ma∣jesties intention to marriage, at least, that she had rather hear of it then per∣form it. But assuredly I do verily believe her Majesties mind herein is other∣wise then it hath been, and more resolutely determined then ever yet at any time before: yet doe they mean to deale so secretly on that side, as though they will not yet believe it. And accordingly her Majestie mindeth not to deal but as privatly as may be devised, that if that should not take effect, the lesse reproach is to either party: her Majestie hath onely broken this matter with my Lord of Burleigh and me, and I think will not use any more till some apparance fall out what is like to become of the mat∣ter. The person of Monsieur is very well liked of, his conversation is harder to know. I see her Majestie misliketh not of his estate; For she is of mind to marry with the greatest, and he is left almost alone the greatest to be had. The conditions will be all: wherein I am right glad, and we are bound to thank God to see her Majestie so well to stand to the maintenance of the cause of Religion: For as there will be no great difficulty in respect of his person and estate to cause a marriage between them, so yet I perceive with
the impeachment any way of the true Religion here now established, she will for no cause deal with him, as you may perceive by her Majesties own Let∣ters to you. Albeit she doth not mean in respect of his policy, to drive him in open shew in the mean time to renounce his own profession; but condi∣tionally, that if they should match, then wholly to maintain this aswell pri∣vatly as publiquely. God send her Majestie alwaies during her life so to stand to the defence of so just a cause, and withall, his blessings upon her for us all, that we may live and see her bring forth of her own body, as may hereafter suceed her aswell in that happinesse, as in the enjoyning of her kingdome. So not doubting but we shall shortly hear from you, I commit you to God. In hast this 23 of March 1571. Your assured friend, R. Leicester. To our trusty, and right welbeloved Francis Walsingham Esq our Ambassador Resident with our good Brother the French King. ELIZABETH R. TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well, we have seen your Letters of the 11 of this moneth written to the Lord of Burleigh, our Secretary, and perceive thereby your diligence in exploring further certain matters practised in Spain, where you formerly wrot your doings, wherein we doe well commend you, and according to our former resolution (whereof we lately advertised you) we do now send unto the King of Spain this bearer our servant Henry Cobham, one of our Gentlemen Pensioners, for whose speedier and surer passing thither, we have directed him to passe by you, both to conferre with you, and to utter unto you certain things from us, wherein you shall give him credit and also to procure from the King our good Bro∣ther his passport, and surety to passe throughout that Realm into Spain; and likewise to return; wherein we pray you to use some diligence to obtain the same for our said servant as (you can consider) the cause doth require, we have instructed this said bearer of the Queen of Scots cause, and have willed him to impart the same to you; and having well conceived it, we would have you there to let the Queen Mother understand so much thereof as shall be meet, that she may know our sincere dealing therein. And in your speech to her, you may say, that we do somewhat marvell, that she doth so often sollicite and presse in the said Queen of Scots cause, considering that we have not omitted to do any thing for her benefit, which time and commo∣dity would yield, and that with reason we might do: And specially we do the more marvell of the late urging of us therein, considering the motion of the matter which she lately uttered to my Lord of Buckhurst. Given under our Signet at our Mannor of Greenwich the 26 of March 1571. in the 13 yeare of our raign.
To the Queens Majesties Ambassador in France Mr. Fr. Walsingham, my assured friend. AFter I had sealed up my other Letters with Mr. Cobham, I received yours of the 18 by Mr. York, whereof I thought good to give you knowledge. I am also to ascertain you, that although the contrary may be reported, my Lord of Leicester finding just occasion thereto, doth by all good means, to my knowledge, further the marriage; and therefore I think it reason that by such good means as your self may think meet, both the Q. Mother and Monsieur de Anjou might understand his disposition, so as he may be well thought of herein. And if he find that his doing may be liked there (if God be content with the cause) it is very probable that it may take effect: you see how plain I deal with you, and the rather, because I find by my Lord of Buckhurst, that upon the hope you have of the amendment of Monsieur in Religion, you do not mislike of the matter: Surely if Monsieur be not rooted in opinion of evill Religion, as by his young years it is not likely, there might be argument made that marriage here with England would be becoming a Professor of the Gospel: considering the towardness of him to be a Martiall Prince, he may prove a Noble Conquerer of all Popery in Christendome, with such aids as may joyn with him in the Empire, and other where. I wish he were capable of such a designe: You see still the more I write the more open I am; and yet considering the trust I have in your se∣cresie I trust nothing hereof shall have light to do me any hurt, and so it is time to end. From Greenwich the 25 of March, late in the night 1571. Yours assuredly, William Burleigh. My stile of my poore degree is, Lord of Burleigh. To the Right Honourable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. THis bearer shall make you Lordship acquainted with the present state of the matter, which of credit you committed to his report, at his last being with you; and as at that time I did most earnestly request your Lordship, that if you saw no likelihood of any good issue to grow by the revealing of the same So I cannot but renew my said request, for surely in this my service, no∣thing would more grieve me then that they of the Religion, whom I wish chiefly to further, should receive by me any hinderance: Therefore I be∣seech your Lordship most earnestly so to use it, as thre may grow to them rather helpe then hurte; on at the least, if there be no likelihood that that will fall out that were  be desired, which is help, yet that the other might be avoided, which is hurt. And although it be my office to advertise and not to advice, yet I shewed your Lordship at my departure, that I vvould presume sometime as a private man, and not as one that beareth a publique office, to write my private opinion touch∣ing such accidents as should happen here, which I do assure my self that your Lordship will keep privately unto your self, whom I am bound to make ac∣quainted vvith my follies, in respect of your promise, to admonish me of my faults. Reasons in pollicy to give aid secretly, I see to be these, by consideration of the Circumstance of the time:
First, in respect of the Spanish practise against Ireland, thereby to divert them from the said enterprize. Secondarily, in respect of the likelihood that there will grow wars, if the practise go forward between France and Spain, whereby England shall live the quietlyer. Thirdly, That if the M. go forward, then shall it be annexed unto England, for that it is meant that M. shall be the head of the enterprize, if the matter in the beginning take good success, which in reason cannot do otherwise, especially if England win in the same, by reason of the Match; and surely in my opinion, no one thing will sooner draw Monsieur to encline to Religion, then the hope of F 6. Lastly, that whereas it is thought, that amongst other Articles in the Treaty of the Marriage, he will request some yearly pension, if God should take away her Majestie, he having no issue by her, he may be perswaded by her Majestie, giving assistance in the said enterprize, to content himself with such a portion as shall fall unto him by Conquest; for that her Majestie assisting, full account is made that Spain, the Inhabitants of the Low-Countries, being quite aliened from him, as they are, shall not be able to defend the same. And so desiring your Lordship to pardon this my swerving from my function; which, as I said before, is onely to advertise, I most humbly take my leave at Paris the fifth of April, 1571. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. SIthence my last Letters unto your Lordship, touching the Archbishop of Cassels, I have thus proceeded; I procured Captain Thomas the Irish man to repair unto the said Archbishop, and to do him any friendship and service, he might here shew him in this Court, in respect he was a Nobleman, and of his Countrey; which being at my request, he willingly did: And the Archbishop seemed to take the same in very good part at his hands; whereupon he desired the Captain to procure him access unto the Cardinal of Lorrain. And so not long after he accompanied him to the Cardinal of Lorrain; who talked with him the space of two hours: but what Communication passed between him and the said Cardinal, he could not draw from him; yet thus much he signifi∣ed unto him, after his departure from him, that hereafter there might be some occasion offered to imploy him to some good service; and that there∣fore he should do very well to make such report of him, as that he might grow in credit here; and further, that he should say, that the Archbishop was a man of a noble family, and of great reputation in his Countrey, that Ireland of it self was but weak, and easie to be gotten by the Enemy, and such like talk to this effect. After the Captain had made me privy hereof, my counsel was, that he should bear the Archbishop in hand to do so; nevertheless, I ad∣vised him, that unto the Cardinal he should report, namely, that true it was, that he was of a noble familie, and allyed to the best in that Countrey, yet of no such credit and reputation, whereby he might be able to do much in
his Countrey, for that the heads of the house of Dsmond, whereof he was descended were under guard in England. And if he should enquire of Ireland, that he should say, it was ot so weak as the Archbishop reported it to be; but that whosoever should attempt any thing against it, should find it able enough to resist a multitude, now that her Majestie had caused Garrisons, and appointed certain ships to go on the seas. Two days after the Captain was sent for by the Cardinal; and being demanded, what manner of man the Archbishop was, of what estimation in his Countrey, in what case Ireland stood in, &c. answered to every point as I required him. Si∣thence which time, I learn, that the Cardinal maketh not that account of the Archbishop that he looked for at his hands. And therefore consider∣ing that the Archbishop cannot take effect here, and that he is in some ne∣cessity (as by Letters he wrote to the Cardinal of late I perceived) I think he would easily be gotten to utter such things as he knoweth of this Spanish Enterprize, so he might be well assured of the Queens Majesties favour, and be restored to his former living. I have appointed another Irish Souldier to give attendance on him, and to mark diligently whither, and to whom he resorteth; what company in like sort come unto him, and to certifie me thereof. Thus much have I learned of his proceedings since his coming to Paris, especially through the Irish Captains means, who hath dealt very dutifully in this behalf; and hath been so ready to do what I willed him, as I cannot but recommend him unto your Lordship. He is very honest, and civil; and one that hath taken profit with these Civil Wars here, besides of good Parentage, breed and born in the English pale. Sir Henry Norris hath heretofore had tryal of him; we both have promised him, in respect of his dutifulness (as one worthy the entertaining) to be a means unto her Ma∣jestie for him; and so of late, in respect of this imploying of him, have taken upon me to assure him, that he shall receive some comfortable words from her Majestie; and therefore I am to desire your Lordship to move her Majestie therein. The 29 of March the Archbishop sent one of his men to me, willing me to send some trustie servant of mine, to whom from time to time, he might communicate the Spanish Enterprize, and so gave me knowledge thereof; be∣tween whom passed this speech following: After ordinary salutations done, I shewed him that your Lordship willed me to signifie unto him, that you had written to the Queens Majestie in his behalf; and that you hoped shortly to receive some answer; and that af∣ter receipt had thereof, you would not fail to advertise him. Further, that you willed him to deal plainly with you, as you for your part mind∣ed to deal honourably with him; and that if it pleased him to adver∣tise your Lordship of any thing, either by word of mouth, or by writing, that you promised of your honour to to keep the same with all secresie, and that you offered your self most ready to pleasure him in any thing that you could do for him. I thank my Lord Ambassador, quoth he, in that it pleaseth his Lordship thus honourably to deal with me; and if that by his good means I may be brought into my Princess's favour, and enjoy my living, I should think my self most bound unto him; and besides, make him privie of all Stewkleys practises. The onely cause of my coming out of Spain, was to obtain license to return into my Countrey with my Princess's favour, if it might be, and to schew the name of a Traytor;
although one Huggins (whom for certain unseemly words he used against Mr. —the Queens Majesties Ambassador) I reprehended hath written divers Letters to Master Secretarie Cecil and the rest of the Councel, and so in∣censed them against me, as that they have me in great suspicion. After this he asked me whether I knew if any should be sent into Spain about this matter. I told him, I knew not. Yes, quoth he, your Lordship told him so. I answered, that it might well be so, but that I knew nothing thereof. Well (saith he) it is more then time that she did send, both for that the Queens Majestie hath many Traytors in Ireland, of the Irish men and English Souldiers there; and also, because the King of Spain doth what he can to win the French Kings Brother on his side. And surely, saith he, if the match go not forward between her Majestie and Monsieur, it is to be feared that he will joyn with the King of Spain in that enter∣prize. I told him, that the common report was here, that Mounsieur did con∣cur in all things with the King; and that the King himself had made such Protestations of Amitie and Friendship towards the Queens Majestie, as that he, in respect of his honour, would not, nor any of his Subjects, for fear of his displeasure, durst not attempt any thing to infringe the same. Well (saith he) I beseech God they may long continue in Amitie. In the mean time I will remain here as one not known, until I know her Ma∣jesties, pleasure. If I might go into my Countrey with her good leave and license, I doubt not but what I could do much good there, for that the most part of the Nobility are of some affinity with me; and will, I am assured, be much ruled by my counsel. If I cannot obtain this benefit at her Majesties hands, after I have dispatched my business here, I will return into Spain, where I have been most honourably entertained at the Kings hands; having had, during the time of my abode there, besides two two thousand Ducats for my annual pension, sometimes one hundred Du∣cats, sometimes two hundred Ducats, and sometimes three hundred Ducats, when the Court did remove, And to this end, saith he, have I left four of my train at Nantes in Brittain, with some part of my goods, to the end that if I go into England, I might send for them hither; if not, I might take them with me when I go into Spain. He told me further, that Fitzmorice' s son was at Morles in Brittain; that Stewkley had sent one out of Spain, to learn what he did there, and to discredit him, if it were possible. That the Duke D'alva hath offered thirty thousand Ducats for the Earl of Northumberlands ransome. And so fearing that I have over troubled your Honour, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the fourth of April, 1571. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. MAdam de Mvie desired me to recommend unto your Lordship the Peti∣tion of her Daughter; hoping by your good means unto her Majestie, there shall be no deliverie made of her, without her special consent, in respect of the interest she hath in her in right of a Mother; the cause of her staying there being such as it is, I did assure her, that she could not lack any protection that you could give, who did honour in her the religious respect that she had in the match of her daughter. Touching the provision of Mules your Lord∣ship sent me word of, I will not fail to cause some care to be used for the pro∣curing of them. I hear the King maketh provision for some to present unto her Majestie notwithstanding, because the same is not certain. I think it not fit to stay to proceed otherwise. And so, &c. At Paris the fifth of April, 1571. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To our trusly and well-beloved Sir Francis Walsingham our Ambassador Rsi∣dent with our good Brother the French King. ELIZABETH R. TRustie and well-beloved we greet you well; we have perceived by your Letters written to the Lord of Burleigh, in what sort you have lately conferred with an Irish man, naming himself the Archbishop of Cassels, up∣on occasion sought by him to make his submission and suit to us for his of∣fence in departing out of Ireland. And considering the conditions of the party, and the profit that might follow by his discovering of the practices wherewith he is so throughly acquainted, we can be content, that if you shall find it likely that he meaneth dutifully to ask pardon, as he pretendeth by his speech, that then you shall give him comfort to continue with the same duti∣fulness and loyal meaning, and provoke him to make repair hither into Eng∣land; where you may assure him, he shall not find lack of grace, if he hum∣blie desire it, and by his truth hereafter deserve it. And if you find him very difficult to be perswaded with such general speech, without further assurance from us; you shall say, that you have written so effectually unto us, with as∣sirmation of your good liking of his dealing with you in so plain terms, as he had done; as ye have power from us to warrant him to come into this our Realm safely, and to make his means unto us for our favour: If he shall shew himself repentant of his former fault, and disposed to live hereafter dutiful, he shall be provided of as good a living as heretofore he hath had. And if he shall not obtain our favour as he desireth, at his coming, your warrant shall serve him to return safely out of our Realm; which manner of usage, you shall say, is very rare in us, but upon your instance we have yielded thereunto. And so we pray you use it, and give him warrant under your hand accordingly. And if you shall find that he hath sought to abuse you, as we perceive by your Letters you have some reason to doubt, then shall you forbear to deal with him in the for∣mer sort; and yet procure so much intelligence as you may at his hands; and after you shall discover his continuance in falshood and practise there, as you
can see occasion, and can gather matter against him, so deal with the King there, as by all good means that may be, specially considering the Amitie so often, of late time, assured to us by the King, he may be delivered as an open known Rebel and Traytor, especially in these practises used by him in Spn, however he himself hath discovered his evils, with the excuses. And we have some cause the more to doubt his lewdness there, for that Rogers, who brought your Letters, reported, that after he was come from Paris, about St. Dennis, he met with an Irish man; who told him, that this Archbishop had been secretly at the Court, and was readie to be dispatched away into Spain, by the means of the Cardinal of Lorrain; which if it were true, we cannot think but you have within a short time after been made privie hereof by the Irish man. And so according as you shall find the matter, we leave it to your discretion. The Scotish Ambassadors, who have been here with us, the Bishop of Ross, the Bishop of Gallaway, and the the Lord Leviston, as from their Queen; the Earl Mrton, and others, as from her son, now amongst them accepted as King; the said Queen, as they think, being justly deposed, have been long here, and troubled not a little us and our Councel. After much debating of the cause, we minding to make (if it might be) a final end, to the assurance of our selves, our Estates, and to the reducing of that Realm into quiet in it self without bloodshed, or further occasion of intestine War and con∣tinual dissention, in a Realm so near adjoyning to us; found at the last, that the said Earl Morton and his Colleagues had no sufficient Commission to treat of that matter, which, as we thought, was most necessarie to be treat∣ed of, if we should do any good in it, which was my final end and purpose; that is, the ayding of our Sister the Scots Queen, without impairing of our estate and uretie, and without putting the Realm of Scotland in an extriable danger of sedition and intestine war: Whereupon we were inforced now at the , after much debating with both the parties, so to leave the matter, with each of their contentations (as we think) both by going home for a time, the one, to have ample Commission to treat with us, as appertain∣eth to that effect, we may do that good herein that we desire; the other, to refresh themselves for a time, till the other having Commission, may be made a partie; which hithero, without Commission from their partie which be on the young Kings side, can be accounted but as private per∣sons, and not to be dealt withal in reason to do any thing which may be accounted of just moment, and effectual in Law. And they ffirm, that without Parliament, there can be made no Commission, neither to them, nor to any other, to treat of such matter: Whereupon their Parliament begun, and for fear of prejudicing the Queens partie in that behalf, at our motion surceased, and prorogued until May day next: They go home to it there to have such ample Power, Commission and Authoritie given to them or others, to treat with us and the Queen of Scots partie, for a final end; which done and and , we  shortlie to make an end of this con∣troversie, to the pleasure of God, and contentation of all parties, if it might be. This you may shew to the King, our good Brother, that it is our design and purpose, and hitherto in this sort we have travelled and have good hope to bring it to pass. And if the King shall thus reply, But if they will give no Com∣mission, or otherwise defer it of purpose, without answering any thing what we will then do (you may say) that we have thought upon that case.
That if they shall seek to look onely but upon delaies, and upon set purpose, and obstinatelie go about to defraud our intent, which is to unitie and quiet there, we must leave that partie which is unreasonable and obstinate and con∣clude with the other partie which will hear and understand reason: And so God willing we intend to do; the good success whereof we do not doubt but the King our good Brother shall see, and well allow of. Given under our Signet at our Pallace of Westminster the eighth day of April in the thirteenth year of our Reign. To the Right Honourable, my very good Friend Sir Francis Walsingham, Ambassador Resident for the Queens Majestie in France. SIr, my hard case is such, as either by business in health, or by dolour in sick∣ness, I cannot account my self a freeman, but a slave to serve, or an offen∣der to suffer torment. The will of God be fulfilled in me to his honour, for otherwise I find no comfort in this world: of this enough. I am forced to write this in my bed, with my hand, whilest I groan for pain in my knee and foot, and therefore I must be short. I could no sooner get answer to your Letters brought by Rogers. Your Lordships brought yesterday by Harcourt, were, I think, welcome, and well interpreted by her Majestie; for I sent them with my own sentence aforehand of my good allowance of your discretion in your choise of taking and leaving. The Queen of Scots you see is deferred, whereof that portion which is writ∣ten, was for my ease indited by Sir Thomas Smith: You must make the best of it, and seek out reasons to satisfie them there, that will mislike the delay. Indeed it hath been onely devised to win delay. I thank you for your private Letter. Even now we have very good news from the borders, that Dun-Britten Castle was taken on Monday last in the night by cunning, where was taken the Archbishop of Saint Andrews and the Lord Flenning, the manner how it was taken, is not signified. But it is of a greater importance then Edenborough Castle, considering it was receptaculum to all the Scotish Queens Forraign ayd. From Westminster, out of my bed, this Saturday at five of the clock, the seventh of March, 1571. Your assured Friend, William Burleigh. Excuse me to my Lord of Rutland for not writing.
To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. BEfore the receit of her Majesties, bearing date the eighth day of April, the Archbishops enterprize offered up to this State, through the discreet usage of the Irish Captain, was quite overthrown. For the same day that he should have conference with Monsieur about the matter, the said Captain pro∣cured the Archbishop to send him unto Monsieur, to know when it would be his pleasure that he might wait upon him, and so he according repaired un∣to Monsieur. Monsieur asked him divers questions touching the situation of Ireland, the manner of the Government of the same, to whom it appertained, and divers other such like questions: At the length he asked him, if the Coun∣trey were fruitful; and what commodity the Q. Majestie received by the same. Whereunto he answered, that the Countrey was very poor, and that her Ma∣jestie was at continual and yearly charges in keeping of the same, without re∣ceiving any commoditie from thence. Then he asked him, what the Bishop was. He answered him, that he was banished out of his Countrey for certain disorders there committed. And that sithence his departure from thence, he hath been in divers Countreys, seeking at Princes hands such relief as he might get, bearing them in hand, that he is able to do much in his Countrey. And after that Monsieur had heard this report, giving him credit, as one whom he knew; he willed him to tell the Arthbishop, that he doubted that he should not be at any leisure to confer with him, being now entertained in Counsel with matters of great wait; and further to say unto him, that if he did lack any thing, upon knowledge thereof given, he would be a mean unto the King for the same: Whereupon the Bishop by his Letters made Monsieur acquainted with his poverty, and order was taken that he had sent him two hundred Crowns. This I thought good to set down unto your Lordship at large, for two respects; the one, to the end you might the better know the Archbishop; the other, for that there may be by your good means unto her Majestie, some considerati∣on had of this Irish Captain, who from time to time hath been a very good in∣strument for the discoverie of the practises against Ireland, which he hath done with the hazarding of his life, if his dealing with me, or with Sir Henry were known. I have taken upon me to put him out of doubt, that this service of his will not be unconsidered by her Majestie. Surely, my good Lord, if when we promise in these causes consideration, and no regard be had thereto, neither can those of my calling promise reward; nor they to whom we promise, give cre∣dit to our words, when no fruits follow. I beseech your Lordship, therefore, deal earnestly with her Majestie in this behalf: he, without respect of this present ser∣vice, as I have before written, deserveth entertainment, in respect of his sufficien∣cy and hability to serve her Majestie through the skill he hath gotten by expe∣rience had of these latter wars here. After the receipt of her Majesties Letters of the eighth of April, according to the charge given me in them. I dealt with the Archbishop in respect of the secret practises he promised to reveal: Such perswasions as I could, I used to pro∣cure him to make his repair into Egland, shewing him that her Majestie pro∣mised grace and pardon, if he would humbly desire it at her hands, and purposed by his dutiful loyal meaning hereafter, to deserve it. And to the end that he should not doubt of her Majesties sincere dealing herein, I offered him my safe conduct, having authority from her Majesties so to do, to warrant him to go safely into the Realm, thereby to obtain her Majesties favour, with more safety
of his person, and to return in like case safely out of the Realm, if he should misuse the same: whereunto he once willingly accorded; but afterwards, by what sinister counsel I know not, he changed his mind; in the end he came to this issue, that unless it would please her Majestie to grant him this rude request, which also I send your Lordship, signed with his own hands, he would never return either into England, or into Ireland. I told him, that it became not a Subject, and an offendor, as he was, to stand in such terms with his Prince, but with humble submission, and acknowledging of his fault, to crave pardon, and to esteem this favour offered as rare; and not to be refused, but with thank∣fulness to be received. If it shall please her Majestie to grant him his pardon, his request is, that he might have knowledge thereof within these twenty dayes; for that otherwise, he is minded to repair again into Spain. At this present he is gone to Nantes in Brittain, there to dispatch certain businesses, as he saith, promising to return, and not to depart out of this Countrey these twenty days. The 19 of this month there arrived here two Gentlemen named Conniers, and one other named Beamont, who said they imbarqued at Newcastle the 12 of the same, and they escaped very narrowly: After they had stayed here a day, departed by Post into Flanders. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most hum∣bly take my leave at Paris, the 22 of April, 1571. To our right trusty and well-beloved Sir Francis Walsingham our Ambassador Resident with our good Brother the French King. ELIZABETH R. TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well; we understand such Mes∣sage and credit you lately sent and gave to Robert Beal, to be declared by the Lord of Burleigh to us, according as we did heretofore will you to ex∣plore the circumstance of the matter now revealed to you. You shall as much as may be, say to the party that hath made the demand, that we are sorry that we cannot satisfie their demand at this present; neither for the place where they require to be satisfied, nor for the same with such speed, the same being indeed impossible unto us both for place and time. And so you may conclude with assurance, that the revealing of their intent to you, shall in no wayes by our means prejudice their purpose. And so we pray you use the matter, as they report our answer to the best; we mean, with expedition to return Mr. Cavalcant thither with so much of our resolution as we can con∣veniently open unto him. And for the rest, we mean to commit to your charge by our other more special Letter. Given under our Signet at our Pallace of Westminster, the thirteenth of April, 1571. the thirteenth year of our Reign.
To the Right Honourable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. HEr Majesties answer contained in her Letters, bearing date the 13 of Aprill, I delivered unto the party, who awaited for the same, using the best words I might to breed contentation. The reply was, that he hoped the suit being so small, the surety offered sufficient, and the benefit that thereby might have risen unto her Majestie so great, that the same would not have been denied; for saith she, Let her Majestie assure her self, that Spain will never forget the arrest of the money, which she shall find when occasion of re∣venge shall be offered. They do here with great desire expect Mr. Cavalcants coming, and as I judge by some Letters received from their Ambassador, they conceive great hope to proceed; certain speech passed between Tilligney and the King, which I have imported to my Lord of Leicester, maketh me think that the Religion will be no let, &c. And so &c. Paris the 22 of Aprill 1571. Your Honours to command, Francis Walsingham. To the Right Honourable Sir Francis Walsingham, her Majesties Ambassador Resident in France. SIr, I most heartily thank you for your so well advised Letters, and conside∣ring I find them so circumsectly written, and the matters contained so well digested, I cannot but give you knowledge of my well liking of your service, whereof to my power I will also procure the Q. Majestie to conceive the like good opinion. I am sorry that the Q. Majestie findeth occasion to pretermit this late mo∣tion whereof (it is likely) she might reap great fruit, to the quietness of her own Countries; you must make the best that you can to content the parties; I need not vvrite more, because this bearer Mr. Beale is so sufficient, to vvhom I have also shevved some of our occurrents. From Westminster the 14 of Aprill 1571. Your assured loving friend Will. Cecill, I forgot my nevv vvord Will. Burleigh. To the Right Honourable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. I Was glad by your Lordships of the 7 and 14 of April, to understand the good liking you have of my ravv dealing in matters of such vveight as I am novv imployed in; next her Majestie, to your Lordships contentation do I chiefly seek, as his, vvhom (in this calling) I see hath chief regard to Gods glory and her Majesties safety. I am sorry the request I preferred took no better effect; I pray God it may be kept secret, that thereby there may grovv no evill effect, vvhereof I have some cause to doubt, by the experience I have had since my coming hither; The fault I knovv, but no remedie I hope after; The en∣terprise vvithin this moneth vvill break forth, and I hope to good effect▪ by
that I have further understood of their matter; and surely, the match proceed∣ing, nothing could be more sit in my poor opinion, then for us to have been dealers in the same, thereby to have avoided others. Thus I am bold to write, as a private man, in a private Letter, having no opinion as an Ambassador. And thus having nothing else at this present to trouble your Lordship with, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the 22 of Aprill. Your Honours to command, Fr. Walsingham. To my very friend Sir Fr. Walsingham, Ambassador Resident for the Queens Majestie in France. TOuching the Archb. you shall understand her Majesties pleasure by her Let∣ters. My Brother Sidney (the Deputy of Ireland) is arrived here; as farre as we can learn by him, there is great jarre between that Prelate and Prince Stewk∣ley, which hath caused his great mislike to remain in Spain, it may be to good purpose (if it be possible) to recover him and get him hither. For the other greatest matter, you shall shortly receive her Majesties full resolution; it appeareth, her Majestie hath good liking to proceed, if reason take place in the conditions. God send such speed as may be to the glory of the Al∣mighty God, and her Majesties good satisfaction. I suppose the dispatch will be ready to depart by Sunday, or Monday at the farthest; I pray you send me another Cipher more easie then the last. So with my hearty commendations, I bid you farewell. In haste this good Friday. Your assured friend, R. Leicester. To the Right Honourable and my very good Lord, the Earle of Leicester. SEeing her Majestie hath good liking to proceed, as appeareth by your Lordships Letters dated on Friday last, I am glad to conceive great hope by certain speech lately passed, between the King and Tilligny, that Religion will not be the let, which is the chiefest thing I respect in this match. About an 8 dayes past, the King entring into talke with him concerning this match, Tilligney shewed him, that it seemed strange to the world, that Monsieur (considering that this matter was in treaty) grew every day more suspicious then the other. To that the King replied, That his Brother (if there fell out no other let but Religion) would be ruled by him; And be∣cause (saith he) I may the better bring the matter to passe, I will have my Brother with me out of this Town, and divide him from certain super∣stitious Fryers, that seek to nourish this new holiness in him; And I doubt not (saith he) within these few dayes so to work my Brother, as he will yield to any thing that I will require. Two dayes after the King called again Tilligney unto him; and asked him, whether he lately had any talk with his Brother. He shewed him, that
the same day at dinner, Monsieur called him unto him, whose whole course of talk was onely in commendation of the Q. Majestie, and of the great desire he had to have so happy and so honorable a match; whereby (saith Tilligney) I see him so farre in, as I hope he will not make any difficulty at Religion, which will be the chiefest matter the Queen will stick in. No (saith the King) ob∣serve my Brother well, & you shall see him every day lesse superstitious then other. This I thought good at large to set down, aswell in respect of the match; as also, that your Lordship may see the great hope that may be gathered by this speech, of the Kings revolt from Papistry. Surely, I am of opinion, that if this match go forward, it will set the triple Crown quite aside. According to your Lordships request, I have sent you this inclosed Cipher; and o leaving further to trouble your Lordship at this present, referring you over for other matters unto my Lord of Burleighs Letters, &c. From Paris the 22 of Aprill 1571. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. alsingham. To our trusty and welbeloved, Sir Francis Walsingham, Ambassador Resident in France. ELIZABETH R. RIght trusty and welbeloved we greet your well, The bearer hereof Sr. Ca∣valcant hath bin here, and imparted to us certain matters (as it seemeth) committed to his charge; whereunto the Ambassador here being also by him made privy, they both have received our answer to such Articles as th been by them propounded. And of the same, and of our further pleasure how you shall proceed, you shall by our other Letters and instructions more amply understand. Given under our Signet, at our Palace of Westminster, the 17 day of Aprill 1571. the 13 year of our Reign. To our Right trusty and welbeloved, Sr. Fr. Walsingham our Ambassador Resident in France. ELIZABETH R. RIght trusty and welbeloved we greet you well, you shall understand that the French Ambassador and Cavalcant having speciall credit to move to us the matter of marriage with Monsieur de Anjou, have propounded to us certain Articles in French, whereof you shall herewith receive a Copy, To the which after some conference had by our commandment betwixt our Councellors the Earle of Leicester, and the Lord of Burleigh for us, and the said Ambassador and Cavalcant of the other party, our said Councellors have delivered such answers in writing to them, as also we send you herewith. In the debating whereof, the Ambassador hath with great earnestness, misliked sundry of them in this manner following; hat in the first he maketh doubt, that the usage of the matrimony by the orders of this our Realm, may contain matters which should be repugnant to the Dukes conscience, and namely, that he should at that time be urged to receive the Sacrament according to the institution of this our Church
whereupon, such words as are now at the last agreed in the answer, we think ought and doth satisfie them, though he pretend still some doubt; And yet if by the answer they there shall not be satisfied, then you may do well to impart to Monsieur de Foix the very order of the Book for that cause; And though the receiving of the Sacrament at that time, be in some part there mentio∣ned, yet that being not out of necessity, you may of your self give them some cause to hope, that it may (for reasonable respect) be forborn, and so they shall have reason to be content with it. The clause to have the Dukes Ministers in, was inserted upon such motion made by the Ambas∣sador. In the second he hath found most difficulty, for that by our answer he saith no grant is made by us, that the Duke shall have liberty for himself and his domestiques to use his own Religion; which he saith he would not re∣quire, but to be permitted withall these cautions and conditions; That he should use his Religion in secret place and manner, and with such circum∣spection, as thereby no manner of publique offence should grow to our Subjects; but hereto he could not have us yield, being answered, That we doubted not but that Monsieur de Anjou, would (by the advice of Queen Mother) be contented with our answers, being well weighed; in that we are content that by no means he, nor his Domestiques shall be com∣pelled to use the Rites of our Religion; otherwise then shall be agreeable with his conscience; But as for exercise of his own Religion, being specially forbidden by our Laws, we cannot without manifest offence and perill to our State accord thereto. And so we would have you to use all good perswasions to induce them to be content with our answer in this behalf: for the better main∣tenance whereof you may require, that it may be considered what perill it might be to the quietness of our State to have one that should be our husband (by his example in our house) to give comfort to our Subjects that pre∣sently are well devoted to obey our Laws, to break them; which may so fall out in processe of time, as we might repent that ever we had been so evill advised. And therefore specially you shall require Queen Mother to have good consideration hereof, as one that by her own experience of Government hath tasted of no small trouble growing by such permission, although she have now at length prudently brought a stay in the Realm; and in any wise you shall give them no other comfort in this behalf, but return to us their answer. The third Article is agreeable to the like Article, conceived in a treaty of marriage betwixt King Philip, and our late Sister Q. Mary; so as thereto no exception hath been made by the Ambassador. The fourth, though it was misliked by the Ambassador; yet it cannot be otherwise by us ordered, and so the Ambassador was peremptorily an∣swered. The fifth, though it did not like the Ambassador, for that there is no expresse sum of yearly revenues named to be allowed to the Duke, yet he hath accepted it with generall words. And herein to maintain our answer, you may truly affirm, that King Philip had no manner of thing allowed him, but sustained all his own charge, and gave also to Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Yeomen of our Nation good entertainment. In the sixth, the Ambassador hath alledged no misliking, but on our part you may see by the latter part of the Article, that it is meet that we should know the interest that the Duke hath in his severall Dominions, and how
the same are to succeed to his children, as well Sons as Daughters, if there be no Sons; and so you shall require a particular answer thereto. The seventh is agreeable to the like clause of an Act of Parliament, whereof you shall receive better information in another writing, containing such thing as on our part are to be demanded. And yet the Ambassador hath ear∣nestly required, that if the Duke should overlive us, and have a child living, that should be Heir to the Crown, he might continue the Title of a King, with his addition to be called Rex pater; and if no child should be living, that then he may be called Rex dotarius, which we think rather of matters of form then of substance, and meeter to be thought of when greater mat∣ters are accorded, then now; and so we have forborn to alter the Ar∣ticle. In this sort you see the manner of our answers. And although by our Let∣ters yesterday we signified unto you, that we would give some instructions how to propound other things to our benefit, and so we did also let the French Ambassador understand; yet upon some better consideration, we have forborn, thinking it meet, that this matter concerning the point of Religion, were first on both parties determined, before we should pro∣ceed in the rest; for this being accorded, there is no great difficulty in the rest; and this being not accorded to our contentation, the rest are not to be dealt in; and if it be misliked that we do not give you Commission to propound other things, as perchance the Ambassador here will give them some hope that we now meant to do, you may confesse, that we have indeed consi∣dered of other things requisite, wherein we think there will rest no difficulty. But we hold it most agreeable to the Queen Mothers own intention, that the matter might be so dealt in, as it might speedily appeare what were to be hoped of herein. And considering this matter, for the Religion seemeth of such substance, as none of the rest is, we think it best to have this first treated of; And so either to proceed or forbear, wherein, we trust our sin∣cerity shall well appeare. And so we would have you to expresse our good meaning. Given under our Signet, at our Pallace of Westminster, the 19 of April, 1571. the 13 yeare of our Reign. Articles delivered by the French Ambassador, and Mr. Cavalcant, 13 of April 1571. Q Ue le mariage se solemnizera sans user Des ceremonies, qui ne sont con∣formes á la Religion De Monseigneur. Que pour lay et ses domesticques, il poura fere libre exercice De sad Reli∣gion, sans toutesfois alterer en aucune faon l'ordre sur Icelle receu et apprové par la loy en Anglet. Qu'incontinent le mariage faict, Monsieur aie le tiltre Du Roy. d' Anglet. et governe et administre iceluz conjointement auecla roine. Que le lend demain apres le Mariage consommé, Monseigneur comme Mary de la royne sera coronné et recea des subjects pour Roy. Quil prendra soixante mil livres sterling par an du revenu du Roy D Anglet. affn, quil se puisse maint enir convenablement a la dignité e grandeur du Roy. Les dscendans de ce mariage succederont es biens paternels & maternels,
conformement aux loix et custumes des royaumes et pais ou ils sout situéz. Et outre sila roy ne aecederoit ne laissant hoirs procrees dece mariage, Mon∣sieur le nom et tilte, governement et administration desusdits soixante ante mil livres sterlin, affi qu'il puisse continuer sa premiere splen∣dur et grandeur. Qu'entre le Roy treschrestien et ses enfans les Roys d' Anglet. et lez enfans sera perpetuelle Amii et fraternit ligue et union. Explanatio Articulorum propositorum à D. Oratore Regis Christ∣niss. cum potestate reservata ad ampliorem explicationem corundem; cum tempus postulaverit. MAtrimonium celebrabitur secundum leges & ritus ecclesiae Anglicanae ceteris civilibus & regiis solemnitatibus adhibitis, quales adhiberi decet in matrnoniis regum Angliae. In cujus celebratione licebit Illustrissi∣mo, Duci habere presentes suos ministros tam ecclesiasticos quam civiles, qui contract matrimonii testes esse possint, requae omnes ibidem gestas in acta secun um formam Juris redigere valeant; Illustrssimus Dux & domestici qui su  sunt subditi Coronae Angliae nullo modo cogentur contra conscientiam sum, ut eorum uti vel exerere ritus ullos ecclisiasticos secundu morem eccle∣siae Anglianae. Idem Illustrssimus Dux & Maritus charissimus serenissimae Re∣ginae Angliae eam temporus congruis & usitatis comitabitur ad ecclesim vel Oratorium, ibidemque morabtur in loco sibi accomodato donec sere∣nisima Regina revertatur atque eam reducet ut tempus & locus postula∣bunt. Preterea Idem Illustrissimus Dux neque per seipsum neque quovis alis modo procurabt, ut aliqua muatio aut innovatio legum Ecclesisticarum de Reli∣gine etarum, in regno Angliae aut fiet aut tentetur, neque ullo subdito serenissimae Reginae favorem ullum praestabit quo easdem leges ecclisiasticas in ulla parte violet, sed potius curabit & dabit operam ut hujusmodi violator legum condiné puniatur. Illustrissimus  post marimonium conactum & consummatum, virtute dicti Matrimonii gaudebit, una cum serenssima regina consorte sua; titulo stilo honore & nomne regio constane & durane dicto mtrimonio, salvis tamen Juribus legibus conuetudinibus regni Angliae ceterisque cautis & conventis quae in hac parte specialiter provisa sunt, per tractatum de matrimonio inter serenissimam reginam Mariam defunctm sororem serenissimae reginae & Phillip∣pum nunc regem & tunc Principem Hipaniarum. Hud  est hujusmodi po∣stulat. consentire sine aperta injuria her. vel successor. serenissimae reginae neque unquam hoc postulatum  in contractum matrimonii á Carol. V. Caesare no∣filii sui Philips Principis Hispan. Quin aequum esse videatur ut Illustrissimus Dux suos proprios domesticos alat, suis sumptibus, ubicunque tamen & quandocunque dictus Illustris∣smus Dux tenebitur facere aliquas expensas mandato serenissimae Reginae, aut respectu Regnorum suorum providebitur, ut omnes hujusmodi expensae sol∣vantur ex erario publico Regni Angliae. Liberi ex hoc Matrimonio prognati in Materna hereditate sucdent in
regius, secundum jura & consuetudines regnorum (viz.) primogenitus filius in Coronam, quam Regina Mater habet, & si nulli extabunt filii Masculi, filiae; si extabunt, succedent, viz prima & sola maxima natu, &c. Atque idem ut fiat in hereditate paterna aequum est, & quo modo consuetudines locorum id ferrent, intelligi par est. Si reliqua petenda ab Illustriimo Duce, quo ad aequa fuerint, concedantur non negabitur illi tutela filii & filiae suae cum in hoc matrimonio prognat, Regnum Angliae pertinebit ac—etiam regnorum eodem modo iisque conditionibus & provisionibus quibus statutum est per quasdam ordinationes magni Parlamenti Angliae in favorem Reg. Hispa. cum serenissima regina putabatur ex eo esse gra∣vida. Nihil tale poterit in hoc casu per serenissimam Reginam concedi marito suo superviventi, presertim ubi non extabunt liberi aliqui ex eo matrimonio, nisi id fiat authoritate totius Regni per consensum trium statuum Regni Angliae; Ne∣que hujusmodi quicquam petitum est à Phil. Rege vel principe tempore serenis∣simae nunc Reginae cum eadem serenissima Regina à compluribus petita it in conjugem. At si quid hujusmodi in posterum sperari possit ut à statubus Regni concedatur, tum potissimum expectandum est, cum Illustrissimus Dux fuerit illis & Regno magis cognitus & perspectus. ltimò utiliss. est utrique Regno ut quam firmissima pax & confede∣ratio perpetua ineatur. To the Right Honourable and my very loving friend, Sir Francis Walsingham, her Majesties Ambassador Resident in France. SIr, this bearer returneth with the Queens Majesties Letters, and answer, to such Articles as he brought hither; both which I do send you at this time, but not that you should deal therein in any wise, untill you shall receive the Queens Majesties Letters to inform you how to deal therein; and how like∣wise you shall proceed further in other matters to be moved on her Majesties behalf, which are of more waite and consequence to be written, then can presently be sent by this bearer; But I trust they shall be expedited within these few daies, and untill that time I forbeare to write any more. This bearer appeareth to us a very carefull and honest Gentlemen, and well devoted to the Queens Majestie, and so I pray you let him know my opinion of him. From Westminster the 18 of Aprill 1571. Your loving friend William Burleigh. To the Right Honourable and my assured friend Sir Fr. Walsingham, the Queens Majesties Ambassador in France. SIr, after I had written my other Letters yesterday, there happened some alteration in this great matter of moment; Where the Queens Ma∣jestie
Majestie had determined (besides her answer to the French Articles) to have also sent you certain other Articles to be demanded of them there, whereby the whole cause should be opened, and nothing left behind in silence; so that both parties might have understood their mutuall intentions. Now suddainly her Majestie hath thought good at this time to send onely the French Articles, and her answers, and for the rest she meaneth to reserve untill she may understand how her answers are taken, and specially how the knotty point of Religion will be smoothed▪ And the cause of this change (as I con∣jecture) groweth of some late intelligence brought thence, that if the Queens Majestie will stand earnestly upon that point for Religion, it shall be assented unto, which causeth her to proceed thus confidently. And for my part, I wish most heartily that it may so succeed, but that onely I must fear, except you shall moderate the matter better, they there will imagine that this matter of Religion is but projected to colour the delay in breaking off; for indeed in like cause so did the Emperor for his Brother the Arch-Duke Charles. As I cannot instruct you how to dissolve this doubt there, but as cause shall be given; So, I know your wisdome sufficient to invent sufficient answers to mollifie their hard conceits. Thus you see how inwardly I deale with you, and trust you will so use it. I find Mr. Cavalcant very well disposed and sorry to see these occasions given, though surely he seeth here the Queen Majesties disposition directly to his contentation. From Westminster the 19 of Aprill 1571. Your assured friend William Burleigh. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majestie, that Mr. Cavalcant arrived here the 24 of this moneth, by whom I received her Majesties Let∣ters, the contents whereof, after I had perused and conferred with him touch∣ing his proceedings, and for that the King and Queen Mother were departed out of this Town, the one to St. Disier, the other to Monceaux to bring the Duke, and Dutchess of Lorrain onward on their way. It was agreed between us that he should repaire the next morning to Monceaux to Queen Mother, there to deliver her Majesties Letters as also her answers to the Articles propounded by the King. Touching his proceeding with her I referre your Lordship to his own Letters. By him I understood at his return that Queen Mother would speak with me, at her repaire to the Town, if I had any thing to say unto her; So the 26 of this moneth she repaired hither, and for that during the time of her abode here she could have no leasure, she sent me word that the next day in the morning I should repaire unto her, to Qure. come four English miles from Paris, and that there I should have Audience. So according to her appointment I repaired thither the next morning, and at the time of my accesse unto her presence, I shewed her that I was come thither to know how she rested satisfied with the answer she recei∣ved from her Majestie by Master Cavalcant to those Articles which were
propounded by the King and her, to the end I might advertise her Ma∣jestie. She shewed me, that the Answers made unto their Articles, seemed to her not to be direct, saving tha which was made unto the second Article con∣cerning Religion; which (saith she) is very hard, and neerly toucheth the honour of my Son, so far forth, that if he should yield thereto, the Queen your Mistress should also receive some part of the blemish, by accept∣ing for a husband such a one as by sudden change of Religion might be thought through worldly respects void of all Conscience and Reli∣gion. I replyed, that I was willed to say to her from her Majestie, that she doubted not but that Monsieur her Son by her good perswasion would take in good part her said answers, who meant not such sudden change of Religion, as that he or his houshold should be compelled to use the Rites of the English Church, contrary to his or their Consciences: But forasmuch as the granting unto him the exercise of his Religion, being contrary to her Laws, might by an example breed such an offence as was like to kindle such trouble as lately reigned in France, whereof both herself and her son had good experience. She therefore hoped, that he who (if the match pro∣ceeded) was to sail with her in in one ship, and to run with her one for∣tune, would not require a thing, that she by no means could yield to, who tendred nothing more then the quiet and repose of her Subjects, and there∣fore in respect hereof, could by no means consent to any such permission, as might by any likelihood disturb the same. To this she replyed, that the not having the exercise, was as much as to change his Religion; which thing he could not do upon a sudden, without the note to be of no Religion; which dishonour I am sure no respect can draw him to endanger himself. And as he in respect of the said ignominie, is resolved fully not to yield, so can I with no reason perswade him thereto; and as for any peril that may happen by the same, I think it shall be the best way of safety of your Mistress, who alwayes by the way of his Bro∣thers sword, should be the better able to correct any such evil Subjects as should go about to disturb the repose and quiet of her Estate, which she may assure herself he will do, without having respect to any Religion, whereof some tryal lately hath been made by his consenting with the King, to have some good justice and example of punishment done at Roan. In answer whereof, I besought her to consider as well the Queens damage, as her sons honour. I shewed her, that of this permission great mischiefs would ensue: First, the violating of her Laws. Secondarily, the offence of her good and faithful Subjects. And lastly, the encouragement of the evil affected: Which three mischiefs if you will weigh, said I, together with your Sons honours, you shall finde them of great moment; and that the Queens Majestie my Mistress hath great cause to stand to the denial of any such permission, whereof is likely to ensue such manifest peril. And as for the ayd of the Kings sword, I shewed her, that the example by permission, would do much more hurt then either his own or his Brothers sword could do good, for that the issue of our mischief by civil dissention, falls out commonly to be sudden and short, but very sharp, and were not drawn in length, as those that happened in other Countreys, we having nei∣ther walled Towns nor Fortresses to retire to, thereby to protract our Wars.
To this she answered, that her Son would soon be overcome by the Queens perswasions in that behalf, who was more zealous then able to de∣fend his Religion, whereby the same inconvenience of example will not long last. For, saith she, it is generally feared by the Catholiques, that this match will breed a change of Religion throughout all Europe. In the end she concluded, that neither Monsieur, her Son, nor the King, nor herself could ever yield to any such sudden change for any respect whatsoever, neither could her Majestie desire it, considering how much it would touch his reputation, whom she is to match withal if it pro∣ceed. I asked then of her, whether she would have me so to advertise her Ma∣jestie. She desired me in any cause so to do; and to know directly, whe∣ther by yielding or not yielding to the said second Articles with all rea∣sonable cautions, she meant to proceed or forbear; whereof she desired her Majestie at the farthest to give answer within ten days, for that the King stayeth his progress onely upon that; and if so be she mean to pro∣ceed; then to send the Articles that are to be propounded by her Ma∣jestie. Monsieur de la Mothe Fenelon (as I learn by Monsieur de Foix) hath given very honourable report of the Queens Majesties proceedings, assuring them that there is nothing but sincerity meant. If her Majestie resolve to proceed, I learn then, that Monsieur de Foix shall come over with the Kings Answer, to such Articles as shall be pro∣pounded by the Queens Majestie, and so to grow to some through conclu∣sion. And so having nothing else to advertise her Majestie at this present, I most humbly take my leave of your Honour. At Paris the eight and twentieth of April, 1571. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. The CONFERENCE between me and Monsieur de Foix. FOr my first entry in our Conference, I shewed him, that I was glad that it was my hap to be appointed to deal with him, who did concur with me in like affection towards this cause, being drawn by publique re∣spects, as wishing well unto our Countreys and Princes; and therefore the rather hoped that the success would be thereafter. I shewed him, that great matters, before they could be brought to an end, could not but be full of great difficulties; which if by the good discretion of those which are Dealers and Instruments in the same were not qualified, a profita∣ble matter might by evil handling quail and take no effect. I shewed him therefore, that this matter being in appearance so good and profita∣ble to both our Countreys, as I for my part would not fail to do therein what there might lie in me to remove such difficulties as might rise, so far forth as might stand with the Queens Honour and Safety. And if I did any way fail, it should be for lack of judgement and experience, and not lack of good will. I
shewed him, that by perusing the answer to the Articles, I found only the difficulty to be in Religion, which by his good help, might be reduced to accord, there was no doubt but that the matter would take that effect we both desired. To this Monsieur de Foix answered, that he was the rather willing to deal in this matter, for that he was well perswaded of my good inclination in that behalf, protesting, that he never more earnestly travelled in matter in his life, which Monsieur could very well witness, whose perswasions to him chiefly to enter into the matter, through the honourable report he made of her Ma∣jesties rare vertues and gifts; wherein through the Counter practises of divers other, he found no small difficulty, Monsieur being by them perswaded, that it would be his hap to march in rank with the forsaken; which scruple being by me, saith he, removed, if the matter should not take that success I desire, would be no less cause of displeasure, then otherwise of comfort, if the same take good effect. Touching the present difficulty of Religion; if her Majestie continue still resolute to maintain her answer, I see the matter at an end. For (saith he) Monsieur hath either Religion, or no Religion. If he have Religion, then Religion being a constant perswasion, confirmed by time, cannot but in time be removed, and not upon the sudden: if he have no Religion, then he is unworthy of your Mistress, and the place and degree he beareth. And surely, saith he, as Religion in all persons is to be desired, so in none more then in Princes, who have no other bridle to stay them from evil, then Religion. And as for Monsieur, saith he, I know him to be religious in his kind, wherein, I suppose, he is not so assuredly grounded, but that there may grow alteration and hange thereof in time, through the Queens good perswasions, whereof we have seen good experience of womens vertue in that place: Constantine was converted by his Mother Helena; the King of Navarre by the Queen his wife; and therefore can I not doubt but this match proceeding, Monsieur will be turned by his wife, who is of that good disposition and nature, as in all his proceedings he is not transported and carried away by passion, but guided and conducted by rea∣son. To this I replyed, That the Queens Majestie wished not such sudden change of Religion, as might breed irreligion, but onely the forbearing of the exercise whereof, might breed by permission both offence and stirrs in her Estate; and as for the Examples of Constantine, and the rest, they are common for both; for as many wives have been turned by their husbands, as husbands by their wives. To this he answered, that to live without exercise of Religion, was as much as to be of no Religion; and saith he, the Queens Majestie I know is honourable, and would not have him  with so great a spot, as to be thought an Atheist, whom she mant so saitly to tye her self to, as of two to become one, who is to participate with him both in honour and dishonour. To this I replyed, that if it were true that I had heard, Monsieuer was not so far from our Religion, having had some introduction therein by Curuvalet his Governour lately deceased; and therefore if it please him to water those seeds, that he had already received by some confe∣rence, he should be able easiely to discern that the change of his Religion, should breed unto him no dishonour at all, it being no less
fault to continue in error, then commendable to come from error to truth. I desired him to consider with me, both the inconvenience that would grow to Monsieur by persisting in his Religion; and also, what greater inconvenience would come unto the Queens Majestie my Mistress, by permission of exercise of the same. Touching the inconvenience that would happen to Monsieur, I told him, that it is held for a general Maxime, that no Prince that is a stranger, and cometh to rule in a Forraign Countrey, can be welcome, or well received by the Inhabitants: Therefore Monsieur coming into England, except it were by accident, in respect of the partialities (said I) as you know are to Protestants and Catholiques, either of these two would be glad to be assured of Monsieur. In reason now it is to be weighed, with which of these two he is to joyn; with the Protestants, he shall favour those whom the Queen especially favoureth; he shall concur with her in the maintenance of the present State and Govern∣ment; he shall gain the favour of her Majesties Councellours, in whom she reposeth her greatest trust; and lastly, he shall continue the Realm in repose and quietness: I on the other side, he persist in his Religion, first, he shall not gain the Catholiques, unless they may have the like libertie as he himself enjoyeth. Secondarily, they are already devoted unto the Queen of Scots, and so mis∣liking nothing more then of his Marriage, doubting thereby to grow the pre∣judice of her Title; whereby we may conclude, that by all likelihood, by having of it, he shall not joyn the good wills of the Catholiques, unless they may participate with him in like liberty; and on the other side, it will breed misliking of him with the Protestants, doubting the exercise of his Religion will breed some unquietness in the State; and consequently, he will be misliked of both, which inconvenience of misliking, I wished him to perswade Monsieur well to weigh. Touching the inconvenience that would grow to the Queen, I shewed him the same would rise three manner of ways: First, by breach of Law. Secondly, by offence of her good Subjects; and, Thirdly, by the encouragement of evil Subjects. Which, said I, if you will well weigh, are of much more mo∣ment then any may happen to Monsieur, he being only touched by re∣lenting in honour, the Queens Majestie my Mistress both in honour and safety; he as a private person, she being as a Monarch and a Prince, whose Kingdoms were to participate any inconvenience that might befall unto her. To this he replyed, that his relenting in Religion being matter of consci∣ence, was an inconvenience of more weight then any that might happen to the Queen. In the end, after many replications on both sides to and fro, he concluded, that he was well assured that Monsieur in no case would be brought upon a sudden to yield to any change of Religion for no respect; and yet that he doubted not but within a mall tim after the Match, the same would easi∣ly be brought to pass without any great difficulty. He willed me to consi∣der how much this match was misliked by the Catholiques; and how much on the other side, desired of those of the Religion here, and that in his opini∣on and conscience nothing could more further Religion throughout Christen∣dom then this match. To this I answered, that her Majestie was on the other side fully bent to maintain her answer to the second Article, or otherwise resolved not to proceed; and so we ended.
This Conference was between us, the day after Master Cavalcants ar∣rival, Master Cavalcant being present. And so &c. From Paris the eight and twentieth of April, 1571. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To our right trusty and well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esquire, our Ambassador Resident with our good Brother the French King. ELIZABETH R. RIght trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well: By your Letters of the two and twentieth of April, sent to the Lord of Burleigh, we per∣ceive in what sort you have dealt with the Irish Fugitive Morris fitz-Gibbons, naming himself Archbishop of Cassel; and having considered his request in a Paper subscribed with his hand, we do not so much disallow his request to have our pardon, and his restitution of his Bishoprick, if we shall so please, as the slender manner of his suit, being void of all recog∣nition of his offences, and therewith, his desire to repair out of that Countrey into Ireland, without first coming hither, where he ought by his submission to recover his pardon: And therefore we would that you should inform him by Letters, or by Message, and upon your informations of his pe∣titions, we do not allow of his manner of so slender submission and petition. And if he will not humblie require pardon for his offences, and shew him∣self repentant, and disposed to live hereafter in Ireland like a faithful Sub∣ject, we mean not to bestow upon him either pardon or Bishoprick. But if he will upon your warrant come hither into England, he shall find us ready to shew him grace, according to his humbleness in suing for it. This you may let him know, and express the same unto him in such sort as you shall see cause; for except you shall understand certainly of him, we understand there is no great account to be made of him as he pretendeth for himself; neither is he of kin to the Earl of Desmond, as he alledgeth, nor of any cre∣dit in England: And yet we are content to draw him home by means not dishonourable. We do well allow of the Irish man whom you have im∣ployed to attend upon him; but whether it be Captain Thomas or Henry is not expressed; and we would have you to assure him, that he shall be considered by us: And we pray you to advertise us in what sort you think best to have him rewarded. Given under our Signet at our Pallace of Westminster, the fifth of May, 1571. and in the thirteenth year of our Reign.
To the Right Honourable Sir Francis Walsingham, Ambassador for the Queens Majestie in France. SIr, for answer to your Letters concerning the Iewd Lozell of Ireland, intituling himself Archbishop of Cassels, the Queens Majesties will serve. And for reward of the Irish man, I pray you advertise your opinion by your next. I hear by many means out of Spain, that the King is therein rather counselled by Epimetheus, then Prometheus; he hath imployed much money upon Stewkley, and now findeth him not worthie of any more. Our Parlia∣ment is dailie new with child with projects for Laws, that I was never more wearie. Your Letters for the matters of D. hath driven us to the wall, and particularly offended the Queens Majestie. But the French Ambassador hath Letters from the Queen Mother, and from de Foix, wherein the matters are more tempered; and I think he hath Commission to qualifie that hard Ar∣ticle that cannot be there digested. It is too true that I perceive that you wrote to Master Hennage, that some comfort here hath made you hardlier answered. Indeed I wish things were not subject to sudden changes, but Gods will be done; for I cannot tell how to satisfie doubts, but must refer me to his power to direct me. As I received news out of Scotland, so I send you them; we have matters revealed which will shortly disgrace 8 and offend 2 and yet nothing shall be justly imployed to the Queens Majestie, but that she is of meer necessity forced in extremities to use new remedies. Yours assuredly, William Burleigh. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majestie, that according to the tenor of her Letters, dated the fifth of May, I have given the pretended Archbishop to understand by my Letters, who is now at Nantes, how her Majestie doth not allow the slender manner of his submission, neither can think him worthy of favour or grace, unless upon warrant given by me, he maketh his repair into Enland, and there with all humilitie sue unto her Majestie for the same. Of late he hath sent from Nantes certain of his servants (as I am enformed) to what end I cannot learn. I have enformed Captain Thomas how her Majestie, upon information given by me, doth accept in very good part his late service in the discovery of the pretended Archbishops practises; and that she meaneth to consider there∣of: Whereupon he hath desired me in his name, most humbly to desire her Majestie to be so good and gracious a Lady unto him, as he may have some charge under her Majestie, either in Ireland his native Countrey, or else∣where, as one that desireth nothing more then to imploy the experience he hath gathered in these Civil Wars in her Majesties service: Here there is very good account made of him: And notwithstanding that the most part of the ordinary bands are discharged, as well Captains as Souldiers, yet hath he allowed by the King sixteen Crowns a moneth pension. His Father, whose
name was Bathe, was one of the Justices in Ireland, his Brother is Recorder of Drogheda. This I write touching his Parentage, to the end her Majestie may the better conceive of his loyaltie. I am given secretly to understand, that Rodolphi had Letters of Credit given him by the Spanish▪ Ambassador, unto the Duke de Alva: whereupon he had long conference with the Duke, and was dispatched in post to Rome, with Letters of Credit to the Pope; as also, with Letters of Credit to the King of Spain, promising to be at Madril the 20 of this present moneth. Touching the matter of secresie committed unto him, I can learn nothing as yet; notwithstanding I thought it my part to advertise your Lordship of thus much, who perhaps by other advertisements can give some ghess what the same importeth. The Scots here have some enterprize in hand, as I am inform∣ed by the party whom I appointed to observe the Lord Seatons doings. The Ambassador of late hath been at Court, and is returned from thence with answer not altogether to his liking; and saith, that so long as the Marriage is in Treaty, there is no hope of good here to be done for the help of their cause. Birack, who lately returned out of Scotland, is in hope to return with new Forces, which se∣cretly he saith to his Friends dependeth onely upon the resolution of the marri∣age now in hand. The Lord Seaton departeth hence out of hand into Flanders, being sent for by her Majesties Rebels there, who have somewhat in hand pre∣sently to be executed. They of late have very importunately been in hand with me for passports; but understanding they have such enterprize in hand, I thought good in that behalf to make some stay for a time, alledging, that I have some or∣der from her Majestie to make some stay therein, until I be further advertised of her pleasure, I hope her Majestie will not dissallow of this my doings, though I do it without warrant. Out of Brittain I am advertised, that la Roche had dis∣covered unto a Kinsman of his, that his enterprize in Ireland was, to have exe∣cuted a plot of Conquest, devised by Peter Strozza in King Henries time; which if the match go not forward, he is promised that he shall go in hand withal: here∣by it doth well appear, that the expectation of this match is the onely stay of divers pretended mischiefs. Here they are in some perplexitie, for that they hear nothing of her Majesties answer, being given to understand by the Ambassador, that her Majestie had signified her mind unto me in that behalf. Queen Mother denieth now, that she prefixed a day of answer, and that I did mistake her. I must needs confess, that in requiring the same, she used such words, as her Majestie hath no cause to be justly offended, which omitting to impart unto her Majestie, I do most humbly crave pardon at her hands, being most heartily sorry, that through my default, there should grow any unkindness between them. Her words were as followeth: First, she asked me, after she had willed me to signifie unto her Majestie the Kings and her resolution in what time I might have answer. I shevved her, that I hoped vvithin ten or tvvelve days; the rather, for that I knovv my Mistress to be re∣solved, and therefore the matter required the less deliberation. Then she desired me to vvill her Majestie, that they might have ansvver within ten dayes, if it might be. These circumstances by me omitted, I perceive her Majestie the ra∣ther to mislike the limitation of the time; for the vvhich as before, so again I most humbly require her Majesties pardon. And so, &c. At Paris the fourteenth of May, 1571. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham.
To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham, the Queen Majesties Am∣bassador with the French King. THere is nothing yet readie to send you touching the matter of Monsieur. The Ambassador resident hath received Letters of late, since yours came from the Queen Mother, and from Monsieur de Foix, touching that cause: He shewed his Letter to me and my Lord of Burleigh; and it appeareth, that de Foix Letter doth qualifie much the dealing which you and Cavalcant had; I mean, he writeth in sort to continue the matter, and as it were, that there would be offer made by them: But her Majestie hath handled the matter, ex∣ceeding well with the Ambassador, and giveth him no hope, without yielding of their part to that she hath reformed in their first demands. And as as I can perceive, they will rather yield then break off: God send all to be for his glory, and our good; and so farewel my good Walsingham. In haste this seventh of May 1571. Your assured Friend, Ro. Leicester. Commend me to my Cousin your wife, by the next you shall hear more of this matter. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. MY very good Lord, the Protestants here do so earnestlie desire this match; and on the other side, the Papists do so earnestlie seek to im∣peach the same, as it maketh me the more earnest in furthering of the same: Besides, when I particularly consider her Majesties state, both at home and abroad, so far forth as my poor eye-sight can discern; and how she is beset with Forraign peril, the execution whereof stayeth onely upon the event of this match, I do not see how she can stand, if this matter break off. No particu∣lar respect (as God is my witness) moveth me to write thus earnestly, but on∣ly the regard I have to Gods glory, and her Majesties safetie. They rest here somewhat perplexed, for that the answer is so long deferred, being advertised from their Ambassador, I had order from her Majestie in that behalf: Your Lordship therefore shall do well, if there be none sent before the arrival of this Messenger, to hasten the same with all speed. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave at Paris the fourteenth of May, 1571. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lords, the Earle of Leicester, and my Lord of Burleigh. I Thought good to advertise her Majestie with speed, that they rest here in very good opinion of the matter; and that if the Articles were here, that are to be propounded by her Majestie, it would make them more reasonable in the point of Religion. Thus farre I hear they are come on, that they are content that that Article shall be left out uncapitulated. Montmorency who is now at the Court, hath done very good offices herein. They stand upon this, as I learn, that her Majestie promised to deliver her Articles assoon as she could re∣ceive the King; and that therefore without the having of them, will not deal so frankly as otherwise they would; for that the same being promised and not come, breedeth mistrust; I beseech your Lordships therefore (for put∣ting away all jealousie) to deal earnestly with her Majestie for the present sending of them with all speed; for that by her Majesties Letters I perceive they are in a readiness. To morrow I repaire to the Court to deliver my message, whereof they have an inkling by the Ambassadors Letters, who doth deal very honorably towards her Majestie. Thus for haste, leaving further to trouble your Lordships at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Vernon the 19 of May 1571. Your Honours to command, Fr. Walsingham. To our Right trusty and well beloved, Francis Walsingham Esq our Ambassador Resident with our good Brother the French King. ELIZABETH R. RIght trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well; after we heard the con∣tents of your Letters sent hither concerning your communication with the Queen Mother, and also with Monsieur de Foix, upon the answer we sent you by Cavalcant to the Articles brought by him, we understood also by the French Ambassador here resident, that he had received Letters from the Q. Mother and de Foix concerning the same matters. And though the answer made to you (as by your Letters we conceive) were more peremptory, then such as the Letters to this Ambassador (which we have seen) did purport, ad∣ding thereunto some dulcimes to qualifie the same, especally in answering that which we could not but object as strange; that the Q. Mother required to have answer from us within the space of ten dayes; yet to omit rehearsalls, either the contents of your Letters, or of the Letters sent to this Ambas∣sador; we think best to impart unto you, which we will you shall impart to the Q. Mother, or to the King; which is thus, we find more great and urgent causes to move us to persist in our former answer in the Article of Religion, both for our conscience, our safety, honour, and quietness, then can be be alledged or imagined for the conscience and honour of Monsieur de Anjou, and the reasons hereof as apparent in this sort following: First, if we shall grant a permis∣sion to Monsieur to have the use of his Religion, which we take principally to consist in the having, saying, and hearing of the private Masse, though the same should be secret for the place, and rarely for the time, and not frequented with
numbers; yet it might seem doubtfull to us how without offence of conscience, such a tolleration might be by us permitted. Secondarily, though our conscience should not be offended, yet we are well assured, that our realm being not void of diversities of opinions herein, though indeed presently we find no disobedience worthy of any accompt against our Laws, there could not any such exercise of Religion be used by our sufferance (by a person of such estimation, as one being allowed to be our husband, should be) but that the same would breed such a misliking to our best subjects and servants, as surely should diminish their great love toward us, and consequently hazard some inward troubles within our Realm, by occasion that one part now dutifully obeying us, would grow doubt∣full of our conscience in the observations of our Laws, and another part would be imboldened by example of that which our husband should be permitted to do, should attempt to neglect our Laws, and multiply occasions, discords, and sedi∣tions; and these perills are so evident to follow, and so dangerous if they should follow, as surely if we should not aforehand so consider them, we might con∣demn our selves of great folly, as not having due regard either to our own particular estate, or to the common quietness of our Realm; whereof hitherto, we thank Almighty God (through his speciall goodness) we have had the effects of much contentation. On the other part, we see no such matter of weight to be considered for Monsieur, that either his conscience, his honour, or safety should be troubled, impeached, or indangered; although we perceive that the Queen Mothers speeches seem to tend thereto; for where it is said, and that by answer, if he should come hither, and live without his own Religion, he should be ac∣compted as one of no Religion, and in time comming he should be (as de Foix saith) an Atheist, and so neither could we in right esteem him to have any faith; neither should he keep the reputation that he hath. Of all which, certainly, if we could think that by our answer, and his yielding thereto, any hurt might happen to him, we should utterly condemn our selves, and readily Reform the same, or else forbear to give any answer at all; but you shall say, That we require the Queen Mother, or the King, or if the cause so re∣quire, Monsieur himself, to consider better of our answer; we leave him freedome to use our Religion, in that we are content not to constrain him, or any of his otherwise to use it, then it shall please him, saying, That we think it expedient, that if he should be our husband, he should accom∣pany us to the Church, and why he should not, or may not use our man∣ner of prayers and divine Service, certainly we think no reason can be yielded by any that knoweth the same, and will compare it to that which the Church of Rome doeth use; For in ours, there is no part that hath not been, yea that is not at this day used in the Church of Rome, as of late the same hath been allowed by the last Councell at Trent; and if any thing be more in ours, the same is part of the holy Scripture. Now therefore why it should be objected, That Monsieur should live here without Religion, if he shall be present at ours, there is no cause, except it may be objected, that ours is in the English tongue and not understood; but to satisfie that, the same is also in the Latin tgue as the service of the Church of Rome, and so ordered to be used in our Universities▪ And if the Latin tongue should not content; it is also, or may be translated into the French, either of which his own ministers might use at his pleasure, in places convenient; whereby he might serve God devoutly, and thereby not to be counted irre∣ligious, or an Atheist: And if it should be objected, that by this means it might be esteemed that he might make a change of his faith in matters of questions in Religion; certainly herein it might also be truly answered,
that although we can be glad that all persons should by Gods inspiration change from ignorance, or errour, to knowledge and truth; yet mean we not to pre∣scribe to him, or any person, that they should at our motion, or in respect of us, change their Religion in matters of faith; Neither doth the usage of the divine Service of England properly compell any man to alter his opinion in the great matters now in controversie in the Church; Onely the usage thereof doth direct men daily to heare and read the Scriptures, to pray to almighty God (by daily use of the Psalter of David,) and of the ancient Prayers, Anthemes and Collects of the Church, even the same which the universall Church hath used, and doth yet use. Lastly, if any one part of our Articles and Ceremonies should mislike him, as surely we cannot conjecture of any such; Yet therein (the rest not being by him misliked) some tolleration might be to forbear the same, untill he might better consider thereof. And to that which is said, That we permit Ambassadors to use the Religion of Rome: First, we never made any grant thereof to any, whereby in that respect his conscience is free. But being suf∣fered, that is to say, not molested, therein by any of our ministers of our Laws, the difference is apparent between another Princes servant comming onely but as a Messenger, or tarrying to do Messages, which is the office of an Am∣bassador; and one that is to be our husband, that is, in respect of Religion our head, and in order to be joynt Governor of our Realms, and subjects with us; that is, to assist us in maintenance of our Laws, in punishing offenders, in giving good example to our Subjects, in counselling us how to maintain the quietness of our estate, and preserve to us, and to himself for our sake, the love which he shall find is born to us by our subjects. And how contrary it shall be to all those that he may doe, as Ambassadors are suffred to doe, in whom neither we, nor our People can have any such Opinion of carriage for us, or them; or for our Laws or quietness, every person understandeth. Yea, com∣monly, Subjects think the contrary of all Ambassadors of strange Princes, though all give not like cause; Thus you see what we think meet to answer at this time, having some reasonable Causes to move us to think, That if the matter be as earnestly meant, as is by the Ambassadors words pretended, they will not be so precise as to demand any conditions in the case of Religion, where∣of our estate may come in danger, or our present quietness come in doubt; And therefore you shall be the more earnest in setting forth the dangers that neces∣sarily may follow. The Ambassador hath required us to send you the rest of such demands as is meet for our part; whereunto we were once inclined, and have them in readiness; But now we find it convenient, first to understand the resolution of this matter of Religion, before we will propound the rest, where∣by no delay of time shall follow, if in the first we may accord; for we may spee∣dily by Post send you the same demands, if cause so require. Given under our signet, at our Pallace of Westminister, the 11 day of May 1571 and in the 13 year of our Reign.
To the Right Honourable, Fr. Walsingham Esq her Majesties Ambassador Resident in France. SIr, by the Queens Majesties Letters you shall understand, what you are directed to do and say; and therefore I must forbear to deal therein with you, con∣sidering you are prescribed; But I will friendly let you know how the answer hath proceeded; and so the cause and circumstance known, you may the bet∣ter conceive the inward sense of the Message. At the first coming of your Letters hither, with the answer from Queen Mother. In—A was very sorry to judge the matter so perplexed, and almost desperate; Whereby I then judged there was here a plaine forward intention to proceed in the cause, if this let for Religion should not be a stay. After two daies the French Ambassador had Letters, and the Queens Majestie was by some informed, that saw the Letters, that there was no such difficulty in that matter of Religion; Never∣theless, the Ambassador himself being appointed to conferr with my Lord of Leicester, and me, made the cause very hard, alledging directly, that Mon∣sieur would never sustaine that dishonour, as to come hither with an accompt to the world, that he should have no Religion; and then I answered, as is contained in the Queens Majesties Letters, setting out the neerness of ours, to such as was good and found in the Roman; adding, that we omitted nothing but those which were impious and doubtfull to be against the Scriptures: And so with us he ended, with this request, that the Queens Majestie would grant these words (quod) which sentence I found imperfect, and so yet do; I reported this to the Queens Majestie, After this, I was by one of some value secretly informed, that if this matter of Religion were earnestly sticked unto, and per∣emptorily pressed, it would be obtained; whereupon the answer was concei∣ved, and I commanded to report it to the French Ambassador; who hearing it; seemed much dismayed; and concluded, That he saw not but this answer should make a breach and end of the whole: For, if the answer (saith he) be grounded upon the Queens conscience, then saith he, there is no qualification to be hoped for. Thus I reported, and thereupon I saw her Majestie was perplexed, and wished I had forborn to have made the principall foundation upon her Majesties conscience, which I was commanded to do, and there∣fore no fault in me. And to remedie the matter, I was willed speedily to ad∣vertise the Ambassador secretly, that I was larger in explication of her Ma∣jesties conscience, then I see since my speaking with him was meant; and that the principall reasons were the other of the misliking of her good subjects, and of the danger to lose their good wills, &c. And so did I by a little writing advertise him; whereby, what conceit he gathereth, I know not; but by some others I heare that he still judgeth it broken. After this, I was commanded also to temper the sentence in the Queens Majesties Letters, as you perceive; for it is not as it was, an assertion of direct necessity, but of possibility. Thus having some circumstances to give you some light, but what you shall find by your light, God knoweth: I doubt the worst, and so I have said; but yet the opinion conceived by her Majestie maketh her to believe the contrary. It were strange that any one man should give comfort to the Ambas∣sador in the cause; and yet the same man to perswade the Queens Majestie that she should persist; both these things are done, but I dare not affirm by any one; and thus I end. In Scotland; the Q. partie have recovered Eden∣burgh Town by Granges favour; And yet presently he tearmeth himself
the Kings subject, and so they are like to fray together, or else to come to consul∣tation amongst themselves, to govern the Realm without deciding the Kings title, or the Queens; I cannot tell whether the greater part like better a or of none, for so their writings and words purport; making no mention of King or Queen, but of Magistrates to conserve the peace and liberty of their Coun∣try. And so I am forced to leave of, and so I end from Westminster the 11 of May 1571. Your assured loving friend, Wil. Burleigh. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majestie, That the 20 of this month I repaired to Galleon; where I had Audience at the Queen Mothers hands, to whom I declared at large, such reasons as moved her Majestie to maintain her first answer, touching the Article of Religion, the repetition whereof I leave at this present to put down, the same containing no other thing, then that which was perscribed me by her Majesties last Letters, dated the 11 of May. To this the Queen Mother answered, That she saw very well, that the reasons alleadged by her Majestie were not lightly to be weighed, and that therefore she would consult with the King and Monsieur in that behalf; and that the next day I should receive answer. By certain that wish well to the cause, I was advised to deal with Monsieur himself; so repairing unto him, I shewed him, That I was appointed by her Majestie to make him understand, the great inconvenience that would follow by such permission as he required touching the exercise of his Religion; as also, that her Majestie (though other∣wise she could wish him reduced from error to truth) yet did not presse him to any such sodaine change of Religion, as might cause him to be reputed for an Atheist; onely this she desired, that he would forbear the use of his private Masse, in respect of the great inconvenience that would follow; and that fur∣ther he would examine, whether he might not with good devotion serve God with such form of prayer as publiquely is used in our Realm, being in effect nothing else, &c. To this he answered, That he rather desired to be a meane to redresse inconveniencies, then to breed any; to be a comfort, then a discom∣fort; and that he thought it would otherwise fall out. After he had thus ended, he replyed, That though he was of years young, yet any time these five years there have been overtures of marriage made unto him, and that he found in himself no inclination untill this present to yield to any. But (saith he) I must needs confesse, that through the great commendations that is made of the Q. your Mistress, for her rare guifts, aswell of mind as of body, being (as even her very enemies say) the rarest creature that was in Eu∣rope these 500. years; my affection grounded upon so good respects, hath now made me yield to be wholly hers. And that therefore (saith he) if I thought that there could ensue any inconvenience to her disquiet, through me, I would rather wish my self never to have been born. Touching my request for the exercise of my Religion, considering the same toucheth my soul & conscience,
being but private for my self, in some private place, I suppose there will grow no such offence thereof as will breed any disquiet, o alteration of state; and therefore I hope she will dispence with me in that behalf. I replyed, That I hoped that when he had well weighed the inconvenience that would follow; that without scruple of conscience he might well (with good devotion) frequent the exercise of our Church service, he would not insist upon any dispensation. To that he answered, that he knew not how God hereafter would dispose his heart, and (that therefore for the present) he desired her to weigh in her own con∣science, what it were to do any thing with scruple and remorse of conscience, and so desired me to present on his behalf his most affectionate and humble commendation; and to assure her, That she onely had Authority to command him. The next day, as I was appointed, I repaired to the Court, and there having accesse unto the King, I shewed, that I doubted not but that his Mo∣ther had made him acquainted with such reasons as lead the Q. Majesty my Mi∣stris to maintain her former answer in respect of the great inconveniences that would ensue, aswell perjudiciall to Monsieur his brother, as to her Majestie. I shewed him, That I was now onely to request him from her Majestie, that he would perswade his Brother, that in respect of the said inconveniences, not to be so resolute in requiring a tolleration that might prove so dangerous; as also, to advise him to examine, whether he might not with good conscience serve God, according to such form of prayers, as is usually practised throughout her Dominious. To this the King answered, That the reasons alleadged by her Ma∣jestie were of great moment; he willed me therefore to desire her Majestie, in his name, that the Articles by her to be propounded might be sent, that the whole matter might be joyntly considered of. And to assure her, that he doubted not but that his Brother would be ruled by him so farre forth, as might stand with honour, reason, and conscience. After I had thus euded with the King, I repaired to Q. Mother, to whom I made report of such answer as I received from the Kings hands, which she said, I had well conceived, for that it was the self same that they had resolved on between themselves; she willed me to desire her Majestie that her demand might be at the first propounded reasonable and well qualified, to the end this matter might come the sooner to conclusion, and therefore she wished, that if it might so lie in her, that the Ambassador might be made acquainted with them before the sending of them over, who can give before hand some light what the King in reason will consent unto, whereby to breed the more expedition; she concluded with me, that I should assure her Majestie, that aswell touching Religion, as other points, reason should decide on their parts all such difficulties as should rise. It is thought that Monsieur de Foix shall be sent over with the Kings answers unto her Majesties demands; he sheweth him∣self not unthankfull for such honour as he hath received at her Majesties hands, who earnestly travelleth to remove such difficulties as do rise in this matter, and to stand in her Majesties defence against those that seek any way to touch her in honour, your Lordship shall therefore do well to move her Majestie, that you by your private Letters may signifie unto him, that her Majestie doth ac∣cept those good offices done by him, in very good part. It is further thought, that Monsieur Montmorency shall be the Nobleman, that shall be sent to ratifie such Articles as shall be accorded unto by the King: he hath since his repaire unto the Court, marvelously furthered this matter, and hath caused them to grow so reasonable. Monsieur de la Mot doth con∣tinually (by his Letters) make very honourable report of her Majestie, touching her proceedings in this cause.
Monsieur de Foix hath willed me to advertise your Lordship, that her Ma∣jesties direction to me, and her speech delivered to their Ambassador did not agree; for he writeth, That her Majestie promiseth some qualification of her answer unto the second Article, and I deny the receipt of any such thing; he writeth, that I should deliver unto the King her Majesties demand, and I deny to have received any; he therefore wisheth, for the advoiding of jealousie, that the same were reformed, that the Articles be sent before the return of this bearer: I do not mean to be known of the receipt of them, untill I hear fur∣ther of her Majesties pleasure. Your Lordship shall do well; by the next, to send a Book of Common praiers translated in the French, that I may present it unto Monsieur; I have seen of them printed at Garnesey. C. Lodowick desired me most earnestly to move her Majestie, that it would please her to licence Hawkins underhand to serve him with certain ships; which favour (if it please her Majestie to shew him) he hopeth she shall not have cause to forethink the same, which Letter shall well appeare, whensoever occasion shall be offered, wherein he may do her service. Mr. Cavalcant is here a very good instrument in this cause in hand, and doth deal therein both sinceerly and discreetly, and worthy of the trust that her Majestie doth put in him, whose assistance by no means I could have lacked. Thus leaving further to trouble your honour &c. At Vernon the 25 of May 1571. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majestie, That Q. Mother sent lately unto me this Memoriall, which I send your Lordship here inclosed, requesting me, that some good justice might be done therein. The Me∣moriall is unperfect, making no mention at all either of personship, or place; but he saith that Monsieur de la Mot can declare unto you at large the whole circumstance of the matter; of late I find here, in like causes, reasonable ex∣pedition of Justice; and therefore it may please your Lordship to take order, that they may receive like measure. Further she willed me to signifie unto her Ma∣jestie, that touching the information given unto her, how that the Scotish Ambassador here had dealt with her and Monsieur about some attempt against Ireland, that she, and Monsieur for his justification, do avow, that he never moved any such thing unto them; And for that she understood, that this re∣port should be some let why the Scotish Ambassador obtained not a Paspor lately demanded at her Majesties hand; she desireth her, for that she avoweth the report to be untrue, to grant him the said Pasport, with free egresse and regresse for her sake: she willed me further to advertise her Majestie, that he assureth her, that his repaire thither to the Q. his Mistress, is for no evill intent, but chiefly to deal with her in some particular causes touching himself; wherein if he should falsify his faith, his comodity would be but small, in respect of the living he presently enjoyeth in France. I have of late granted Pasport, (alleadging
that I am now so warned from home) to certain Scotish men; for that I see there is no cause of feare, France being so well enclined toward us as they are; And as for Flanders, they begin now to stand upon their guard, &c. At Nantes the 26 of May 1571. Your Honours to command Francis Walsingham. To the Right Honourable Fr. Walsingham Esq the Queen Majesties Ambassador in France. SIr, you must beare with my slow dispatches in returning your servants, for that I cannot obtain such resolutions as may give cause to write; whereupon I am forced to beare here patiently the lack I find, and you must do the like on your part; hoping that Deus dabit meliora. Now I send away this bearer, meaning and hoping to send herewith the great answer; and to give you some light hereof; Thus it is, the French Ambassador upon the receipt of his last answers, agreeable with your Letters, pressed the Queens Majestie to have the rest of the Articles on her part, which in no wise she would agree unto, pre∣tending, that without a resolute answer to the Article of Religion this could not be; wherewith the Ambassador was so wounded as indeed in conference with him I found him desperate of the matter, and entred into passions. But after some speechs used with him, I pacified him, with hope, that the Q. Ma∣jestie might be by further perswasions induced to shew the rest of the Articles; and so with some long labourious perswasions her Majestie was induced to agree, that the Articles should be made ready and shewed, as things earnestly pressed by that King and his Ambassador here, with which pretence her Majestie thought her honour saved well, hereof I was appointed to inform the Ambassador, and then was I also commanded to put the Articles in readiness, which were not unready, as I conceived; but ere I could finish them, I was commanded to con∣clude them with a request to have Calais restored, a matter so inconvenient to bring forth a marriage, as indeed, I thought it meant to procure a breach, and so the matter continued in my opinion desperate; but with good help it was re∣medied. I desired that the Queens Majestie would let my Lord Marques, the Earles of suffex and Leicester to see the Articles, and so they did, and very ho∣norably and wisely gave counsell to forbeare that Toy of Calais; and generally did further the prosecution of the marriage, as a matter of all other most necessary at this time. And now we take it that her Majestie intendeth it earnestly; whereupon, yesterday in the afternoone my Lord of Leicester and I have delivered unto the Ambassador a Copy of the Articles, which at the first hearing he did not mislike; what he will do this day I know not, but cer∣tainly they are very reasonable. Thus farre are we passed: so I trust on Wednesday to dispatch Harcourt. Yesterday came de Pine with Letters to my Lord of Leicester from the King, the Q. Mother, and Monsieur, which will much further the matter, and it is rea∣son that my Lord of Leicester be assured of favours both there, and at home; for some that like not this match, may otherwise engender doubts in his Lordship; And yet surely at this present he dealeth earnestly with her
Majestie in the furtherance of the match; you shall do well to let his Lordship understand what good opinion is had of him for so doing. The matters in Scot∣land go hardly for us, the Queens party, by Granges means, occupieth Eden∣burgh, and the King is constrained to keep in Sterling; both parties are in arms, which yet are used defensive. The Queen party hath had Money and Ammu∣nitions from France. The Bishop of Ross is still restrained, and so deserveth. The Queen liketh not of the Bishop of Glascows coming into the Realm. Dr Story suffered at Tyborn on Fryday, and there refused to give alleagiance to the Queens Majestie, and professed to dye as the King of Spains Subject; and so be∣ing arraigned on the Tuesday before at the Kings Bench, he would not answer to the Indictment, alledging, that he was not a Subject of the Realm; whereupon, without further Tryal, he was condemned as guilty of the Treasons contained in the Indictments. The practises of Stewkley are abated in Spain, by discovery of his lewdness and insufficiency. Huggins is here arrived; and so fare you well. From West∣minster the fifth of Iune, 1571. Yours assuredly, William Burleigh. I send you a Note of our late Acts in Parliament. To my very Friend Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador for the Queen Ma∣jestie in France. I Have received your Letters by this Bearer, who brought me also Letters from the King, Queen Mother and Monsieur, whom I perceived hath con∣ceived good opinion of my devotion for the furtherance of the matter of mar∣riage with the Queens Majestie. I have thought good to return this Bearer again, for that he desired speedy dispatch; to whom I have imparted the state of that matter, which onely doth stand upon the Article of Religion, to which her Ma∣jestie will by no means relent: All other Articles are reasonable; and her Ma∣jestie hath shewed her Demands to this Ambassador, and hath dispatched the same to you, which I think will be with you before this. For the other point, touching Religion, if I might advise them thereof, they should not speak of it at all; for sooner will her Majestie yield to reason himself, that shall have that interest in her, that shall be her husband, then by any Contract or other De∣claration. And finding her Majestie disappointed upon the argument of that point, to proceed as she hath seemed in the matter, I cannot but hope of ve∣ry good success, to which for my part, in respect of her Majesties surety and hope of universal good to the cause of Religion, I must with well, and further the best I can, according to your advice, whereof I thank you, and am glad to see your consideration thereof. This Bearer shall further declare some part of my minde unto you, for that I know him to be honest and trusty, and well devoted to her Majestie and the cause of Religion. Thus, with my most hearty com∣mendations, I bid you farewel. In haste this seventh of Iune, 1571. Your assured Friend, Ro: Leicester.
By the QUEEN. To our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Francis Walsingham, our Am∣bassador Resident with our good Brother the French King. ELIZABETH R. RIght Trusty and Well-beloved, we greet you well; although we did heretofore think it reasonable to forbear the sending of any Articles to contain the Demands on our part, until we might have a resolute An∣swer from the King to our former Answers made to his Articles, sent hi∣ther by Cavalcant; and namely, to the Article touching Religion: Yet finding by your Letters, and the continual solicitation of the French Am∣bassador here Resident, how earnestly the King desireth to see our De∣mands; which when he shall have, he will make answer to the former, we are, contrary to our own disposition, induced by these means to send the same at this time, as you shall receive the same in Articles; whereof you shall advertise the King and Queen Mother, and let them understand, that were it not for the earnest solicitation of the Ambassador, we would have forborn so to have done; for that we take it it may be interpreted in some manner to touch us in honour, that not having knowledge how the King will satisfie us in the matter of Religion, which is the principal, we should pass further into the Treaty of all the rest, altogether upon un∣certainty what to hope in the principal. But to their satisfaction herein, you shall say, that we not onely caused the Earl of Leicester and Lord Burleigh, whom onely of our Councel we have used herein, according to our former agreement, to impart our Demands in certain Articles to the French Ambassador; but have also sent them now in writing, to be by you shewed unto them, having therein followed for the most part the form of things granted to our late Sister, of Noble Memory, Queen Mary, as by the Treaty of Marriage betwixt King Philip and her may appear. And further, you shall say, that these Articles are but briefly and summari∣ly conceived by our foresaid Counsellours, who have not the knowledge of the forms of Law requisite in such case; so as we reserve to our selves power, if the substance of them shall be granted, to cause the same to be in form of Law inlarged, by such others of our Councel, as by learn∣ing can better do the same. Besides, we do deliver these Demands to be joynt∣ly considered with the Articles of our first Answer to the Demands on their part brought by Cavalcant. We perceive by the French Ambassador, that certain Clauses which we agreed should be added to some of the first Articles, were not contained in the Writing by you there shewed: And not knowing whether in the writing of them there, the same Clauses were omit∣ted, for more surety we send you a new Copy hereof, to be shewed as you shall have occasion: And if indeed those Clauses shall appear to have been omitted in the former, the same was omitted but by the Writer.
If the King or any other shall press you to understand of our proceedings with the Queen of Scots, as in misliking the restraint of the Bishop of Ross, or in not determining her cause; you shall for the first say, that the evil parts done by the Bishop of Ross, are such, and so dangerous to us, and our State, as no Prince could suffer, as we think, the like, without some sharp revenge: For where in the late Rebellion in the North, we understood that he had given the Heads of that Rebellion comfort to enter into the same, which he could not deny, being charged therewith, but that secret∣ly they had sent to him for ayd and comfort afore their Rebellion, although he yield the same unto them, nor thought it meet to utter the same, and so we were content to pass over the same, with hope that he would at∣tend his causes only according to the place he held, to be as an Agent or Minister for her, and not to intermeddle as he had done with our Affairs, and to trouble our State; nevertheless, within a few moneths after he did eftsoons secretly by night, which was the last Summer, enter into such intelligences and practises with some of our Nobility, as we could not en∣dure the same, but for a time restrained him of his libertie, until he pro∣mised never to be found in the like to offend us: Contrary whereun∣to he hath now of new entred into practises by his Letters and Ministers to stir up secretly some new Rebellion in our Realm; and hath for that purpose dealt by his Ministers with certain our Fugitives and Rebels in the the King of Spains Low-Countreys: As also with the Duke of Alva, and further prosecuted his intentions to that purpose, by sending both to the Pope, and to the King of Spain; of all which his doing we have full proof, and in certain part to prove the same his own Confessions, and manifestly argue his guiltiness. Now therefore you shall require the King or his Mother, if they shall deal with you herein, to interpret well of our doings, for that we may not endure such kind of dealing as may so indanger, or at the least trou∣ble our Estate. And for this purpose, if you shall be required, why we do refuse to grant to the Bishop of Glascow passport, you shall say, it is up∣on the self same ground; for we do well know his conditions, and spe∣cially how unmeet a man he is to come hither to do any good office be∣twixt the Queen his Mistress and us, who we know hath rather been a maintainer then a pacifier of discord betwixt us in times past. And for our intention towards the Queens of Scots, although her Minister the Bi∣shop of Ross hath otherwise deserved; yet we do continue in minde to proceed to the hearing and ordering of her cause, upon the coming of certain Noblemen out of Scotland, both for her and the King her Son, the delay whereof hath lately grown by the renewing of arms on both sides, whereof being by an express Messenger of ours now very lately sent into Scotland to both parties earnestly charged by us, either of the parties do charge the other, and excuse themselves; and yet at length they are now content to re-enter again into Treaty offering to send hither their Commissioners. For which purpose we have even this day re∣turned answer to them of our contentation to hear them, and have required both parties to lay down their Arms, which we doubt not but they will; and so doing, we trust, shortly some good end will follow; for so is our desire and full purpose, and so shall it appear by our actions. Of all this we thought good to inform you, to the end you
may the better answer thereto, if speech be moved thereof, or else not. Given at Osterley the eighth of Iune, 1571. and in the thirteenth year of our Reign. To the Right Honourable and my very loving Friend Mr. Francis Wal∣singham Esquire, Ambassador Resident in France. SIr, as I promised by my last Letters, sent by your Italian, so do I now dispatch Harcourt. By her Majesties Letters you shall see your charge, wherein God give you good success; as I for my part sincerely mean, even for his glory, and for the surety of the Queen my Soveraign, and weal of my Countrey; wherein if I do dissemble, I wish, as I am writing, the indig∣nation of the Almighty Lord of Hosts. The cause of the Queens Maje∣sties persisting so hard in the cause of Religion, wherein I rejoyce, as the allowance of the matter is, as I find and do disclose secretly an opinion, that her Majestie conceiveth, that if she will stand fast, they will utterly yield. Now how true that will fall out in the event, or why she is so informed, if it be not too certain, you may ghess. I hear by some other, that du Pine saith so; unto me he neither saith so, nor doth answer to it, though I do ask him thereof directly. But this he saith, that Monsieur will be content to have the point of Religion left free, without any Capitulation. This I pray you keep to your self, for it may be mistaken of some. I send you a a Book in French of the Common-prayer, which is hardly gotten, as this bearer can shew you. I fear the first Articles were mistaken, in that the Ambassador saith they lacked some clauses. And I perusing my Copies, find both sorts remaining with me; that is, one sort without these clauses added, and another with them, whereof I do now send you one. I did name to the Ambassadour for the Queens Majesties Dowry, Fourty thou∣sand Crowns; and since I find the Queens Majestie content with Thirty thousand; for so was Queen Maries, by the name of Three thousand pounds Flemish, after fourty grooz to the pound, which maketh but Thirty thou∣sand Crowns French. The Ambassador, since he had his answer, wrote to me to procure a more certain Answer what Monsieur should have; and though it be not expressed in the first answers, where properly it was to be answered, yet I think it shall be no less then the Dowry of Kings Wives here hath been, which is Ten thousand Marks, or Twenty thousand No∣bles. Now I must wearily, being assaulted with business of Scotland, which is now in Arms, and dangerously for our part, and also fore Ireland, which is onely in trouble for want of money, give over, &c. From Osterly, where the Queens Majestie is retired for this day and to morrow the seventh of Iune, 1571.
To the ight Horale, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Honour to advertise her Majestie, that the 19 of this Moneth, having access unto the King, I shewed unto the King her Maje∣sties Articles, using such speech before the delivery of the same, as by mine instructions from her Majestie I was directed. The King shewed me, that he could not but accept in the best part her Majesties frank and confident dealing, and that therefore he found himself most bound unto her, willing me to assure her Majestie from him, that this sincere and direct dealing should receive the like aquital at his hands. Touching his answer unto the said demands, he told me he would confer with his Councel, and would with∣in a day or two send for me to the Court, to understand what would be his resolution. The eighteenth of this Moneth he sent for me, and there shewed me, that upon conference with his Councel, he was resolved forthwith to dis∣patch a Gentleman of his Chamber, named de l' Archant, being Captain of his Brothers guard, to give her Majestie thanks, for that it pleased her to deal so frankly with him, and so sincerely, as she had done in the Treaty of this weighty cause in hand; which honourable proceeding of hers, he willed me to assure her, that he would never forget; and further to signifie unto her, that he made choise of the Marshal Montmrency, and Monsieur de Foix, to send over with his full mind touching the Articles that have been propounded of ei∣ther side; and that he therefore desired by the said Gentlemen to understand when it shall be her Majesties pleasure that they shall come over to treat in that behalf. Having then done with the King, the Queen Mother called me unto her, and told me, that of late certain had gone about to perswade the King her Son, that her Majestie meant nothing less then to proceed in this marriage, using sundry perswasions to induce her to believe the same: Notwithstanding she assured me, that such is the great good opinion that they all have of her Majesties sincerity upon good grounds, in respect of her Majesties honourable dealing, as no such brutes and sinister practises can prevail with them to make them think otherwise then honourable of her Majestie, and yet she did assure me that the same did proceed from such persons, as they might easily have been abused, had not her Majesties own sincere dealing assured them of the contrary. I shewed her, that if she or the King should otherwise think of her Majestie, they should do her great wrong, and give her just cause to think her sincere dealing unsincerely requited. This was the effect of my present negotiation. And so &c. At  the twentieth of Iune, 1571. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham.
To my very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador for the Queens Majestie in France. I Have written by du Pine of late to you, and before that, as I think, you have received her Majesties Answer, and such Articles as she doth think meet to be demanded. Her Majestie doth stand still very stiff touching the point of Religion required of that side; and as far as I can perceive, she will hardly relent to any other qualification then you know of; and that be∣ing granted to her, I suppose there will be no other difficultie. And surely in this, if Monsieur remit the whole to her Majestie, there is no doubt but by that means he shall obtain more then we wish, and more then is reasonable, or at the least convenient to be openly contracted by them: For as by the one that may be had, which is to be born withal for a time, in hope of bet∣ter; so by the other, it will altogether encourage such as are already too high and most meetest to be kept under, even for both their sureties. For this cause it is onely to be wished: for these respects; the first, to the uni∣versal good of the cause of Religion; the other, for the quietness of our pre∣sent Estate: And for these causes sake, I pray God to prosper it accordingly; and I see no cause gratly to doubt, if that point of Religion be yielded on that side unto. The Ambassador here doth very honestly and well in the matter, and surely doth good offices between their Majesties. For my part, I perceive by you, that I have cause to thank him for his particular affecti∣on towards me, I can but thank him here. And I pray you, as you may have occasion, use this favour for me, as it may appear to the Kings Maje∣stie there, how much his Ambassador hath made me know of his good ac∣ceptance of my good devotion towards the encrease of the good Amitie be∣tween our good Soveraign and him, which doth give me great encouragement to go alway the more forward, so far forth as with my duty to her Majestie I may. Thus having no other matter presently to write to you, I bid you fare∣wel, in haste the ninth of June, 1571. Your assured Friend, Ro. Leicester. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. THe  shewed me his Mistresses Letters dated the seventh of this moneth— him to advertise A. that their— of great moment in hand to impart— he seeketh with England, and therefore— roundly forward with the matter furthe— to advertise A. that there is a practise in— the stealing away of the Scotish Q. whereunto— him to have regard. This as I can gather— come from 54 who discovereth it to his Master, he hath not yet imparted the same unto A. by the reason of his absence about ten days past, it was
bruted here for most certain truth, that the Scotish Queen was escaped into Flanders. Of late days, of these common brutes, there have followed shrewd effects, whereof your Lordship shall do well to advertise her Maje∣stie to have an eye that way. The King is not yet returned to Galleon, but re∣maineth still at Paris, which divers of my fellows find themselves agrieved withal, especially Spain. There rise daily new causes of unkindness between the two Princes; Spain seemeth to set the King here very light, which ingen∣dreth in him a great desire of revenge, and lacketh but treasure to make open demonstration thereof. And so, &c. At Loveirs the five and twentieth of June, 1571. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham. By the QUEEN. To our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esq our Ambassador Resident with our good Brother the French King. ELIZABETH R. RIght Trusty and Well-beloved, we greet you well: Forasmuch as the French Ambassador here, joyntly with Monsieur de l' Archant, Captain of the Guard of Monsier D. Anjo, treated with us to have our consent, that the Marshal Montmorency and others, nominated with him for the French King, might come hither (as they say) to treat and conclude the matter moved be∣twixt us and the said Monsieur, we think it necessary to impart unto you what hath passed therein at some length; which we have ordered to be put in writing by the Lord of Burleigh, to the intent that on the one part, you should not be ignorant; and on the other part, you should be better instructed how to treat upon the matter, both with the King or any other that shall in this matter have Commission to treat with you. In all our dealings with them you shall find, that we have in no wise yielded to grant to Monsieur a liberty for exercise of his Romish Religion; neither have we any inclination to yield thereto; and yet for the benefit of our Realm, rather then for any particular inclination to marriage, we have resolved this marriage to be meet for us, so as the difficulty of Religion be well accorded. And where in the last end, up∣on conference had by the Ambassador and Lord of Archant, with the Earl of Leicester and the Lord of Burleigh, it may appear to you, that they finding a resolute determination of their Ambassadors, should demand of us a liberty for Monsieur in the cause of Religion, it should be denied, then did they there∣upon seem to yield, and by way of demand require to know, how it might be liked, if the demand of Religion were utterly forborn and put to silence. Our meaning is not, that you should make any mention hereof to the King, or any other, except it be first moved to you. And then in that case you may well say, that if it be not demanded by them in Treaty, then shall there need no con∣tradiction to be made in Treaty; and if they think the honour of Monsieur pre∣served in that, it is not denied him; as likewise the honour of us should be pre∣served, in that we have not assented thereto: And that there shall not be no further meaning by Monsieur herein; but that as it shall not be by way of Treaty demanded before Marriage; so he will be also content after marriage to forbear the use of it, then may you seem to agree thereto. For otherwise you
may plainly say, either to Monsieur himself, or to some other in credit about him, whom you may trust, that the forbearing of it by way of Treaty shall not con∣tent us only, but also the forbearing of the use of it. And so we require you to express the same plainly, where you shall see cause; for we cannot esteem it a plain dealing to pass it over with silence in the Treaty, and yet to be in doubt whether the same shall be used indeed, and thereby move a new controversie be∣tween him and us, of more danger then is meet to be suffered, to follow for lack of plain dealing with them: herewith included shall you have in writing, the sum of the Conference had at this time, by which you may be fully informed. And whereas prssport was required by de l' Archant for the Marshal Montmorency, Monsieur de Foix, and Monsieur de Chiverny, we thought once to have sent it unto you, to the end if the King would send them, you might deliver the same; but sithence we have thought better to stay it, until we might know the Kings answer to you. Given under our Signet at our Honor of Hampton Court the ninth of Iuly, 1571. in the thirteenth year of our Reign. A summary of the several answers made by the Queens Majestie to the French Ambassador and Mr. ' Archant to their Message and Request. THey first said, That the French King, Queen Mother, and Monsieur de An∣jou, thanked her Majestie for her sincere manner of dealing hitherto; and that having considered such answers as her Majestie had made to the first de∣mands, and the last Articles delivered by her Ambassador, containing things to be demanded on her part, which her Majestie had done upon earnest solicitation of the King on his part: The King their Master, and the Queen his Mother, thought fit to send this Gentleman to notifie their great liking to proceed, and to finish the matter; and therefore were determined to send hither an Ambas∣sage of honourable and wise persons; that is to say, the Marshal of Montmorency, Monsieur de Foix, and Monsieur de Chiverny Chancellor to Monsieur, to treat and conclude the same, if so her Majestie would think meet, and would grant them her license and conduct to come; who also were in such readiness, and im∣mediately upon the return of Monsieur de l' Archant, they would forthwith take their journey hither. To this her Majestie answered, That she also thanked the King and the Queen Mother for their manner of friendly dealing, in prosecuting this matter so earnestly; and for her sincere dealing with them, she doubted not but her doings should always thereof make good proof. But as to the matter of Monsieur and her, she could not understand that it was in such forwardness, as by their speeches she gathered, that the Ambas∣sadors might come in such sort, as by their speeches it seemed to end and conclude it; for that she, as yet, understood not the difficulties risen upon the first answer, that were by the King conceived, namely, in the matter of Religion; neither yet how her last Articles of her Demands were accepted by the King, althogh she confess that she thought there could be no mislike in those last Articles, con∣sidering there was nothing contained in them, but that which already had been granted by King Philip to Q. Mary her sister; so as then her Majestie concluded, that except the King would declare his contentation and his Brothers, agreeable to her Majasties minde already declared in the matter of Religion (that is, that she could not grant unto Monsieur liberty to exercise the Roman Religion in
any  contrary to her Laws) she saw it but labor lost to send any Ambassadors. To this the Ambassador & l' Archant, for answer, used long speeches, in declaring how the King, Q. Mother, and his brother, desired nothing more then the honor of her Maj. and the weal of her Estate; & so likewise hoped that her Maj. would have due regard of the honour and estate of Monsieur, that should not be judged by the world to be without a Religion; which must needs be, if he should live here with∣out the exercise of his Religion; and yet his meaning was not, to use the same in any sort to be offensive to her Majestie, or to breed offence to the quiet estate of the Realm. And so further, they used many arguments to move her Maj. to yield to their desire. But her Maj. persisted in her former determination, that she could neither with conscience, nor yet in respect of policy, grant to Mon. such liberty as was required; and added, that she was not of mind that Mon. should be constrained to live here without exercise of religion; for if the form of the religion in England as it is established by the Laws of the Realm, were considered by them, as it might easily be, considering that it was published, and to be seen both in Latin & French, it should be found that there is nothing in the same contrary to the Roman religi∣on, differing only, that the same is translated out of the Latin tongue into English, and that some things, for reasonable respects, are omitted, and not used in the Church of England, so as whosoever shall use the same service, cannot be ac∣counted without Religion, nor to do any thing repugnant to the Roman Religion. In this sort, with speeches at more length tending to these ends, they departed from her Majestie upon their first access; and afterwards they made means that her Maj. would be pleased to give them some better answer; and in like manner her Majestie thought her determination so reasonable for her to hold, as she rather thought that they had some further power to yield to her. And because her Maj. understood that the French King had concluded this matter with the rest of his Councel, and by nominating Ambassadors, had made the cause patent, her Maj. hi∣therto having not imparted it to any others, but with two of her Councel, as she was required so to keep it secretly on the French Kings behalf. Now she com∣mandeth that the whole proceedings from the beginning should be declared to her Councel; and so being done, the same were very well allowed by her Coun∣cellors, and her Maj. was earnestly moved by them all not to stay in this matter of her marriage with Mon. de Anjon, so as he might be induced to consent with her in Religion, or at the least not to have any exercise of Religion contrary to hers. After this, the Ambassador, with l' Archant, came again on Friday to her Maj. and renewing their former reasons, requested of her Maj. to know her answer, whether the Marshal Montmorency should not come in ambassage, as before was signified to be the Kings desire. Whereunto in brief the substance of her Majesties answer was, that as she did greatly esteem the Kings amity, and was desirous to conserve the same with mutual good will, so was she very careful not to accord to any thing that in her opinion might in any wise impair the same, by giving to him any cause or colour of unkindness; and therefore she wished that the K. would well consider this matter & difficulty of Religion, before he should send his ambassage: for consi∣dering with her self, on the one part, that she could not chang her mind herein, nor as she thought could by any perswasion hereafter, be moved to alter her determi∣nation (although in most matters it is doubtful to determine de futur) but such was her mind resolute at this present; and on the other part, if the K. should hope that his Ambassador might by treaty alter her Majesties mind herein, and that then indeed they should not be able so to do: And thereupon the matter might break off, she doubted how the French King might conceive some unkindness hereby, although she her self were altogether free from giving cause thereof; and for that purpose her Majestie required them, in her name, that the King would
accept it for answer in as sincere part as she uttered it, which was with a eanest respect to keep the amity,  well begn, inviolated. And so still being by the Ambassador instanted to give them a more comfortable answer, for that thereby the King and his brother might doubt of her Majesties intention in the principal matter. She answered them, that truly this cause of Religion was directly for it self, and that being assented unto by the K. and his brother, she knew no cause in the rest of the things, on her pat, to move any doubt, but by reasonable treaty they might be accorded, which, said she, did the rather declare to them, because the K. might not think, that if the point of Religion were by him and his brother as∣sented unto, that her Maj. had a meaning to make any difficulty in other points, and that the rather, because she had declar'd her mind plainly in two several writings: the one, being an answer to the K. demands; the other, containing demands agree∣able to the like, as were accorded betwixt K. Philip & Q. Mary▪ and so she conclu∣ded, that she must remit the coming of the Ambassadors to the K. own judgment. And thus they departed, as it seemed by their speeches, doubful of the substance of the matter, and therefore they required to have the next day some conference with the E. of Leicester, and the L. of Burleigh, to declare their conceits upon the Q. Majesties answer: and so they had on the next day following, being Saturday, where they stil pressed to have some reasonable answer, that although the Q. would not presently assent to their request, yet that if the Ambassador should come, the cause might not be thus peremptory desperate, but that in some sort it might be obtained, that neither on the one part Monsieur should be condemned to the world, and taken as a person excommunicated from the rest of Princes, if he should not have the use of his Religion, neither on the other part, the Q. Majestie there∣by should take any offence, or that the least part of her Estate should be troubled; for such was the resolute determination of Monsieur and his profession, that from the first time he should enter into the Realm, he would in no wise offend the mean∣est subject the had; with many such speeches tending to perswade that Mon. would so use his religion, or so forbear it in times and places, as not to cause offence. They were answered, that the Q. Majestie could not give any other answer, and that they might well perceive her sincerity in dealing, to tter plainly her mind, as she did; and many reasons to maintain her resolution, were to them remembred, as principally her conscience, next the desire she had to preserve the State in quiet∣ness, which by granting him that should be her husband, a power to break her laws in matter of such weight, must needs induce an alienation from her of the minds and hearts of her good subjects, being of her Rligion  and indurate the minds of others, that though secretly, yet truly are loath to obey the Laws, if they might have any maintenance to the contrary; which though Monsieur would not give them, yet they would conceive a boldness to offend, in the hope to be allowed by him. In the end, it was moved to know the opinions of the said E. & L. Burleigh, whe∣ther they thought it good that the Ambassadors should come. Whereunto it was answered, that the consideration thereof did more directly belong to the K. and that also they two could best give advice therein, for they saw what was likely to be the issue of their coming: If the stay were not in Religion, there was no evident let seen in the matter▪ and to speak truly, she said two Lords said, they could give them no hope that the bassage could  her Majesties mind; but that if they would demand of her Majestie a grant or toleration for Monsieur, her Majestie would deny it. And therefore if they could not like with the denying of it, they must forbear to demand it. Hereupon there followed some opinions on boh parts, that if Monieur should forbear to require it, and thereby her Majesty should not grant it, but that the matter should be , and pass in silence, it might be, that Monsieurs friends might  their good opinions of him,
as of one that hd not changed his Religion: and likewise the Q. Majesties good subjects should continue their opinions of her Maj. as of a Prince that would not assent to any thing against her Religion. And with this kind of speech we ended. To my very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Esq the Queens Majesties Am∣bassador with the French King. AFter our very hearty commendations; considering the Queens Majestie hath used our service joyntly, in treating of the matter betwixt her Maje∣stie and Monsieur de Anjo, and that you are to be burthened in the prosecution thereof, we have thought good to write also to you joyntly; how her Majestie hath proceeded since the arrival of Monsieur l' Archant you may perceive by her own Letters, wherein also somewhat is touched for our dealing with them; what the said l' Archant shall of himself report, or what he shall bring from the Ambassador, we cannot tell, but percase you shall hear somewhat thereof. Indeed we were in∣formed, that her Majesties answer did not content them, whereupon we being de∣sirous that they should not conceive thereof worse then was meant, did confer with them on Saturday last as is mentioned in the Q. Majesties Letter; and after long maintenance of her Majesties reasons, and therewith giving them sufficient hope, so as the matter of Religion might be concluded, they descended to the devise of forbearing that article, whereunto her Majestie hath directed you what to say, if it be treated upon, and thereto we refer you. As for the inward intention of her Majestie in this case, we cannot certainly give you to understand more then it pleaseth her to utter. To the matter it self, she yieldeth as to a matter necessary for her Estate and Realm, otherwise we see no particular forwardness, such as is commonly between persons that are to e marri∣ed. And now her Majestie sheweth no let, but this matter of Religion, as if either that may be well accorded or well buried, we see no impediment of any moment: we can but counsel you, as we use do our selves, that is, to do and serve as she di∣recteth us; and for the rest to commit the success to Almighty God, who direct you in this service to her Majesties contentation, with regard of Gods honour, and the weal of our Countrey. From Hampton Court the eighth of July, 1571. Your very loving Friends, Ro: Leicester, Will: Burleigh. To the Right Honourable, and my very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Es abque; her Majesties Ambassador Resident in France. SIr, I am in doubt whether to write or no: for to write nothing, were to dis∣comfort you, and to write something with uncertainty; cannot comfort, and yet in extremities, the lesser is to be admitted. I assure you, that I cannot assure you from hence, what is to be looked for by the Q. Majesties manner of answers as this time: she is not unwarned how dangerous it were, if in her default the mat∣ter taketh not success; and she seemeth to conceive thereof, and pretendeth that she seemeth, that if the matter of Religion may be granted, there will be no other difficulty: but whether she is perswaded that therein the breach will be on that side, and so she to escape the reproof, I cannot tell. God direct the matter, for I have done my uttermost, and so hath other Councellours here. My Lord Keeper hath earnestly dealt in it, and so hath my Lord of Sussex; my Lord of Leicester hath in my dealings also joyned earnestly with me, and among the rest of the Councellours, I know none directly against it. From Spain we have no good answer, and therefore this amity were needful to us, but God hath deter∣mined to plague us, the hour is at hand; his will be done with mercy. The Gentle∣man hath a Chain of one hundred and sixty pound, which was not easily had:
The Queens Majestie hath sent her Letters to the King, Queen Mother, and Monsieur l' Archant. From Hampton Court the ninth of Iuly, 1571. Yours assuredly William Burligh. Cheshol the Queen of Scots servant, that passed lately from Diepe, with money and munition is taken by the Regent at Lethe. To my very Friend Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador for the Queens Majestie in France. MR. Walsingham, you shall at length understand her Majesties resolution touching her answer to the Gentleman Monsieur l' Archant: for mine own part, what opinion I have of this great matter, I will deal plainly with you, even as I find her Majesties disposition. For her desire to marriage, I perceive it con∣tinueth still as it was, which is very cold; nevertheless, she seeth it is so necessa∣ry, as I believe she yieldeth rather to think it fit to have a husband, then willing to have any found indeed for her. And I fear so it will appear in this matter with Monsieur. For as you shall perceive by the Articles passed already, there is among them all but one that maketh the difficulty, which is his demand to have his private exercise of his Religion: so it doth appear, if he would omit that de∣mand, and put it in silence, yet will her Majestie straitly capitulate with him, that he shall in no way demand it hereafter at her hands: Which scruple, I believe, will utterly break off the matter; wherefore I am in small hope that any marriage will grow this way. I pray God that some other amity may be accepted, and yet I was at the first in full conceit that her Majesty meant earnestly to proceed there∣in, and that she had so advisedly thought of the matter, as any reason being of∣fered, it should not be refused: whereupon, as my part was, I did deal to the furtherance thereof by all the good means I could, which not taking effect accord∣ingly, I shall be most sorry; albeit I do not mistrust the goodness of God, but what∣soever shall fall out, it is his providence for the best, or at the least for our just scourge for our deserts towards him. I can say no more, but Almighty God strengthen her Majesties true zeal to Religion; and failing of this match, that she will allie her self with such other Princes abroad as will earnestly joyn with her therein. And for this matter of her Majesties marriage, you shall do well to ob∣serve all their doings upon this answer, and gather the certainty, as you may, what they intend, whether to yield to her Majestie absolutely or no: if they will yield, then it must needs proceed; if not, then must we provide in other sort, and the sooner the better; and if they do accord to her Majesties request touching the cause of Religion, certainly she saith, there shall be no other difficulty. God direct us to his glory, and so I make an end of it. Mr. Cobham is returned out of Spain, where we have no cause to look for any friendship. The King used him gently, but those of Authority and Credit about him most proudly and arrogantly: What terms we stand in in other places, is easily known. Thus are we with our neighbor, in all places without friendship. God protect and defend us, who is onely able, and must do it for any policy is used. Thus, with my most hearty commendations, I bid you heartily farewel. In haste, this seventh of Iuly, 1571. Your assured Friend, R. Leicester.
To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majestie, that within two or three days after l' Archant departure from hence, there came Letters hither out of England, sent, as I am informed from the Ambassador there; by the which he did assure those that are enemies to the match, that her Majestie had nothing less, then intention to marry, whereof he was well assured by those about her; and therefore willed them to be of good comfort, and never to doubt of the matter. After l' Archants leave taking, and departing out of England, the said Ambassa∣dor dispatched a Currier, who overtook him at Bullen, & arived here a day or two before him. After the arrival of the said Currier, it was given out here, that l' ∣chant brought but a cold answer, whereby it might appear to them, that his first assurance was not without good ground: With this, those that favored the marri∣age, were very much appaled. L' rchant being come, and making so honourable a report of her Majesties sincerity and honourable dealing; the same also being confirmed by Monsieur de la Mts Letters, as a matter though desperate, bega again to revive. Hereupon, they have, with certain choise Counsellors conferred, what resolution is to be taken; they have continued in Councel, chiefly about this matter, about the space of five or six days, and yet cannot resolve what to do. I am put in hope, that though the matter proceed not, yet that the Kings in∣tention is, to send some person of good quality, as well to thank her Majestie for her honourable proceeding in this cause, as also to desire continuance of good amity. Of thus much I thought good to advertise her Majestie before hand and when they have fully resolved what they will do, I mean to dispatch another. And thus leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present. I most humbly take leave. From Melun the seven and twentieth of Iuly, 1571. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. I Most humbly thank your Lordship for your frank and plain dealing towards me, touching your opinion of their cause. There is bred in them here now of late, such a doubt before l' Archants arrival, of her Majesties disposition to marry, as they know not how to proceed. This doubt is nourished by advertisements come from the Scotish Ambassador there with you, who pretendeth to know all secrets of State: If this distrust were not, no doubt of it Religion would not be the let; but to yield in Religion, and afterwards to miss of their purpose, they think would be a great touch in her. This difference, I fear me, will quite over∣throw the matter; and therefore it behoveth her Majestie to look about her, being invironed with many practises, the executions whereof have staid upon the event of the match. I do what I can to procure continuance, or rather increase of amity. The King himself, as I learn, is very well inclined thereto, the rather, through a mislike he hath of Spain. I had well hoped there would have grown some broy between them, but that matter, as far as I can learn, will prove but a dream; and now this match not proceeding (as they seem much to doubt it) the King, as I sup∣pose, will be loath to attempt any thing against Spain, though his will that way be good.
Her Majesties liberality bestowed on l' Archant was very well imployed; for none can speak more honourably of her then he doth; and as for your Lordship, you have no cause to repent any courteie shewed unto him, so good a report doth he make. The like also doth one Cornet make, that accompanied l' Archant. The Ambassador there, Monsieur de la Mot doth seek to salve all things that may breed an opinion in them here, that her Majestie dealeth other∣wise then sincerely: his good offices that he hath done as well in this cause, as otherwise, deserve honourable considerations at her Majesties hands. They have by the space of five or six days sate very hard in Councel about this matter; no Councel dare devise, as I can learn, any thing in respect of the distrust they have. I am put in good hope, that if they mind not to proceed, yet they purpose to make choice of some one of good calling to send over, as well to thank her Majestie for her sincere dealing in this matter, as also to desire con∣tinuance of amity. This is as much as hitherto I can learn, touching their intention concerning this matter, wherewith I thought good to dispatch this bearer; and after the through conclusion what they mind to do, then orthwith I minde to dis∣patch another. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this pre∣sent, I most humbly take my leave. From Melun the seven and twentieth of Iuly, 1571. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majestie, that after I had closed up my first packet, thinking to have sent this Bearer presently with the same, Mr. Cavalcant came unto me, sent by the Queen Mother, to request me to forbear to sent to her Majestie for a day or two; in which time they would grow to some through conclusion touching their answer; and that then it was the Kings meaning to send for me, and to impart the same unto me; whereupon, I thought good to stay for the satisfying of her request. According to her promise, I was sent for by the King; at my access, he told me, that they had deliberated upon the answer received from her Majestie by l' Archant, for that the same was of great weight; and that his resolution, after long deliberation, was to send Mon∣sieur de Foix forthwith unto her Majestie, with his full intention touching the same, who he hoped should find her not so resolute touching the point of Reli∣gion. And further, he willed me to tell her Majestie, whatsoever should come of the cause, that in respect of her honourable and sincere dealing in the same, and the grea confidence she shd to repose in him, she might assure herself as much of his friendship, as of any other bodies in the earth; and that she had full power to dispose of him, and of his Realm, to the benefit of her self, and of her Subjects, whose sword should be always ready to defend her against any that should attempt any thing against her. He joyned his words and counte∣nance so together, as great demonstration outwardly of inward good will could not but be seen. Having ended with the King, I repaired to Queen Mother, who used long speech in shewing the great affection she bare to the cause; and that she was sorry that so hard a point as Religion should be the let to hinder a match, where∣of
there would grow so great benefit to both the . I told , that if it pleased her, she might remove that  by the perwading of Son to content himself with the exercise of our Religion. She told me, she could hardly do that, for that it was a thing that touched his and reputation. I willed her again on the other side, to weigh what great reason the ueen my Mistress had, not to yield to that point. She shewed me, that she could not deny but that her Majestie had some cause so to do notwithstanding she hoped there would be some elp found; the party whom the King meant to send, being so grateful unto her Majestie, and having sundry reasons to alledge, to shew both how inconvenient it would b for her Son to live without some kinde of toleration; as also, that there would not follow by the same that inconvenience in her Estate, as she feed. In the end she concluded, whatsoever in the matter through this hard poin should become, that both she and the King were infinitely bound unto her Majestie, for her honourable and sincere dealing in this cause: And that for her own part, she would bear no less affection towards her, thn if she were her own natural daughter. After I had done with her, Monsieur came unto me, and desired me on his behalf, to rener unto her Majestie, most humble thnks for the great li∣berality bestowed on his servant l' Archant, who had made such report of her Majesties rare and Princely vertues, as it was an intolerable grief unto him to see so great a block to lie in the way, as the point of Religion, which so nearly touched both his Honour, and his Conscience, to keep him from the attaining to the  good hap that ever in the world could happen unto him. He protested how he wished, so that the same were ∣removed, he had lost an arm or a leg: But howsoever, saith he, the mat∣ter fall out, I shall desire her to make account of me, as of a Champion ready at all times to hazard my life in her defence during my life, against any that shall attempt any thing against her. This in effect is as much as passed from them at this  Ngotia∣on. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this preet, I most humbly tke my leave. At Melun the last of Iuly, 1571. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. AFter long deliberation, the King is  to send over forthwith Mon∣sieur de Fix with his  touching the matter in hand, who as I suppose, hath Commission o conclude either marriage, or some between the two Cowns. They rest here very wll perswaded of her Majesties sincerity: So that the matter resting now on those good , if you find not in her Majestie  to marry (a thing most for our stggering Sate) then were it expedint to take good hold of , which may serve to ease us for a  though our disease . Her Majestie is bound to the Gentleman  ow cometh; he every way in defence of her honour, as much as if he were her : he is like to ear a great  in this Government; and
affected as he is to her Majestie, he may stand her in great stead, therefore you shall do well to advise her Majestie both honourably to use, and liberally to re∣ward him: And as for your particular part, you cannot be more beholden to a stranger; I doubt not therefore, but that your Honour will use him according∣ly. Touching the point of Religion, though some hope came lately from their Ambassador of some toleration, they are grown more stiff in that point then before. I am not to advise in so great a matter: What my opinion is in that behalf, I refer your Lordship to my former Letters. Great practises are here for the impeachment of this match; the P. Nuncio, Spain and Portugal, are daily Courtiers to disswade this Match: The Clergy here have offered Monsieur a great pension, to stay him from proceeding. In conclusion, there is nothing left un∣done, that may be thought fit to hinder: For a day or two it was given out, that the matter was quite broken, and that Monsieur had no meaning to procced. In respect of this brute, at the time of my being at the Court, he used great words of assurance, that there was no such matter; and that he remained still most con∣stantly affected; saying, that if it were his mishap not to proceed in this match, he could not but think himself most unhappy. He protested, that he wished the loss of an arm or a leg, as that difficulty might be so ordered, as he might not be touched in Conscience and Honor. I used sundry perswasions to induce him to content himself with the form of our Prayer, and not to stand so much upon a toleration, which might be prejudicial both to her Majestie and him∣self, the match proceeding: In outward shew he seemed to have no dispositi∣on to rlent. For certain respects, they desire Monsieur de Foix coming to be kept se∣cret until his arrival. Besides Cavalnts general good offices he doth in this cause, your Honour is particularly beholding to him for the good office he useth towards you. The desire I have to dispatch this bearer with some speed, will not suffer me any longer to trouble you with these scribled lines. And therefore in haste I commit your Lordship to Gods protection, who send you to grow to some conclusion, as may be to Gods glory, and her Majesties safety. From Melun the one and thirtieth of Iuly, 1571. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leceister. MY Lord, if neither Marriage nor Amity may take place, the poor Protestants here do think then their case desperat; they tell me so with tears, and therefore I do believe them: And surely, if they say nothing, beholding the pre∣sent state here, I could not but see it most apparent. What to hope of the marriage I know not, because it hath so many overthrows both here and there: If it may be to Gods glory, and her Majesties safety and contentment, I then wish it, other∣wise at an end. Touching the conclusion of some League and Amity, I hope every one doth wish it, that desireth her Majesties safety, and the benefit of our Countrey, notwithstanding there lieth a block in the way, whereat divers may stumble: The block is, our ancient League with the House of Burgundy, which by entring into some strait League with France, may somewhat be touched; and for that the one cannot yield that profit that the other may, at the first
sight it may seem disptable, whether the same is to be received otherwise then after the accstomed manner; but if the circumstances of the present time be duly considered, this block may be removed, and the Amity that will be proffer∣ed profitably received. The house of Burgundy, till of late days, was ever inferiour to England, and so depended thereon, but now being tyed to the house of Austria, he is grown to the greatness, as of inferior he is become superior; of a good quiet Neighbor, a most dangerous and ambitious Neighbor; which we shall speedily finde, if we do not speedily provide for it. How evilly they rest satisfied with us in respect of the Injuries received, it is well known; how naturally they are inclined to Revenge, the world hath had suf∣ficient tryall of. If presently they forbear, it is not for lack of good will, but in respect of the incommodity of the time, which if the jealousie between them and France were taken away; we should soon see the experience thereof to renew traffick with them, before they do think themselves revenged, or that their pride or greatness be some way abated, were but to present them a fit opportunity of revenge. Now if the dangerous greatness of the house of Austria be well considered, the miscontentment they have in respect of the injuries received, their natu∣ral inclination to revenge, and the unseen traffick of our Merchants as yet: These considerations well weighed, the case may seem somewhat altered. And though France cannot yield like profit that Flanders doth, yet may it yield some profit with less hazard, and more safety. In this case two things I consi∣der chiefly: First, That the house of Austria is become the Popes Champion, and pro∣fessed enemy unto the Gospel, and daily practiseth the rooting out of the same: And therefore we that are Professors of the Gospel, ought to oppose ou selves against it. The other, that the entrance into the league with France, will not onely be an advancement of the Gospel there, but also elsewhere; and therefore, though it yieldeth ot so much temporal profit, yet in respect of the spiritual fruit that thereby may ensue, I think it worthy the imbracing; or rather to say better, I think we have cause to thank God, that offereth us so good occasion, both to ad∣vance his glory, and also for her Majesties safety. I doubt not but your Lordship will do your uttermost, that this occasion offered may not grow to be fruitless. And so most humbly desiring your Lordship to pardon these my scribled lines, I leave further to trouble your Honour. At Melun the third of August, 1571. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. THe Spanish Ambassador having audience the sixth of this moneth, declared to the King, that his Master could not endure the great spoils made by cer∣tain ships of the P. of Orange, harboured in Rochel, where they made open sale of the said spoils they take, contrary to all good amity. Besides, he shewed the King, that he heard that C. L. had secret conference with his Majestie, who was a Rebel, and sought to disquiet his Master by his indirect practises; therefore he protested, that unless there grew some speedie redress thereof, there could
not but grow was betwixt him and his Master. To this the King answered, that the Prince of Orange was a P. of the Empire, with whom he had good amity, and therefore could not deny him the use of his Ports, no more then he doth to all other Princes his Confederates. And as for conference had with the Count Lewi of Nassaw, he told him, that he was misinformed. But if it were so, said he, what just cause should your Master have to complain, or to think himself injured, he being also a Prince of Germany, and neither Pensionary nor Subject of his Masters; and therefore he may not look to give Laws to France: And as for fearing us with wars, you do mistake us; let every one, saith he, do there∣in what best liketh him. At Queen Mothers hands he found the like answer, who is very much incensed against Spain, being throughly perswaded that her daughter was poysoned. They here of the Religion, do most humbly desire her Majestie, that in talk with Monsieur de Foix, it would please her to use some speech of liking of the Kings calling of the Princes and the Admiral to the Court; and that it would fur∣ther like her Majestie to say, that so rare a Subject as the Admiral is, was not to be suffered to live in such a corner as Rochel: and though the King be now very well affected towards him; yet they do assure themselves, that her Majesties commendations (in respect of the great good will and reverence the King bear∣eth her) will very much advance his credit; for as I am informed sundry waies, the King is glad when he may take occasion to praise her Majestie, and to ex∣press how much he is bound unto her. The King requested me, by Secretary Pynart, to recommend unto her Majestie one Morris Chamails suit, whereof I send your Lordship herein enclosed, a copy of the Bill he exhibited unto the King. I find them here reasonably inclined to do justice with such expedition as this Countrey yieldeth in such causes as I recom∣mended. We have received order from the King to repair to Blois, where the Princes and the Admiral are to meet him about the first of this next moneth. There are many practises to overthrow this journey, but the King sheweth himself to be very resolute. I am most constantly assured, that the King conceiveth of no subject that he hath, better then of the Admiral; and great hope there is, that the King will use him in matters of greatest trust; for of himself he beginneth to see the insufficiency of others: some, for that they are more addicted to others, then to himself; others, for that they are more Spanish then French; or else given more to private pleasures then publike: There is none of any account within this Realm, whose aswel imperfections, as vertues, he knoweth not. Those that do love him, do lament that he is so much given to pleasure; they hope the Admirals access unto the Court will yield some redress in that case. Q. Mother seeing her son so well affected towards him, laboureth by all means to cause him to think well of her: she seemeth much to further the meeting. The marriage between the P. of Navarre and the L. Margaret is not yet throughly concluded, Religion being the onely let: the Gentlewoman being most desirous thereof, falleth to reading of the Bible, and to the use of the Prayers used by them of the Religion. The marriage between the P. of Conde and the Marquis of List, is throughly concluded, as I hear. I refer your Lordship, touching the privat state of my diseased body, as also of my purs, unto the bearers report, whom I shall desire you to credit. And so leaving further to trouble your Lordship at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris this twelfth of August, 1571. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to understand, that after C. L. had had sundry secret Conferences with the King and Queen Mother; as also with certain chosen Counsellours, he sent unto me, desiring me to devise some means how we might meet secretly; whereupon we agreed upon the means, and so came to conference. First, he protested unto me, that upon the great good opinion he conceived of me, by the report of those whom he did well credit, he did frankly dis∣cover unto me, both what passed between him and the King, and also the present state of their cause. First he shewed unto me, that he declared unto him, that he enterprize wherewith he had been made acquainted by others; as also, he was presently to recommend unto him, might seem to be such as he could neither in Honour nor Conscience imbrace nor attempt; there∣fore he thought it fit for him to declare unto him, all such necessary circum∣stances as were fit for him to know in that behalf, as well for the satisfying of his Majestie, as also for his own honour, who would be loath to be so evill an instrument, as to perswade a Prince to attempt that thing that might not stand as well with Honour as Conscience. First he shewed un∣to me, that the cause of taking up of Arms in the Low-Countreys, pro∣ceeded onely, upon that the King of Spain sought to plant there by In∣quisition, the foundation of a most horrible Tyranny, the overthrow of all freedoms and liberties, a thing which his father Charls the fifth, went about to have established there; but seeing the same so much impugned by the Inha∣bitants of the said Countrey, and that without their consent it could not be re∣ceived, unless he should violently by tyranny seek the establishment of the same, contrary both to his Oath and their Priviledges, he forbore to proceed in that behalf. After the resignation of his Government unto his Son, the Cardinal of Lorrain practised secretly with the Cardinal of Arras, wars being then be∣tween France and the Low Countreys, wishing them to advise the King of Spain to grow to peace, discovering to him, that the King of France his Father was reduced to that extremity, as he should be forced to yield to any thing that the said King would request. Further, he signified unto him, that unless there might grow peace between the two Princes, the Catholique Religion could not long continue neither in France nor Flanders, so great increase was daily here of Protestants, which could by no means be suppressed, but by establishing of an Inquisition in both Countreys: Hereupon, by the pra∣ctise of the said Cardinals, there grew a peace, how dishonourable for France, he referred to the Kings own judgement. After the conclusion of the said Peace, then did the Cardinal of Arras labour what he might, by sundry practises, to plant the said Inquisition, seeking first by perswasion to induce men to like therof: but as well Papists as Protestants misliked it, alledging, that it was against the Kings oath, to seek to establish a thing so prejudicial to their priviledges, which they were bound to maintain, whereof they could see nothing but mischief would ensue, and general destruction of that Countrey; forasmuch as it would overthrow all Forreign traffick, by which the Countrey was chiefly maintained when he saw it would not be planted by way of perswasion, then sought he to do
it by violence, which the Nobility foreseeing, they joyntly presented unto the Regent a Bill, containing a declaration of the great and sundry inconveniences that would ensue, if they proceeded in the establishing of the same. Further, they made choice of two Noble men, whom with one consent they sent into Spain, to declare in all their names, the great mischiefs that should follow if the King should proceed therein; and that it lay not in their power to retain the people from taking arms, so much were they incensed against the said Inquisiti∣on; and therefore they desired that the allowing or disallowing of the same might be committed over to the Assembly of the three Estates. Of these doubtful means no redress followed, but still the said Cardinal and his fau∣tors proceeded in seeking to establish it, contrary to all order and equity. How afterwards the people took arms, how the Nobility that were joyntly united to oppose themselves against the said Inquisition, were after by practise and corruption divided, what Tyranny hath been used by the Duke of Alva since his coming hither, and how insolently he hath behaved himself, both towards his Majestie and the Queen of England (although unhonourable for them both, in respect of their greatness, at such a petty companions hands) how his brother the Prince of Orange sought their delivery from so misera∣ble a servitude, though it pleased God at that time to make him the instru∣ment, who onely knoweth a sit time of the deliverance of the oppressed by the said Tyrant, seeking by all means to be rid of the same, did of late exhibite unto the Emperour at his last Assembly at Spires, a book con∣taining their griefs, requesting him, with all humility, to be a means for their delivery from this their oppression (a thing appertaining to his calling, and the place he beareth in Christendom) To this the Emperour, in respect of the hope he hath of Spain gave a cold ear. They now seeing themselves void of all help, their natural Prince being so carried away by corruption of Councel, from the due consideration that belongeth to a good Prince to have of good Subjects, as he neither regardeth his Oath, nor maintenance of such Priviledges as were confirmed by his Predecessors, nor the dutiful man∣ner of the proceeding of the Nobility in seeking by way of humble petiti∣on redresses of their griefs, thinking themselves in conscience discharged from all duty of obedience, they now throw themselves down before his Majestie with all humility, beseeching him to take them to his protection, and to procure their deliverance from the present Tyranny. Now your Majestie seeth the state of their cause (saith he) you shall do well to weigh with your self, whether the goodness thereof may incourage you to become Protector of this people, reduced by Tyranny to great extremity by seeking their deliverance. If you think in Conscience and Honour you may not, you shall do well to forbear, for otherwise the success cannot be good: If you think you may, then weigh in policy how beneficial it will be for you, and how much your Father would have given to have had the like opportunity offered unto him, that is now presented unto you Gratis, which if you refuse, the like you must never look for. With this he shewed me, that both the King and Queen Mother seemed to be very well satisfied; and that the King said, that like Counsellours by violating of his Edict, had well nigh brought him into like terms with his Subjects, whereof ensued the late trouble; and that therefore now he thanked God that he had opened his eyes to discern what their meaning was. The King thus imformed by him, touching such circumstances as might induce him to think the enterprize both ho∣norable and just: he then proceeded, as he shewed me to declare the easiness and great liklihood of good success of the same. First, he shewed me, that all the inha∣bitants
of the Low-Countries generally, aswel of the one religion as of the other, do mislike the Spanish tyranny, and do desire nothing more then to be rid of the same. Secondarily, that all the Towns M. A. are ready to receive such Garrisons as shall be sent thither by order from his Brother. Thirdly, that other Towns upon his Frontiers whensoever they shall see any forces approach, will be ready to receive them. Fourthly, that the present forces that the King of Spain hath there (whom he may trust) are not in number 3000. Fiftly, that with a dozen ships beside those that presently they have, they will keep the Seas, as no Spanish Forces shall come thither by Sea. Lastly, that the Princes of Germanie are most willing to joyn in the said enterprize; so that the King will be content with Flanders and Artois, which once pertained to the Crown of France; and that Brabant, Gelderland, and the land Luxenburgh, which once were fees of the Empire, might be united again to the same, and as for Zealand, and the rest of the Islands (said he) they wish the Q. of England had them, so that she would be content to joyn in this enterprize. Ater he had made the King acquainted with these likelyhoods, he seemed very well to like them, especially if the Q. of England might be brought to be a party, and to joyn with him, and the Princes of Germanie in the said en∣terprize, and therefore wished shee might be moved as from himself, to see how she were inclined in that behalf; for, saith he, if she being Lady of the narrow Seas, do joyn in the matter with us. I weigh not the King of Spain, nor all the con∣federates. He told me then that he shewed the King, that (as he thought) she had been moved in that behalf already, and that as he heard she was not enclined to be a dealer therein, howbeit he knew not how her Majestie, upon better consideration, might sithence like thereof. The matter being thus propounded to the King and Q. Mother, afterwards it came to be considered of by certain chosen Councellers; who all liked of the enterprize, and saw great reason not to negect it: Onely they saw two things to be provided for, before they could advise them to enter into the same; the one, that he should first establish some goo league with England, the Princes of Germanie, and that he meant presently to send ae Foix into England, whose friendship and confederacy imported him very much, for that the Princes of Germanie depended onely upon knowing how she would be enclined, for that without her they would enter into no con∣federacy. For the help of the second, he said, the King meant to tax generally through his Realm the Clergie with the payment of one years revenue. This is asmuch as he imparted unto me, touching his proceeding with the King▪ saving that he shewed me, That it is secretly agreed on between him and the King, that Strozza, who should imbarque about the midst of the next month, shall do some enterprize in Spain, onely to amaze the King there, whom the King here meaneth notwithstanding to disallow openly. Touching their State, he telleth me, they have much to do to bridle the people of the Low-Countrey from discovering of themselves, by committing some rash enterprize; and that they find the Papists no lesse inclined then the Protestants, to seek with hazard of their lives deliverance from their present tyranny. They find lack of money the greatest let, having been much disapointed by them here, the greatest help they have that way is from the D. of F. Before winter they mean to do nothing, and then onely their intent is to enter into the T. M. then in the spring following (if God shall so direct their intentions) they me to assile the Countrey two wayes, with two severall Armies. After he had thus made me understand both his proceedings with the King,  also their proceedings, the present state of thir case, and how they mean to proceed, he the desired me to propound to her Majestie on his behalf these particular points
following. First, whether her Majestie can be content to joyn with him and the Prince of Orange in the enterpize. Secondarily, whether upon the former assu∣rance offered, her Majestie can be content to lend unto them the sum they re∣quired. Thirdly, that it would please her Majestie to suffer Hawkins underhand to serve them with certain sips, and also to licence him to furnish them with certain victualls to be transported from thence, whereof they have present need. Lastly, that it may please her Majestie to suffer certain Walloons, being presently in Rye to the number of 800. to embarque themselves to repaire hi∣ther. For the first, he desireth her Majestie to consider how it will be no less honour for her to unite Zealand to the Crown of England, then it was dishonour for her sister to lose Calais: and further, that by having Zealand, she shall have the key of the Low-Countries; she shall have a place allwayes for her ships to enter in unto to avoid thereby aswell the danger of the enemie, as of the tempest. Besides, she having Zealand, shall be better able to gather the Princes of Germanie, enjoying Brabant, and the rest of the Countries (which were late federatories to the Empire) to bridle F. for being overgreat. And lastly, that this enterprise being done by Protestants, they receiving the honour thereof, shall be better able by increase of credit with the King; to continue his good devotion toward her, in respect of the rare favours which they have received at her hands, which they both do and alwayes will acknowledge. For the second, he desireth her Majestie to consider, how evill affected Spain is towards her: how he thinketh himself injured in respect of the arrest; how naturally they are inclined to revenge, though outwardly (till convenient time do serve) they can dissemble their malice: how he intertaineth at his great Costs a subject of hers lately departed out of Ireland, as also other Rebells of hers that daily repaire into Flanders, who onely are stayed from molesting her at home, in respect of the fame that the Duke of Alva hath of his Brothers enterprize; And lastly, how he is become a Protector of the Q. of Scots her dangerous enemy (which she knoweth to be true.) Now if the lending of so small a sum may somewhat enable them to abate the pride of so great an enemy, and cause her Majestie to spare the spending of ten times so much besides the hazard of her estate and people; he desires her Majestie to weigh it in reason, whether the disbursing may not stand with good policy. Touching the third, he saith, that by having those ships of Hawkins he shall be able to keep more Spaniards (who being settled there may become dangerous neighbours) from landing in Flanders, be∣sides the victuals presently required, shall serve to furnish Strozza, whose en∣terprize going forward, cannot but kindle warre betwixt France and Spain, though the King disavow him, he being a person of that quality here in respect of his office, whereby at the least her Majestie may be looker on with her more safety: For the last, he hopeth that her Majestie will make no difficulty, for that it is to disburden the Realm of so many strangers. After he had thus imparted unto me, those things which he would have me to propound unto her Majestie; as also, such reasons as might induce her to like thereof; I shewed him, that I would do the duty of an Ambassador, I would advertise them, and referre it to her Majestie to resolve therein as might seeme unto her best to resolve with her honour and safety; and that for my part I could neither put him in comfort or discomfort. He requested me to beseech her Majestie in his behalf, that it would please her to send her resolution to those points with some convenient speed, for that their case requi∣red to know her intention in that behalf out of hand; and therefore she would hold him excused for his importunity, being pressed thereto by necessity. Furthermore he desired me to advertise her Majestie, whereas he understood
that divers (under colour of serving his Brother and him by sea) had committed sundry ourages upon her subjects and Merchants, whom he and his Brother doth utterly dissavow, wishing her Majestie to extend towards them such punishment as they deserve. And for the avoiding of such inconveniences, they mind hereafter to send some secret token to the L. Admirall, wherby they indeed that do serve them may be discerned from them that falsely do usurpe their names; leaving the same for a colour, having no other intention then to spoile aswell friends as foes. Thus leaving further to trouble your honour at this pre∣sent, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the 12 of August. 1571. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Leicester. I Referre your Lordship to my Letters written to my Lord of Burleigh, touching my conference with A. I beseech your Lordship so farre forth as you may further his requests, as those that tend to the advancement of Gods glory, and the Q. Majesties safety, I think it dangerous to advise a Prince to wars, for that the issue of wars is doubtfull: notwithstanding things may so fall out sometimes, as nothing can be more dangerous then not to enter into wars; wars grounded on ambition for increase of Dominion, are alwayes unjust; but warres grounded on necessity, for safety sake are necessary. I leave to your Lordship to judge by consideration of the state of things, as∣well at home as abroad; whether necessity doth not urge us thereto at this present one supplying my place, onely beholding the state of things abroad, and not understanding the inward secrets of home matters, may rather gesse then presently know, what is meet in so weighty a cause; notwithstanding I am bold privately to discover unto your Lordship my folly, in setting down mine opi∣nion of a matter, both without the compasse of my calling, as also my under∣standing. First, I conclude, that we rest in evill terms with Spain, whereof there must grow redresse either by composition, or by sword. Redresse by com∣position may seeme scarce sure, as that which will serve their turn but for awhile, they can disguise their malice for a time. Redresse by sword comparing our forces with theirs, may appeare at the first sight to be void of all possibility; but, if you consider the oppertunity that this present time offereth, that doubt to mans judgment may soone be avoided, though victory (aswell as other things else are) is in the hands of God, who many times disposeth the same contrary to mans judgment; but foreseeing and judging of likelihoods, as men may foresee and judge, there is great appearance, that the pride of Spain may be so pre∣sently daunted, as we need not feare their mallice. The remedie perhaps may seeme more dangerous then the disease, for, in seeking to abate the pride of Spain, we may advance another, whose greatness will contain no less danger. For the answering whereof, your Lordship shall understand that thus standeth the case: The Princes of Germanie, who can be content to be parties in the enterprize, do foresee, that if the whole Low-Countrey might be united to the, Crown of France, it would grow too great; they mean to capitulate with him to
content himself with Flanders and Arois, which once pertained to the Crown. And as for Brabant and other parts, which once pertained to the Empire, they mean to reduce them to their old state, committing the goverment thereof to some P. of Germanie, which in reason cannot be but to the Prince of Orange. Holland and Zealand they wish were united to the Crown of England, which they desire for two respects; the one to make the enterprize more easie, by ha∣ving her assistance, the other, the better to bridle France; if he seek to exceed his portion. If the enterprize might proceed in this order, both the remedie will prove lesse dangerous, and also the successe more likely to be proseperous. These 3 united (all circumstances considered) to mans judgement, the matter can∣not but take; for whiles this is a doing in the Low-Countrys, Spain must not look to be quiet in Italy? but if her Majestie will not be a party, then neither can there grow unto her that honour, profit and surety that otherwise were to be wished. If these then may take place, upon the likelihoods, two mischiefs may thereby be avoided. First, the malice of him that is mighty, and hath good will to revenge. Secondly, the greatness of another, who perhaps otherwise may grow a dangerous neighbour. A third mischief may be avoided, of no lesse, or rather greater consequence; which is, that those who otherwise will not per∣haps live quietly at home, may be kept occupied by being imployed abroad. For the avoidance of these three great mischiefs, it seemeth, that to enter into wars hath necessity for ground. These (as I protested unto your Lordship) to one that seeth but the outward bark of things, may seeme to carry great consequence of reason, but to your Lordship, who seeth inwardly into the matter, it may ap∣peare to contain more danger then safety, howsoever it be, our diseased state, through inward division, well considered, though her Majestie be no dealer in the matter, yet it behoveth her to incourage others, and that she may (as here∣tofore she hath done) take profit of others troubles; for surely we must make this accompt, that their peace will be the beginning of our wars. In my opi∣nion we are rather to weigh inward, then outward mischiefs; the outward great∣ness of France, cannot endanger us so much as the inward dissention at home, which lacketh but some foreign aid to bring the matter to some dangerous triall; the case then standeth so, as for the staying of our inward mischiefs, we are to seek for outward remedies, which is, to grow by other mens harms. I do not doubt, but that your Lordship will do what you may so to deale with her Ma∣jestie, as that some of the C. requests may take place, whereby the fire that is now a kindling may grow a flame, and we take comfort of the heat thereof. I preceive nothing will so much advance the matter, as for her Majestie to give some countenance to the same. The proud Spaniard (whom God hath long used for the rod of his wrath) I see great hope that he will now cast him into the fire, that he may know what it is to serve against God. I would your Lordship knew the Gentleman; for courage abroad, and counsell at home they give him here the reputation to be another Ol: he is in speech elo∣quent & pithy; but which is chiefest, he is in Religion, as Religious in life as he is sincere in profession. I hope God hath raised him up in these days, to serve for an instrument for the advancement of his glory. I beseech your Lordship to credit this bearer touching my particular state: To whom, leaving to trouble your Honour at this present, I refer you. I beseech your Lordship to procure out of hand, that I may know what her Majestie meaneth to do in this matter. At Paris the twelfth of August, 1571. Your Honours to command, Fr. Walsingham.
To the Right honourable, and my very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Esq her Majestes Ambassador Resident in France. SIr, this bearer (my Lord of Rutlands servant) can more commodiously re∣port unto you the arrival of Monsieur de Foix, then I can now write, and so I refer the report thereof to him. Yesterday your long Letters, sent by my Cousin Dannet, came to my hand, even within a quarter of an hour before de Foix came to her Majesties presence. I fear the offers of so great Amitie will diminish or divert the former intention of the marriage, without which the French Amity shall serve to small purpose, but to make us ministers of their appetites, and those fulfilled, to cast us off. Surely I could have wished that the extremi∣ty of the marriage had been seen, before these baits of Amity had been thrown before us. I see those most liked by such, as I could not find to like of the marri∣age: But all this is contrary to your self. At Hatfield the sixteenth of August, 1571. Your assured Friend, William Burleigh. To my very Friend Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador for the Queen Ma∣jestie in France. I Have received your Letters written with Cypher by Dannet. The matter is of great importance. I am most glad to see them at this point. I think her Majestie shall be advised not to lose all these good advantages offered her, special∣ly when they tend both to the setting up of Gods true Religion, and establish∣ing of her own surety, with augmentation of her Crown. For my part, I never found cause since her Reign, that moveth me more to further it; and be you assured, I will do all that is possible that somewhat may come thereof. You shall understand as soon as is possible her resolution; but I think it will be five or six days near hand first, by reason of the other matters which de Foix, who had his access yesterday the fifteenth of this moneth, and was as graciously used at her Majesties hands, as ever I saw any Ambassador; he had loving talk, and hath already entred into this matter, and this day my Lord Keeper, my Lord Cham∣berlain, my Lord of Burleigh and my self, are appointed to confer with him. He standeth stiff to have Religion for Monsieur, her Majestie standeth as stiff in denial, and so I think meaneth to do. For this time I can say no more. Your assured Friend, Ro: Leicester. To our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esq our Ambassador Resident in France. ELIZABETH R. TRusty and Well-beloved, we greet you well; and though we think you had some great desire to hear how Monsieur de Foix hath here proceeded with us in his charge; and the rather, because we understand, that within a few days after the first Speech with us, and Conference with our Councel, he dispatched Letters or Message thither; yet surely, until this present,
we could not ascertain you of any thing certainly concluded with him, by rea∣son that he being not satisfied with our answers, doth still persist in seeking to induce us to reform our answer more towards his satisfaction, But now you shall understand, that he and the Ambassador Resident having had sundry Con∣ferences with us, and apart with our Councel, at all times the weight of the matter hath chiefly depended upon the cause of Religion: For they requiring a toleration, and we denying, they offering to have it tempered and moderated, as our Councel shall devise, to avoid offence of our Conscience, and of the Dukes, the same was found always either impossible, or so hard, as by no device such a mean in plain terms, by words or writing, could be found to satisfie them or our selves: So as in the end they desired, as we would be content to agree secretly, that he should not be impeached in the secret use of his Religion, if we would not consent to a toleration; and so you shal see by writing, which you shal receive here∣with, what hath been said by our Councel thereto; and with the same writing also two answers to two other matters by them onely propounded, because to the same there was no answer satisfactory given in our former writings to their first de∣mands. In this writing now delivered to them, we perceived them most troubled with a phrase added of great necessity for our purpose, and spe∣cially for satisfying of our conscience, that the Duke shall not be molested for using of any Rites not repugnant unto the word of God, which words being in a writing delivered unto them first the one and twentieth of this moneth, was afterwards now in the last of August by their importunity, as now you see altered from the words Verbo Dei to Ecclesiae Dei, which in our judgment is all one; and yet finding themselves therewith better content then with the other, we yielded to have it so altered. Besides this writing, because we know not how our answer in the Article of Religion shall be there imparted, we have also by express speech declared to Monsieur de Foix, that as we shall be well con∣tent that our answer may satisfie Monsieur de Anjou for his honour, for that we have in some sort yielded to him to use other Ceremonies then ours; so that as they be not repugnant to the Church of God, and with such other cautions as in our writing are further contained; so our meaning is to be declared plainly to Monsieur de Anjou, that we cannot permit him at his coming to have the use of any private Mass, which speech we have plainly uttered unto him because there should no misconceiving be gathered of our answer, whereby the Duke might hope of a sufferance; for that we cannot find it, without peril of our Estate, and quietness to yield thereunto. And thus having imparted unto you how we have answered him, we will that you also after the consideration of the same, and of the answer given unto him in writing, which we herewith send, shall resort to the King, and affirm the same to be our mind. And if you shall find them doubtful how to interpret our answer, that is, whether we having our mind satisfied in the cause of Religion, can be content to proceed in the marriage. You shall assure the King, that the rest of the things being by him assented unto, and ordered to be performed; we mean, sincerely to proceed in further treaty of the mar∣riage, according to our former answer. And if they shall so move it unto you, we can be content that special Commissioners may be sent from thence hither, to treat and conclude with us and our Councel, as reason shall re∣quire. And for that we have causes to think, that sundry there, and some being of Credit, will seek to provoke the King to a misliking of our answer, and to conceive that we have not had a sincere intention in this matter from the beginning, you shall do your best, and so we warrant you, to assure the King of the contrary, whatsoever malice shall devise against us: And where we had occasion by some of your Letters to some here, to think that now at
Monsieur de Foix coming hither, though the matter of the Marriage should not take effect, yet that some motion of a further league of Amity might be made betwixt us and the King. You shall understand, that not only no mo∣tion hath been made thereof unto us, but upon indirect speeches used by some of our trusty Ministers to de Foix in that purpose: he hath earnestly de∣clared, that without prosecution of the marriage, he had no Commission to deal in any other matter at all; but said, that he usted that the King his Master would continue Amity with us, except contrary cause should be of∣fered by us. Now therefore considering you may see that we have not made any great difficulty in the matter of Religion, which we cannot see how it may be yielded unto Monsieur and his Domestiques, though the number shall be never so small without peril, by discontentation of our best Subjects, and com∣fort to the worse, it shall be your part to insist earnestly to let it be well un∣derstood how sincerely we have dealt therein, and how free we ought to be from the calumniation of certain persons that will never be content to say well of us, how well soever we do. The occasion of the long abode here of Monsieur de Foix shall appear to you, we doubt not, by the Letters of my Lord of Burleigh. As for satisfaction of your desire to have some to assist you in service now this moneth, whilest you shall attend the recovery of your health; upon the next answer to be made us of these our Letters, you shall also have order for some to be assistant to supply your place. Given under our Signet the Second of September, 1571. in the thirteenth year of our Reign. 24 August. & postea ultima Augusti, 1571. Summarium corum que serenissima Regina suasu & consili surum Consiliariorum proposuit in Colloqui de tribus Articulis cum illustriss: Or atoribus Christianissimi Regis. Ad primum de Coronat. Ducis. SErenissima Regina non potest sine assensu trium ordinum seu statuum regni∣sui concedere, ut serenissimus Dux post nuptias celebratas coronetur ut Rex, verem ut habiatur & coronetur ut Rex respectu matrimonii cum Regina si∣ne aliquo prejudicio juris & tituli suae Majestatis aut hered. aut success. ejus, si id fieri potest communi consilio & consensu eorum statuum Majestas sua libenter assensura est, & dabit operam ut serenissimi ducis honor & amplitudo eo modo augeatur, & eò libentiùs quia per accessionem aliquam ad ejus amplitudi∣nem Majestatis suae splendor & gloria etiam incrementum capiet. Ad secundum de conjuctione in administratione regnorum. Secundò existimat sua Majestas ut concedatur serenissmo duci ut ipse sereniss. Dux, uná cum serenissima Regina consorte sua, constante Matrimo∣nio, stilo honore & nomine Regio censeatur & gaudeat, eandemque serenissima Reginam consortem suam in foelici regnorum & dominiorum administratione & gubernatione adjuvet tanquam, maritus salvis tamen juribus legibus & con∣suetudinibus regni, ut in terto Articulo prioris scripti intitulati explanatio Articulorum &c. continetur.
Ad tertium de toleranda religione Ducis. Tertio, ubi ab oratore postulatum est, quemadmodum à Rege Christianissimo mandatis se habuisse asseruit, ut scripto authentico & valido facultas concederet dicto serenissimo Duci & domesticis ejus excercendum suae religionis in Angliâ quod cum propter multas & graves causas à Majestate Reginae fieri non posse re∣sponsum esset, Agitatum postea inter dictos oratores & consiliarios dicte Re∣ginae, ut saltem privato aliquo singrapho Reginae serenissimae serenissimus Dux certior redderetur futurum esse ut nullo modo impedritur in hoc regno reli∣gionem suam excercere. Quod cum ad Maiestatem Reginae relatum esset, ita consiliariis suis responsum dari vsum est. Imprimis, quod existimatur Serenissimum ducem non futurum alienum à Reli∣gione ecclesiae Anglicanae, si de ea benè candidè & recè informaretur, maximè expedire etiam videbatur si de hac causa exercendae religionis nihil ageretur in aliquo tractatu aut Colloquio, sed quae in eâ apparebant difficultates & contro∣versie mutuò utriusque Principìs colloquio componerentur. Sed cum id Ora∣toribus nullo modo placere videatur non absurdum esse putabatur si hoc modo utriusque menti & conscienti consulatur. Si serenissimus dux temporibus usitatis divinorum officiorū uná cum serenissim Reginâ in oratoriis suis adesse volet, neque Religionis Anglicanae institutiones & rationes audire & ediscere temporibus congruis recusabit; Eadem serems∣ima Regina assentietur, ut neque ipsemet dux neque sui domestici contra con∣scientiam suam aut illorum cogantur ritibus aut ceremoniis Ecclesiae Anglicanae eo modo uti, quo subditi regni ex legibus obligatur, donec instituti & alitr per∣suasi fuerint. Porró idem serenissimus Dux & is numerus domesticorum suorum, de quo postea convenietur, non molestabuntur per leges hujus regni propter usur∣pationem aliorum divinorum rituum & ceremoniarum Ecclesiarum Ecclesiae Dei non apertè repugnantium, modo it fiat in loco certo, eoque privato & secreto, ut conscientiis suis satisfaciant, & ut nulla ex ea varietate occasio manifesta detur subditis regni ad violendas leges Ecclesiasticas. Et cum multa alia petenda sunt  serenissimo Duce ut & per Christianissimum Regem fratrem suum, & per seipsum pactis caveantur ut juramentis etiam confir∣mentur quemadmodum & oratoribus non est negatum, nec tamen clausula sub∣sequens eodem modo ab ipso serenissimo Duce exigenda & obtinenda est, quo presens hoc responsum in superioribus tribus Clausulis contentum à sua Majestate Regia postulabitur. Quae dicenda sunt ex parte Ducis. Serenissimus Dux non diutiùs utetur ritibus & ceremoniis haud consentienti∣bus cum Legibus Angliae quam quoad institutus & persuasus fuerit ut Ecclesiae Anglicanae ritus sufficientes esse existimet ad Cultum divinum neque iis quidem consentientibus cum legibus Angliae ita utetur ut aut bonis subditis regni ad publicam offensionem, aut malis ad violandas leges prebeatur—sed semper quum publicae offensiones huic aut acciderint aut indubitatè ad futurae videbuntur unde tumultus in regno metui possint, se adomnes suae Majestatis benevolas admonitio∣nes cum pro honore & securitate suae Majestatis quam pro communi tranquilitate regni conservanda & modo & forma se geret ut Reginae & Consilio suo par esse atque conveniens videbitur. Idem{que} per omnia permittit se prestiturum pro om∣nibus domesticis qui cum illo permittenter ad esse in aliquo suo cultu Reli∣gioso. Postremo, quia Regiae Majestati visum est Oratores falsos esse, se non habuisse potestatem iis premissis ut proponuntur plenè assentiendi, aequum esse etiam vi∣sum est suae Majestati ut illa responsa non tradantur tanquam ita maturé consult
& determinata à sua Majestate, quin ut liceat suae Majestati detrahere, aut ad ea aliquid adjicere impost erum, et eò magis quia non fine multa persuasione & co∣hortatione consiliorum suorum ad astentiendum multis praedictorum adducta est. Et id circo etiam Majestas Sua petit à Christianissimo fratre suo Rege Christianissimo, ut quanquam haec, quae  sua Majestate responsa sunt non sunt, per omnia Regi placitura, nulla tamen Diminutio mutuae amicitiae prioris intersuas Majestates subsequatur, quia nihil potis habet in votis sua Majestas quam amicitiam mutuam cum Christianissimo fratre suo conservare atque augere. To the Right honourable, and my very Friend Francis Walsingham Esq her Majestes Ambassador Resident in France. SIr, as we here upon dispatches sent thither to you, do not hear of long time of any answer from you, are unquiet in our minds for the desire we have to understand the process of the causes in hand; so I am assured you have not been out of trouble and care, in that you have not of long time heard from hence, in what sort Monsieur de Foix hath treated, or rather been handled; but this shall content you to think, and therefore I do assure you, that the negotiation hath had almost as many changes, though not in contrarieties, yet in varieties, as it hath had days of conferences, and sometimes moe: If I may truly report, that in some one days act, one part of the day hath not been so seasonable as the other; and therefore judge you, if you had been advertised from one time to another, how dissonant the same might have been in your ears, how deformed in your eye; and percase as herewith you may be justly grieved, so would you ask of me the just cause thereof if you were with me, which I would not re∣fuse to declare conjecturally, as I might, but to write hereof, I do forbear, think∣ing that by other your friends Letters you will guess. Monsieur de Foix hath had seven or eight special conferences with her Majestie, and with us of her Councel. And at the first he found such favourable answers, as he accounted the matter his own to call you truly the 3368 tu wholly added with a certain circumscribld 4 s  477    t 418 and if any of them have principally or indirectly impugned the same, as I cannot affirm truly therein, he nor they shall have hereafter a quiet conscience. Indeed we have cause to think, that some for proof practising particularity, have troubled quiet waters, God give them grace to repent their errours. The answers have been since they were first given in words, altered in writing; and directed so to be to the worse; and thereby the Ambassador have been great∣ly perplexed to find the latter harder then the first; and yet now as you shall see the words for the point of Religion, thus her Majestie is resolved, and so she doth pronounce to her Councel, whom she seeth earnestly bent by all means to further this marriage for her own surety, and for the avoiding of the inevitable Ruine of this Monarchy, that surely so as Monsieur will forbear the mass, she will assent to the marriage; and this she confirmeth with all good speeches to give credit; but yet all of us are not so perswaded, not for doubt of her assertions, which surely are agreeable to her mind when she uttereth them, but for doubt that others mis∣liking the same, may indirectly draw her from her determination. If you require of me what you may say, her Majesties Letters will warrant you for words, but what you may hope will succeed, I can no more ascertain you, then I can my self, who am now to expect at Gods hands blessing or vengeance, for it is like∣ly his Majestie will no longer dissemble his determinations: In the mean time, the beholding of this cloud, the time to creep nearer by prayer for fear, and reverence
of his mercy, and to beseech him to direct the heart of her Majestie to chuse that which may be most to his glory. Monsieur de Foix hath had good enter∣tainment in all external offices, well used by her Majestie, defrayed for his diet at the time he hath been near the Court; and in coming and returning, my Lord of Buckurst hath very courteously and honourably accompanied him, during his being here; and to increase his honour, I caused my Lord of Oxford to attend on him in sundry places; and by the way from London hither to Walen, he dined at my house, as I doubt not but he and the Resident Ambassador have seen my hearty devotion to the marriage; and indeed, so is my judgement therein confirmed; as I am not ashamed to utter my self; howsoever, it may be peril∣ous to me when it shall not take place; you see also, how openly I deal with you. I have declared to her Majestie, the necessary occasion that you have this present moneth to attend Physick, whereby the place you hold were meet to be supplyed by some such as her Majestie shall think convenient, but I cannot have her direction fully to be declared: But she saith, that upon the next an∣swer to come from you, she will give you either authority to appoint Beal in your place as your Substitute, or she will send Master Killigrew thither. Mon∣sieur de Foix hath very earnestly moved her Majestie to send some one person of credit to the French King, to affirm and justifie the reasons of her answer; or rather, if the Marriage shall not take place, to enter into the Treaty of some straiter allyance and confederacy, which for my part I thought very reasonable, and did assent and move the same; but finding now that he hath secretly named me for that place, I do coldlie deal therein, knowing both my insufficiency, and doubting of the success thereof; but whether any shall come, or who shall, I surely cannot gess. The Queens Majestie would have you to enquire what becometh of Liggons my Lord of Norfolks servant, that hath of long time been about Paris and the Court. Here is some matter presently discovered, that my Lord of Norfolk should still mind this matter of the Scotish Queen; for there is intercepted a good portion of money in gold, that was (and by Letters in Cypher) directed to my Lord of Harrife, for help of the Scotish Queens party in Scotland, and the same was sent by one Higford the Dukes Secretary, who was by order from hence taken and committed at London, and this day is examined by Sir Thomas Smith, who yesterday went thither for that purpose. What will fol∣low, I cannot now write, but sorry I shall be that my Lord of Norfolk shall be found undutiful; and yet if he be, I am glad it shall be known, and so I end with my prayer. From Audeley-Inne by Walden the second day of September, 1571. Your assured Friend, William Burleigh. I send you something from Scotland, whereby you may see how small the Queen of Scots party is in Scotland.
To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majestie, that according to her order prescribed me by her Letters, bearing date the second of Septem∣ber, I made report unto the King here of that which passed in sundry Confe∣rences between her Majestie and his Ministers Monsieur de Foix, and his Am∣bassador Resident, as also apart with her Majesties Councel. His answer was, that he had great cause to give her Majestie thanks for her honourable enter∣ainment given unto de Foix. until whose coming he could say nothing in an∣swer of that which had passed by conference. He protested, that he desired no∣thing more then straight Amity with her Majestie; and therefore thinking mar∣riage the best means for the accomplishing thereof, it should be no small grief unto him if the same should not take place, whereby that perfect Amity might ensue that might be beneficial to both the Crowns: This was the effect of this present answer. Her Majestie is very much beholding to the D 3. who standeth most earnestly in defence of her honour, against any that seek any way to touch the same; she seemeth to think her self much bound to her Majestie, for that it pleased her Majestie to vouchsafe once to write, I suppose a few lines of thanks bestowed on her again from her Majestie, would win her to be a good instrument to give advertisements of such things as are sit for her Majestie to know. Queen Mother is much governed by her, and therefore she may be the better able to do the greater good. And if may further please her Majestie to bestow some ring on her, I think the profit that would grow thereof in time, will make her Majestie think it well bestowed. Of late there is a great sum of mo∣ney, to the sum of 15000 franks, made here in Poictu by the Queen of Scots Officers, an the same barrel'd up and sent to Paris, and from thence as I hear it shall be conveyed into Scotland to those of her faction there; yet as I am inform∣ed, that ill success that the money that they sent before had, maketh them to stand in doubt to convey it by sea, and therefore if they may conveniently, they would rather make it over to London by exchange; whereunto (by your Lord∣ships order) if there may an eye be had, it will easily be discovered, the sum be∣ing so great. The Admiral arrived here the twelfth of this Moneth. Touching the manner of his receiving, I refer you to the report of this Gentleman Mr. Lyster, her Majesties servant, whom I have throughly instructed what I have truly learned in that behalf. The day after his arrival, he sent a Gentleman un∣to me with this Message, that (in respect of the place I hold) he was bound for the great favour shewed by her Majestie, generally unto them of the Religion, in the time of their necessity, as also particularly unto his Brother, to have come and visited me; but he desired me to consider what suspicion would grow there∣of, which might rather do harm then good; notwithstanding he assured me, that her Majestie should always find him ready to serve her, with the hazard both of life and goods, whensoever any occasion should be presented, to shew the affection and good will he beareth her Majestie, in respect of the bond he oweth her. Gene∣rally all those of the religion, who are the flower of France, do make like protesta∣tion, assuring her Majestie, that when occasion or tryal shall be offered, she shall find them no less ready to serve her, then if they were her own natural Subjects. The Marriage between the Prince of Navarre is not so forward as Queen Mo∣ther was in preparation at Paris, who had provided both Jewels and Wedding-garments. The onely impediment as I hear is Religion. There departeth shortly, towards the concluding of this matte towards the Q. of
Navarre, who is now gone to Arragon, to certain Baynes there, for her health Byron and Beavoys. Co. Lo. left a man here of purpose to attend her Majesties answer touching those things that I propounded on his behalf, in my letter sent by Mr. Dannet. The resolution of that enterprize stayeth onely upon the expectation what her Majestie will do; and it is feared, that the matter will be so long protracted, as the opportunity of the enterprize will be let slip; which if it so fall out, the un∣kindness between this Crown and Spain will be reconciled, which I fear will not tend most to her Majesties safety, and so do as many fear, as love her Majesty here. The house of Guise secretly doth travel by all means to break the Amity with England, for that they think nothing will more prejudice the Queen of Scots their Kinswoman then the same. Touching my own private estate, my disease groweth so dangerously upon me, as I most humbly desire her Majestie to take some speedy order for some to supply my place. I hope my life shall stand her Majestie in more stead then my death, and upon these extream points standeth the defering of the cure; I hope therefore her Majestie will have consideration of it accordingly. Thus leaving further to trouble your Lordship at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Blois the sixteenth of September, 1571. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majestie, that within three days after Monsieur de Foix arrival, the King sent for me; and after my access un∣to him, he willed me first, in his name, to thank her Majestie for the honourable entertainment given unto de Foix, which he did repute to be done unto himself, for that it was done for his sake. Secondarily, he willed me to shew unto her, that he was glad to understand by him, and receive at so good restimony of the great affection that her Majestie beareth unto him; and of the desire she had, not onely to continue in good Amity with him, but also to encrease the same. Lastly, he willed me to shew unto her, that her answer touching the point of Religion is very hard; and that therefore he trusteth, that the Gentleman whom he is put in hope she will send over, shall have authority to qualifie the same; as also, to treat of some other matters to be propounded, that may tend to the encrease of further Amity, which he above all things desireth, who shall be unto him very welcome; and that he will strive with her in honouring of such Ministers as shall come from her Majestie, whereby the good will he hath to honour her may appear. After he had ended in this behalf, he desired me to recommend again unto her Majestie Moris Chamails the Brittain, on whose behalf he had lately written, and sent his Letters unto his Ambassador, to be delivered unto her Majesty; and that he hoped for his sake, that the said party should receive redress, and come to an end of his long suit, whereby he might have more cause to yield like justice to her Majesties Subjects, at such time as they shall have recourse unto him for the same. In this behalf I understand, that the Councel here have promised him, that if by the Am∣bassadors means his cause shall receive no end, that then he shall have a Letter of Mart given him. I find him very importunate, and one that maketh very lewd reports, how that he hath been put in fear of his life, and that therefore he dare not return to follow his suit. I beseech your Lordship, that by your means, I may
receive some order from her Majestie how to answer him. I was sent unto by the Lord Admirall to desire your Lordship to be a mean unto her Majestie, that whereas there was delivered unto his late brother, the Cardinall, a Bill signed with her Majesties hand for the receipt of certain Jewells engaged, that it would please her Majestie for that the said Bill is onely signed, and not sealed; which being sent unto me, they will deliver the other unsealed upon the receipt of the same. This he willed me to shew you that he doth it rather to content the Queen of Navarre, then that he thinketh the other bill insufficient, who thinketh his said Brother to have used some negligence in this behalf. Thus leaving further to trouble your Lordship, at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Blois the 23 of September. 1571. Your Honour to command. Fr. Walsingham. To Fr Walsingham Esq the Q. Majesties Ambassador Resident in France. SIr, you see that our Northern Planets have their influences, to make changes as others in the Meridionall have: howsoever Monsieur de Foix or the French Ambassador shall advertise of the cause now happened concerning the Duke of Norfolk, this is the truth, and so you may avow it. The money was taken being by the Dukes commandment as he avoweth and confesseth, received by Barker his man from the French Ambassador, to have been sent to Banister, the Dukes man dwelling about Shrewsbury, to one Lowther, and other of the Dukes servants secretly kept upon the West-borders, and by him should have been sent to the Lord Harries, and by him to Riddington. There was in the Bag also Letters from the French Ambassador to Viraque in Cipher, hereof Monsieur de Foix, made mention before his departure, and did think there was no other matter against the Duke, which I would there had not, but sith there was much other of great danger, God is to be thanked that it is discovered as now it is. There is found a long discourse about the D. sent from the Queen of Scots, in Cipher to him the 7 of February last, by which the said Q. layeth before the D. how she is Councelled from Spain, to fly into Spain, misliking utterly of the French, by reason of the doubt of the Q. marriage with Anjou. She doth also use hard words against the Queen Mother; she doth also in this discourse conclude, that she will make a semblance to the Spaniard of the liking of Don Iohn of Austria, al∣though she assureth the Duke of Norfolk of her countenance; she moveth that Ridolf may be sent to Rome, and to be directed wholly by the Duke of Nor∣folk; with many moe things of such sort. The Duke hath confessed the re∣ceipt of this from the Queen of Scots, but denieth he was privie of Ridolfs go∣ing otherwise then that he was earnestly required by the Bishop of Ross to in∣struct him, and write by him to the Duke of Alva, to require aid of men and money for the Queens party in Scotland; wherein he saith, he did refuse to deal for the perill thereof: He confessed that he had received four Letters from the Scotish Queen within this Twelve months, and did answer them by Writing, and all in Cyphering; but his were only of Thanks, and to move the Queen of Scots to depend only upon the Queens Majesty; but herein the Duke can make none of us to credit him: He saith also, that before the sending of this money, he helped the French Ambassador to send his Packet to Vi∣racque in July: We have also found his Cypher betwixt the Scotish Queen and
him, but all his writings are conveyed which he saith were by him burnt: Now have we great cause to think that he was privy to the dangerous practise whereof we found Ridolph to have dealt in with the Duke of Alva, in offering him that a Rebellion should be moved here this Summer, if the Duke of Alva would assist it; but of this the Duke will not be known. But we do find more presently a smell that 258. Deep, whereas 28 at 740  are at this time much perplexed herewith, and secretly disposed to no good; but there is waite laid upon them. Now for Scotland, the fourth of this moneth, Huntley and Hamilton, with others to the num∣ber of 300 secretly stole into Sterling in the night, by Corruption of one Bell of Sterling, who had a postern of a wall into the privy Garden; they addressed themselves to the lodging of the Earle of Lennox, the Regent Morton, Glencarn, Lord Rithill, Mookgill, and suddenly without any great resi∣stance, took them; and was carrying them out of the Town with intent to have killed them; but rescue came out of the Castle, and so they were all saved but the Regent, who was slain with a pistolet by one Calder, who be∣ing taken, confessed that Huntley, and Lord Hamilton did so command him; he is executed, and so also is Bell that betrayed the Town; the Regent lived 8 houres and died stoutly and godly. The Earle of Marre is by Parliament chosen Regent. The Earles of Argile, Cassills, Egliton, and Crawford, the Lord Bloy, and Sr. Iames Finch are sworn to the Regent. There are Letters on the way to the Queens Majestie from the now Regent by Cockburn, who is also come into France. A. seemeth very sorry that the matter of Deep, in which D. at this time is so backward, and still she hopeth that you will set Deep  again, and so she bad me now write to you. The Q. Majestie saith, untill she heare from you, she cannot tell whom to send thither. The French Ambassador is earnest to have his money again; and I answer his Secretary, that it must be demanded of them to whom he delivered it; wherewith he is much offended with me. At Markhall, the 14. and 17. of September 1571. Your assured friend, Wil. Burleigh. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq the Queens Majesties Ambassador Resident in France. SIr, after the writing of my other Letters, we understand, that the murther of the late Regent, by Huntley and Hamilton, hath irritated the Na∣tion of Scotland, that the party of the King is thereby greatly increased, and the Nobility of that side have made solemne oath and band to be speedily avenged thereof. The French Ambassador sent yesterday his Secretary to me, to let the Queens Majestie understand that his Mr. had received Letters from the French King, directed joyntly to him, and to dé Foix, as answering them two for their Letters which they sent immediately after their first Audience, noting thereby, that at the writing of those Letters, de Foix was not at the
Court no looked for, and therewith he motioned that he might speak with her Majestie for the relief of the Queen of Scots, considering that she had her num∣ber lessened and that also he might have his Majesties money, lately intercepted being sent towards Viracque; herewith her Majestie was so offended that he should meddle with the Queen of Scots matters, as she commanded me to say to his Secretary that she could not like his manner of entermedling at this time with the Queen of Scots causes, considering her Majestie findeth her doings not only dangerous to her quietness, but bent also to depend upon others then the Fr. King; and therefore she required him to forbeare, and give her leave to consider in her own Realm what is meet for her surety, and when time shall seem meet it shall well appeare, that she hath done nothing toward the Q. of Scots, but in reason and honour she might have done much more, and she hath deferred the Ambassadors comming to her Majestie untill she shall be at Pichmond, which shall be about the 27 of this moneth: you may boldly affirm that her Majestie is well able to prove, that the Q. of Scots hath by the advice of the Duke of Alva, fully resolved to depend upon the King of Spain, and to match her self with Don Iohn of Austria, and her Son with the King of Spains daughter. All these things her Majestie willed me also to signifie unto you, at this time, and that as you had occasion, you should generally signifie there that her Majestie hath just cause to proceed, otherwise then hitherto she doth to re∣strain the practise intended to her estate by the Queen of Scots, and so she trusteth that the Fr. King will Honourably think of her actions, both with her own subjects and with the Queen of Scots as shall be necessary for her own surety, and yet you may assure them there that there is nothing done toward the Queen, but she is restrained to have such free conference, and intelligence as of late time she hath had with her Majesties subjects, for otherwise she is right ho∣nourably entetained and well used. Now must I end for I am fully occupied in making my imperfect house ready, for the Queens Majestie against Saturday. At Theobalds my house in Chesthunt the 20 of September. 1571. Your assured loving friend, Will. Burleigh. To my very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Esq the Queens Majesties Am∣bassador with the French King. IT is long now since you had any Letter of mine, but so it happened in∣deed that the messengers were dispatched as I could not have time, but because. I know you were fully advertised of all things, I made the lesse matter, now have I thought meet to advertise you again, though there is no new accident of the marriage matter to write of, and I suppose my Lord of Burleigh hath written plainly to you his opinion how little hope there is that ever it will take place, for surely I am now perswded that her Majesties heart is nothing inclined to marry at all, for the  as ever brought to as many points as we could devise, and alwayes she was bent to hold with the difficultest. For my part i grieveth my heart to think of it seeing no way, so farre as I can think, serveth, how she can remain long quiet, and safe without such a strong alliance as marriage must bring, for other Amities may serve for a time, but there is no account to be made of them longer then to serve the turn of each party, and her Majesties yeares running
away so fast causeth me almost to dispaire of long quietness. We long hee to heare how matters stand upon de Foix return, her Majestie is till perswaded that they will yield in the matter of Religion for Monsieur, and so doing▪ she seeme that she will according to her word proceed: but to say my conscience, I think she had rather he stood fast to it, and rather increased some hard point then yield∣ed in it: well I commit the to almighty God, with my continuall prayer for her long preservation. Of the committing of the Duke of Norfolk to the Tower, I doubt not but you have heard ere now: his cause goeth hard even to his own confession: because such causes be doubtfull till they be brought to some cer∣tainty, I will forbeare till my next; but thus much appeareth, vehement suspicion of more ill then I ever thought could fall out in him, but his deserts crave as they deserve, and I believe her Majestie will proceed according to equity, and justice, what cause soever she hath to use little mercy. I have spoke very earnestly to her Majestie touching the relief of your estate; she hath promised earnestly forthwith to help you. Monsieur de Foix therein played the part of a right honest Gentlemen, and a very friend, he hath declared to my Lord of Burleigh, and me, and also to her Majestie her self, so much of your extream chargeable living there, as surely besides that it did much further the matter, he deserved thanks for such an unlooked for office at his hands; truely he did it wisely and honestly for you. The Regent Lennox is slain of late, Marre is chosen in his place, God defend all my friends from that soile. The money that you heard my Lord of Norfolk did send toward Scotland, was the French Ambassadors indeed, but it little helpeth the D. case. I pray you give little Leicester thanks for his often writing to me; and commend me to my Lord of Rutland and his wife. Thus having nothing else to write but of her Majesties good health I bid thee farewell, this 20 of September. Your assured friend, Ro. Leicester. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq her Majesties Ambas∣sador Resident in France. SIr, since Monsieur de Foix departure, these things have happened. The D. of Norfolk is charged with the countenance of dangerous practises with the Queen of Scots, as that he hath sent money into Scotland to maintain her party in the Castle; for proof whereof Letters are intercepted in Cipher by one Higgford his Secretary, who is now in the Tower, and confesseth that the Duke commanded him to write to one Law. Banister the Dukes man; that he should see secretly conveyed 600 l. to the Lord Harrise, to be by him conveyed to Lidding∣ton, & Graunge. The Duke at the first denied all manner of knowledge thereof, but now at his committing to the Tower he yieldeth, and asketh pardon there∣of but yet the money is said to have been by the Fr. Ambassador delivered to Baror the Dukes man to be conveyed to Viracque, how this is true, time must teach: sure we are, that they in the Castle have been payed divers times with English Angells and Royalls. There are also found about the Duke certain writings, by which appeareth that the Duke was acquainted with the voiage that Ridolph made to Rome, and to Spain, hereupon the Queens Majestie is grie∣vously offended both toward the Queen of Scots, and the D. and hath strength∣ned her from intelligence. At this time the matters of Scotland are also in∣tricate, the Queens party much diminished by the deserting of the  of
Argile, Egliton, and Cassill, and yet by a stratagem on Monday last as night, the case had like to have been much altered. The Earle of Huntley and Lord Ha∣milton with Bucklough, and Fernichurst accompained with 40 horsemen entred by stealth into the Town of Sterling after midnight, they took the Regent in his bed, and the Earles Argile, Moretn, Cassills, &c. and whilest these being prisoners were at the Town gate to be carried away with their takers, the rest of the company spoiling the Town they of the Castle of Sterling issued out, and so resued the prisoners, saving that in the conflict the Regent and 16 more of his Gentlemen were slain, as it is written. Thus it is written unto me, but I dare not affirm it untill I heare it again. As for the motion made by de Foix, that some person might be sent thither to affirme his message, and to maintain that with the Queen Majesties honour, wherein by de Foix I was named, the Queens Maestie doth forbeare untill she may heare from you; for according to the answer that shall be made, her Majestie will send a person either mean or great. By reason that I was named I have had lesse occasion to motion it, but surely it had done well to have fed the French humour, and many things may better be said by an expresse messenger then by the report of an Ambassador Lieger, whose commission groweth by writing. Truly the more matters are discovered, the more necessary it is seen that her Majestie should marry. The Queens Majestie returneth towards London, from hence to Hundon, and so to my house in Chesthunt, and so to S. Iame's, and hence to Richmond. And so having com∣modity by this honest Gentleman Mr. Clarke, I end. From Lees the 28 of September, 1571. Your assured loving friend, W. Burleigh. To the Right Honourable and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. YOur Lordships of the 17 & 20 of September sent by Har I received the 28 of the same, which came in very good time for that there is most earnest soli∣citing here by the Ambassadors Lord Fleming, and Duglas, for present aid to be sent into Scotland; therefore after I had well perused the contents thereof, I took occasion by presenting the Earle of Rutland, at his leave taking, to make Q. Mother acquainted with so much of the same as I thought it for her to know. I shewed her, that if it might so like her, I would declare unto her at large the present state of England, as also my private opinion in some points, not by Com∣mission, as an Ambassador, but as a private Gentleman that desireth nothing more then good Amity between both the two Crowns, and therefore wish all jea∣lousie to be removed, for that there could be no perfection of friendship where jealousie was a party. First, touching the state of England, I made her privy what had passed between their Ambassador Monsieur de la Mot and the Duke of Norfolk; touching the money, as also the pacquet conveyed by Virague. I made her also acquainted with the contents of the discourse  by the  of Scots to the Duke. I shewed her further, that Monsieur sending for Audience, to have moved her majestie for relief of the Queen of Scots did not best like her. In the end I concluded with that point that concern∣ed the Duke of Alva's advice given to the said Queen, aswell for her own mar∣riage as her sons, as also not to depend any longer upon France. Then touching my private opinion, I shewed her, I was sorry first, that their Ambassador should have intelligence with the Duke, who was discovered to be a dangerous subject.
Secondarily, That he should be so earnest in seeking the liberty of the Queen of Scots unto the Queen my Mistress, a most dangerous enemy: these things I feare, said I, may breed in the Queen my Mistress some opinion that the friendship professed, is not altogether sincere; and therefore I wished that the King and she in seeking the Queen of Scots liberty, would not forget to have re∣gard to the Queen of Englands safety, especially now, seeing the Queen of Scots seeketh to quit her self of his protection. To this she answered, That as on the one side she was glad to understand that these practises were discovered, so was she sorry that there should fall out any thing that might breed any suspicion in her Majestie of any evill meaning on their behalf, who wished asmuch good to her Majestie as to their own selves. And as for de la Mots doing, I know, saith she, aswell for his duty towards the King my Son, who would not have him deale in any thing that might any way prejudice the Queen your Misterss, as also for the particular good will he beareth unto her, was altogether void of any evill meaning; and so I hope she will interpret it. The money (saith she) as I am informed by the Scots Ambassador, was sent by him to de la Mot, to be con∣veyed to the Queen of Scots, who as he shewed quite was void of mony. I then replied, That the money was sent over to another end, as the Duke himself had confessed; and that therefore the Ambassador, had misinformed her. She told me further, that the money was none of the Kings; but part of that which she hath yearly from hence by virtue of her dowry. By this your Lordship may see that the Ambassador dealeth somewhat cunningly in this behalf, to gratifie the Queen of Scots. Touching the solliciting of her liberty, she shewed me that the King and she, aswell in respect of the ancient League with Scotland, as the alliance by marriage, could in honour do no lesse then recommend her cause, which she protested they never did with intention any way to perjudice her Majestie. I then desired her first to consider whether the Amity of England might not be as beneficiall to France, as that of Scotland. Secondarily, Whether they had that need at this present of the Amity and League of Scotland, as heretofore they have had. For the first, I shewed her that France in respect of the greatness of some of their neer neighbours, had need of the Amity of both England and Scotland. For the second, I told her that England had no foot in France; Scotland was rather chargeable then profitable to France. She replied, That the King notwith∣standing, in honour, could not but continue Amity and League with Scotland, though he had not that use as before time. I answered her, That the King might continue his League with Scotland by joyning with the Queen my Mistris, in the maintenance of the young Kings government there. To this she answered, That the king could not in honour abandon his sister in Law. I answered, That the Kings band towards his sister in Law, is not more then of a naturall father towards his naturall child; yet if the child grow to be dissolute and lewd, where∣by he is shaken off by his father, the fault is not to be imputed to the father, but to the child; even so, if the King in respect of the indignities committed by his siste in Law, shall give over the protection of her, the cause thereof is onely to be imputed to her misdemeannor, unworthy of her calling, and not to him. I desired her to consider further, that whereas she saith the King in Honour is bound to seek her liberty, that he is more bound in honour to have regard of the Queen my istris, safety▪ First, for that she is a Princesse of life vertuous, in Government guided by Law and Justice, in affection toward him sincere. Now if by the Queen of Scots liberty procured by him, the State should be disquieted, what thing could happen that might touch the King more in honour & conscience: and as for any assurance or protestation that she might make to the King touch∣ing
her peaceable behaviour toward the Q. my Mistress; First, I desired her to weigh that she was ambitious, and therefore no Capitulation could serve for a bridle. Secondly, That she is most guided by the advice of those of her kindred, who have been the greatest cause of the disquiet of Europe, whereof she could be a witness. Thirdly, how that now she meaneth chiefly to depend upon Spain, who will be alwaies provoking her to the disquieting of England and France. These considerations (said I) Madam, if you will well weigh, I hope they will give you cause not to be over earnest in procuring any enlargment of liberty, especially upon this late discovery of her evill meaning towards her Majestie. In my private opinion, you shall do well therefore to remit the same untill the coming of the Gentleman whom the Queens Majestie my Mistress meaneth to send. So in the end she concluded, that she would confer with the King her Son, whom she assured me would be loath to do any thing that might any way discon∣tent her Majestie, or tend to her prejudice. J. K. being by me so requested, dealt very earnestly with her in that behalf, shewing the unseasonableness of the time to commend a matter so unacceptable, especially having intention to treat of some straight Amity. Douglas in his return hither, passed by Flanders; he was accompained from Antwerp to Bruxels by the Earle of Westmerland, and a dozen other of the Rebells, where he had conference with the Duke of Alva, and was, as he secretly reporteth to a friend of his, very Honourably used, and put in comfort that there should be somewhat done shortly for the assistance of the Queen of Scots faction in Scotland; and further, that he doubted not but that there would come a time that there should also be somewhat done for her deli∣very, which had not now to have been executed, had not the jealousie of some French enterprize stayed him, Iunius the Co. Palatines servant, who had his dispatch at the King hands the second of this moneth, shewed me, that the mes∣sage he had in commission to deliver to his Mr. and the rest of the Princes, was, that the said King was glad the said Princes were both content and desirous to enter into some straight League with him, a thing necessary for both their preser∣vations, and to the end that the same might proceed, he desired them that they would consider of the points and Articles to be agreed on, as also of some con∣venient place for the meeting of their Deputies: Whereof when he shall be advertised upon his return again, he would not faile to send some personage of good calling, with Authority to coclude such points as shall be agreed upon. After he had received his message, he shewed me that he told the King, that it were very necessary that the Queen of England were named to joyn in this League; whereof he signified unto me, that both the King and Queens Mother were most desirous thereof; and therefore wished that there might be some means found, that her Majestie might be moved in that behalf: whereupon he and I after some conference had what way were best to be taken, agreed upon a Letter to be sent by me to his Mr. as the best means to bring the same to passe; which Letters I caused Mr. Beale to draw, and sent to Mr. Iunius according as we resolved; whereof I send your Lordship a Copy, to the end your Lordship may see the course I have taken, which I hope, for that it tendeth to her Majesties safety, will not mislike her. Thus leaving further to trouble your Lordship at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Blois the 7 of October 1571. Your Honours to command, Fr. Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majestie; that the 22 of this moneth the King sent for me, and at the time of my accesse he shewed me that he was given to understand that her Majestie meant to send certain Soul∣diers into Scotland, which thing he would be sorry it should so fall out, for that then he should be forced in respect of the ancient League, with Scotland to strengthen the Queens party there by sending of forces thither, and that there∣fore he desired her Majestie to forbeare in that behalf, and that that matter might be referred over to treaty, untill the coming of him whom her Majestie meaneth to send, whereby all unkindness might be avoided; he willed me to de∣sire her Majestie to interprete this is message in good part, and to assure her that he is void of all evill meaning, whose Amity he most earnestly desireth; not∣withstanding he may not in honour forbeare if he be urged thereto to assist them in respect of the said League. I shewed him, that I understood nothing of any such meaning of her Majesties sending of any forces thither, but if it were so, it then proceeded upon the discovery of certain dangerous practises of the Queen of Scots, whereupon her Majestie is inforced every way to seek to do that thing that might tend to her safety, and therefore if any such sending grow upon such respect he could not but allow thereof, protesting that good will that he doth to her Majestie: He answered me, that now his meaning was not to recommend the liberty of the Queen of Scots, but onely to recommend the liberty of the Country. I told him in that behalf, I doubted not but he should find the Queen my Mistress inclined to do any thing to agree to reason, and stand with her safety: but if her Majestie should have any intention to seek the liberty of the Queen of Scots, in my private opinion, I thought by no meanes he should prevaile, she now of late being discovered to be so dangerous an enemy, who hath as it were dismembred her Majesties politique body by corruption of sundry of her best qualified Subjects, which thing (said I) if your Majestie could consider in the Queen my Mistress person, I am sure your Majestie would forbeare at any time, hereafter to recommend her cause. His answer to that was, that he meant not now to recommend the same; and so he willed me to present his affectionate com∣mendations unto her Majestie adding further, that he hoped shortly to see one from her here, to treat of such things as my tend to increase of good and per∣fect Amity between them; he desired me to dispatch one with some intelligence, to the end he may know her Majesties answer. I am given secretly to understand, that there are certain of the Guisian faction, that have made offer unto the King to go and serve in Scotland of their own charges, and that the King if he re∣ceived not a good answer from her Majestie is determined to imploy them: there are some also of that faction that go about to perswade him, that her Majestie meaneth nothing less then to send any hither to treat of Amity, and that all is but intertainment untill she have made full conquest of Scotland, the King not∣withstanding these lewd perswasions, as I learn, conceiveth a good and honour∣able opinion of her Majestie. As I was writing, I was given to understand that the morning the King sent for me, there was long debate had in Councell whether he should recommend the Q. of Scots cause or not. In the end, after long debating, through the earnest perswasions of some, it was thought expe∣dient to forbeare in that behalf, and so concluded that he should onely recom∣mend the liberty of the Countrey. I am put in great hope that the King will be content to joyn with her Majestie in the establishing of the young Kings Go∣vernment.
Surely, if her Majestie send hither in time, whilest her friends enjoy the credit of the Court here, some parsonage of good quality, whereby the King may think she maketh some account of him. I think her Majestie shall obtain any reasonable thing at his hands that she her self can desire; for she is perswaded, that no Amity is so fit for him as that with her Majestie, in respect that all occa∣sions of quarrels are now taken away. If it might so like her, I would wish, that her Maiestie would in talk with the Ambassador, use some words of excuse, in that she hath so long deferred the sending of the Gentleman that is here looked for; as also, two words of assurance of the great desire she hath of the increase of Amity with the King: This I know, would content him, as also stop the mouthes of those that perswade the contrary. Thus leaving further to trouble your Lordship, I most humbly take my leave. At Blois the nineteenth of October, 1571. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esq our Ambassador Resident in France. ELIZABETH R. TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well; we have presently sent the bearer hereof, our trusty servant Henry Killegrew, to supply the place that there you have, to be our Ambassador Resident with the French King our good brother, for the time that you shall be occasioned to be necessarily absent about the tendance to cure your self of such infirmities, as to our grief, we hear you are subject unto, and glad therewith to hear, that if you may have some respite and leisure from business to attend to your Cure, you are in hope to be cured by certain Physicians that have taken upon them the charge thereof, whereof we are both willing to further you, and do earnestly charge you, without either delay of time, or care of our business to apply your self; for that by your good service hitherto we do plainly perceive that our election of you hath been well answered, and the continuance of you in that service, is to be much desired by the recovery of your health. And for that this bearer shall now supply your absence, whom we know to be a faithful friend unto you, we would you should instruct him in things meet to be known to him, and to give him assistance of such of your servants, as shall be to him needful for this purpose. And for our further knowledge in things presently to be prosecuted and imparted to the King there, we have also given to him knowledge thereof by special Instructions in writing, signed with our hand, have informed him, and have willed him to make you partaker, and to use your advise in what sort to communicate with our good brother the French King; and assoons as you may recover your self, to re∣turn to your former charge, which we wish to be speedy both for your self and our service. We require you so to do, and to give us knowledge thereof; for our meaning is, assoon as you shall be able so to do, this bearer Henry Killegrew shall return. Given under our Signet at our Mannor of Richmond the twentieth of October, 1571. in the thirteenth year of our Reign.
To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador for the Queens Majestie in France. SIr, though your leisure were more then it is, yet the coming of this bearer my brother Killigrew, is able to discharge me of all my care to write; but yet I cannot let him depart without my Letter, how short soever it is; you know my brother so well, and love and trust him, as I perceive so entirely, as I think none could come more grateful unto you; and surely so do I find him to love and care for you, as none can do more to a natural brother. I am greatly perplexed with the strangeness of 2 4. In Dover 7 0 d m t m o t m: for surely at this time there groweth daily more cause then other to have 57 Callice A M. And so when you shall understand the state of things here you will judge. This bearer can tell you who is likely to come thither; for surely there are many im∣pediments why I cannot, but the principal is, for that I am far unmeet to treat of any thing out of England, being as I am known only meet to speak as my mother taught me. Of Scotland, this bearer can report to you, and so can he of the Scotish Queen, of the Duke of Norfolk, and all the matter. He can also tell you of a sud∣den alarm given to me, specially yesternight, by her Majestie, being suddenly sick in her stomack, and as suddenly relieved by a vomit. You must think such a matter would drive men to the end of their wits, but God is the stay of all that put their trust in him. At Richmond the twentieth of October, 1571. Yours assuredly William Burleigh. To my very Friend Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador for the Queens Majestie in France. MR. Walsingham, this bearer is so fully instructed, as I shall need the less to trouble you with any tedious Letter; for both touching our opinion of the marriage, of the Amity, as also of the Queen of Scots, the Duke of Norfolk, &c. I have at large delivered it to this bearer. And last of all, for your self, I assure you I have most earnestly travelled with her Majestie, and let her fully understand your estate, and how chargably your service there hath been already to you. Her answers be so gracious, and do promise so earnestly to see you shortly recompenced. as I have no doubt but it will prove no less in deed then in word, and to my power I will not cease to put her still in remem∣membrance of you. Thus with my hearty commendations, I bid you farewel. In some haste the twentieth of October, 1571. Your assured Friend, Ro: Leicester.
Instructions for Henry Killegrew Esq sent into France to supply the place of Francis Walsingham Esq her Majesties Ambassador Resident with the French King, during the time that the said Walsingham shall be absent from the Court of France, to recover his health for such infirmities as he is troubled withal. YOu shall repair to our Ambassador Francis Walsingham, and let him under∣stand, as he shall perceive by our Letters now sent to him, that your coming is to supplie his room, for such a season as shall be needful for him to attend his recoverie of his infirmities as he is molested withal; and assoon as you may, for the speedy relieving of him, you shall repair with him to the French King our good brother, or otherwise by his direction if it so be, that for his infirmitie he may not without some great hinderance repair to the Court with you, and you shall deliver the Kings Letters, which for this purpose are directed to our good brother the King, and to Queen Mother, for to credit you in the absence of our Ambassador. After that you are so notified and allowed of the King and Queen Mother, you shall also at time convenient salute the French Queen and Monsieur de Anjou, and also Angoulemse the Kings brethren, with such good usual speeches as may seem agreeable. You shall also let the King understand, that since the arrival of Monsieur de Foix there at the Court, we have heard both by Letters of our own Ambassa∣dor, and since that by the report of Monsieur de la Mot the Kings Ambassador, in what good part the King hath accepted our friendly and plain manner of deal∣ing with him in the negotiation of the matter for the which Monsieur de Foix was sent hither; and how well Monsieur de Foix hath reported our good usage of him for the Kings sake, of all which we are very glad to see our good meaning to be so well interpreted and allowed, for ever to that end indeed we did direct our meaning and intention to make some demonstrations of our heartie good will towards our good brother, especially by many things confirmed to us of late time, not only in the honourable usuage of our Ministers and Servants, but in so earnest prosecution of this matter of marriage of his brother the Duke of Ajou. And considering we perceive by his Ambassador, that he will not enter into any direct judgement upon our answer given to Monsieur de Foix, neither to accept it, until that some special person of value and credit with us, may be sent unto them to treat further thereupon: and that he doth certainlie look that we will send some such person thither, upon the report of Monsieur de Foix, who indeed at his departure, did intreat us so to do; yet he had no certain promise of us for the same; but that we would first understand how the King our good brother should allow of our answer, and so thereafter to do. We now finding not onely the expectation of our said good brother, but his desire also that one such person might come from us, are minded within short time to send forth such a one as shall be meet for that purpose to deal with our said good brother, for declaration of our mind in that matter, or in any other; which we mean to defer onely until we may at more length, more largely un∣derstand the whole intention and progress of certain dangerous practises begun against us and our State by the Scotish Queen, and some of our natural Sub∣jects, which being lately discovered, doth alreadie manifestly appear to have been of long time intended, and by Gods goodness staied in such sort, as be∣fore the execution thereof, we have knowledge of a great part thereof,
and doubt not by the continuance of the same goodness of God, both to under∣stand the rest, and to understand the danger intended; whereof when the whole shall be further known to us, we will make our said brother private thereto, as to one that for the assured friendship that we conceive in him, will be both glad that God hath defended us from such dangers, and also willing by his good concurrency in friendship, to assist us in our State against the like. And yet you shall say to our good brother, because he shall not be ignorant of these mat∣ters, for such part as shall be to us discovered; you shall shew him, that whereas about two years past the Queen of Scots had practised to have mar∣ried wthout our knowledge, with one of our greatest Subjects, the Duke of Norfolk, wherewith for many great reasons we were justly offended, both a∣gainst her and the said Duke, having for that purpose restrained the said Duke, but from his common liberty, leaving him the use of all his Lands and Goods, and meaning by degrees to receive him to our grace, as we did in some part diminish the demonstration of our offence, upon signification of his repentance, and protestation never to deal in that matter, or any such like; and the like de∣claration did the Queen of Scots make to us from the beginning, both by her sundry messages, and specially by multitude of her Letters to us, which do re∣main with us, written of her own hand. And though we had many sparks of suspetion that their meaning was not fully agreeable to their Words, Letters, Promises and Oathes, which made us not hastie in the full deliverie of the Duke, yet now we have manifestly found by their practises with sundrie others, and by their own Letters, which we have in great number, that even from the be∣ginning that we did find fault with the said practises for marriage, and that they did solemnly revoke their intentions with firm promises in writing never to deal therein any further: They did not onely secretlie continue their first intents of marriage against our will, but the rest also of our dangers that properlie we did at the begining conjecture to have been joyned to that marriage, which now are so manifestlie discovered, as no answer can excuse the same; and that is in one word to express the whole, under colour of restoring her to libertie, to deprive us of our Crown, and erect her up in our place; and that by force, not onely by Rebellion to be stirred up in our Realm, but by bringing in of Forreign Forces to assist that enterprize, against such power as we should have had of faith∣ful natural Subjects in our defence. This intention of the Queen of Scots, you shall assure our good brother is not to us by conjectures, as for the most part the greatest Treasons are, that they be not executed, but by manifest writing of the Queen of Scots own hand, by confession of such as be apprehended, and are guiltie thereof themselves, and have confessed it voluntarilie, with tokens of great repentance: And in all these their practises, we are much com∣forted to find it declared, yea, by the Queen of Scots own writings, that she and her partie much misliked the Friendship between our good brother the French King and us; and specially gave charge, that in seeking of Forreign Forces to invade our Realm, none of the French Kings Ministers should be made participant, judging by plain speeches and words in writing, that she the Scotish Queen would wholly follow the directions of the King of Spain, and would procure her son to be transported thither; and to entice their friend∣ship, she would shew her self willing to marrie Don Iohn of Austria. This in sum, you may assure the French King we can in substance manifest, even by the Scotish Queens writings to the Duke of Norfolk, which we have divers ways confirmed by writings and Confessions of others. And until this whole Tree shall be fully discovered, as well in the branches as in the roots, which we trust God will display afore our eyes, we have thought meet
to impart in this manner so much thereof, praying our good brother to shew herein the office of a good perfect friend; that is, in case of all such danger as this is, touching our life, our State, and the ruine of our Realm and faithful Subjects, not to credit the false report of any, that to our prejudice shall labour to deprave our doings in the procuring of our own safety and quietness of our State, and the continuance of Peace in our Realms and Dominions. For surely we do not herein any thing but in the sight of God we are bound in nature to do for our selves, and in dutie for our Realm. At Richmond the nineteenth of October, 1571. Burleigh. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to understand, that finding the King absent from Bloys, as also all those from whom I was wont to receive any light of their proceeding here, whereby my abode there was to no great purpose, finding also my disease to increase upon me, and the time fit for the cure to slip away; I thought it good to repair to Pari, having taken order be∣fore my departure for the excuse of my going away without taking leave of the King, he being then well near thirtie Leagues from Bloys, at a house of Marshal Villeile, not far from Agiers. At my access hither, I found Master Killegrew, who delivered me her Majesties Letters, by the which I have just cause to think my self most bound to her Majestie for accept∣ing my simple service; as also, for the care she hath of my health, by send∣ing this Gentleman to relieve me. I have conferred with him, and made him acquainted with my proceeding in this charge, as also with the pre∣sent state of this Countrey. The chief cause of my sending at this pre∣sent, is to advertise her Majestie of the late victorie had by the Princes Confederates against the Turk: The particularities whereof, as I re∣ceived them from the Venetian Ambassador, were these: That the seventh of, &c. It is much feared by those of judgement here, that this Victory, though generallie it may grow to Christendom profitable, yet particularlie it may prove dangerous to some, in that it is likely to increase the reputation and greatness of Spain, which may breed some change here, and may cause the King to relent over much to Spain; the reason of the fear is, that Queen Mother, who directeth all things here, is of nature fearful, and there∣fore they doubt that those that incline to Spain, who are in best credit with her, will take profit of the Victorie, and make her an instrument to perswade the King to dissemble the Injuries received at Spains hands, and to encline him to run one course with him for a time. Of these fears I thought good to advertise, refring the consideration thereof unto her Majestie. One Waldie, servant unto the Countess of Emden, being sent from her unto her Majestie with certain Letters, is stayed in the Town through sickness, whereby he cannot perform his voyage. He desired me to convey over these Letters he hath unto her, unto a servant of his Mistris's resident in London, whom he meaneth to make his substitute for the delivery of the said
Letters, as also to make your Lordship acquainted with the causes of his stay: His Commission, as I gather by him, is two ends; the one to desire her Ma∣jestie, that by her aid there may be some order taken for the clearing of the narrow seas of Pyrats; the other, to move her Majestie to grant to the Subjects of the said Commonwealth, an exemption of a certain custom, in re∣spect of the favour shewed her Majesties Subjects. Thus leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humblie take my leave. At Paris the eighth of November, 1571. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. BY your Lordships of the twentieth of October, sent by Mr. Killegrew, I conceive great hope of her Majesties consideration of my chargable living here▪ and because your Lordship hath been a most earnest furtherer of the same, I most humbly thank you; as also, for that it pleaseth your Lord∣ship to promise the continuance of your said furtherance, when occasion shall be offered, wherein the same will stand you in any stead, which I will pre∣sume with that boldness to use, as I hope your Lordship will imploy me, wherein your Honour may have any use of my poor service. The cause of my present sending is, to advertise of the victory had by sea of the Christian against the Turk. The Conflict was the seventh of the last moneth, not far from Crfu, between Morea and Lepanto: There escaped, as the Venetian Am∣bassador gave me to understand, onely four of two hundred Gallies, other particularities as then he knew not. I send your Lordship also a little Pamphlet that they have put in print here touching the said victorie, of what credit, I know not. Whatsoever shew the King here giveth of joy outward∣ly, inwardlie he doth not best like of the victorie, as that thing which addeth too great an increase of reputation to the King of Spain. I think therefore no time more fit to treat of Amitie, then at this present. I do not there∣fore doubt but that your Lordship will urge her Majestie most earnestlie to take profit of the time, by sending with convenient speed him over, whom she meaneth to use in this behalf. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humblie take my leave. At Paris the seveth of November, 1571. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham.
To my assured Friend Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador in France, and my brother in Law Henry Killigrew Esq and to either of them. HAving this present occasion to send two of my Lord of Oxfords men to Paris, at his Lordships request I thought good also therewith to send to you this little Treatise therewith, newly printed in Latine, in commending or discommending the Qu. of Scots actions, to further her Marriage with Bothwel. I hear it is to be translated into English, with addition of many other supplements of like condition. The Queens Majestie hath sent for my Lord Gray to come thither into France, and if his health cannot serve him, Sir Peter Gray shall come. Her Majestie, with furtherance of her whole Councel, is certainly resolved to send one thither. My Lord of Hunsdon is at Berwick by computation yesternight, and his Commissi∣on is to set a good face upon the matter, to bring Grange and the Castle to the Kings devotion; if he cannot, we of her Councel are of opinion that England shall inforce them. And yet it shall do well, that no such thing be notified to the French King. My Lord Marquis dyed at Warwick on Sunday, the loss of a good Councellour. The case of the Duke of Norfolk falleth even out by branches to be more odious. The B. of Ross is in the Tower, where he utter∣eth many things right plainly, and yet you need not be known thereof. I pray let the bearers hereof, if they shall have need of your friendship, find that your friendship is readier for my commendations. I think to marry my daughter at Christmass. From Richmond the first of November, 1571. Yours assuredly, Wil. Burleigh. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. BEsides Mr. Killigws advertisements, as from the Court, I thought good to give your Lordship to understand what they do here at Paris. The Mar∣shal de Coss hath been here imployed of late by the French King, in procuring a Loan, which is granted, and the same is presently in leavying; the people mur∣mur much at it, and yet do not refuse to pay it. Marshal Montmorency repaired to this Town the third of this moneth, ac∣companied with 300 horse: The next day after his arrival, he and the Marshal de Coss conferred with the chief of this Town about the plucking down of the Cross, which was resolved on, and the same presently put in execution; the Masons employed in that behalf, being guarded by certain Harquebusers: The common people ease their stomacks onely by uttering certain seditious words, which is born withal, for that was doubted; the Protestants by the overthrow of this Cross, receive greater comfort, and the Papists the contrary. Touching my particular, I find it will be the latter end of the next moneth before I shall re∣turn to my charge, for that I am diseased by three sundry Carnosities, which will require the longer time in the cure. Thus much I thought good to give your Lordship to understand, for that I fear her Majestie will think somewhat other∣wise in my long stay here. And so leaving further to trouble your Lordship at this present, I most humbly take my leave the seventh of Decemb. 1571. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq her Majesties Ambas∣sador Resident in France. SIr the bearer hereof is one whom you may trust, as I am informed. And if he shall require you to send any his Letters to be conveyed into Scotland, he is content that they shall come into my hands, whereby I shall not be the worse informed of things meet to be known: He can shew you both of Scotlands causes, and of Englands. Sir Thomas Smith is ready to depart thitherward from hence to morrow, if the French Ambassadors Negotiation here with her Majestie this afternoon whilest I am writing this Letter, do not prolong the same. My Lord of Oxfords servants were constrained by contrary winds to tarry at Callis, so as they came not hither before Sunday last, at which time came also Fiasco, the Genevoise, who had likewise stayed at Callis for the same purpose; and at his coming he maketh all to be sound between Spain and France, and would not be known of the Spanish Ambassadors passage into the Low Countrey, nor of any thing done in Henault, and yet he did not understand by us here, that he had any knowledge thereof from you. And so I end, wishing to hear of your amendment by Physick. At Greenwich the fifth of December, 1571. Yours assuredly, William Burleigh. To the Right honourable, Francis Walsingham Esq her Majestes Am∣bassador Resident in France. SIr, such sufficient persons of understanding, credit and acquaintance as this bearer Sir Thomas is, may serve to excuse me from writing of any long Let∣ters; and therefore I mean to touch things by notes and peice-meals. He can tell you of the Duke of Norfolks case, but percase not when, nor how it takes end, neither can I help him to inlarge his knowledge, but I think the Queens Majestie will therein deal more substantially then many do imagine. He can tell you how straitly the Queen of Scots is kept, having now but ten persons of her own of all sorts. She pretendeth a great fear of her life, and craveth a ghostly Father, being Catholique. He can tell you, that the Queens Maje∣stie hath plainly notified to the Estates of Scotland, that she will never suffer the Scotish Queen to have her Government in Scotland; and at this present we are in hand to make an accord betwixt Liddington and Graunge in the Castle, and the Regent, &c. difficulties are rather particular then publike. They in the Castle look to have their Offices and Lands restored; and for surety, that Graunge may remain Captain of the Castle: The other party are greedy to keep that they have catched, as of Bishopricks and Abbeys, &c. I think next avoid∣ance might help, but greediness and mistrust keeps them asunder, and I fear more the wilfulness of the Kings party, then the conformation of the adverse. Now for the principal matter of Sir Tho: Smith, I have at such length explained that in his instructions, whereof he will make you privy, as I need not adde any more, I. Dover A. was never  then now I am commanded to move you to advise some secret ways with St T: Smith,
how if K. be not at Court, he might secretly procure to be there at Sr. Tho. Smiths being there; and also by secret means Sir Tho. Smith may understand his opinion in the greatest mater, as one whom we think of such dexterity in his acti∣ons, of such dutifull good will hitherward, as no advice nor direction shall be gi∣ven to our prejudice. All this I write by commandment, and that after Mr. S. departure from this place, so as I have not specially informed him hereof, and therefore I pray you impart this to him; adding this caution, that Mr. Smith do not appear to any others to deal with him; for so may he best serve the purpose. Now Sir, you may think that I am not a little perplexed in this matter, when I consider with my self the doubtfulness that you have signified unto me of Cal∣lais , whereof I never made A. privy, nor any other al∣most, and now finding here on the other a contrary intention, which surely is earnestly meant, and not the less for the cause of , I am doubly trou∣bled, and therefore the good order, either to conclude or break off, must lie in the wisdom of the Ministers there, to whom I wish the assistance of Gods Spirit. Sir, my infirmity, as Sir Tho. Smith can inform you, hath been so lingring upon me, as I have bin, though not idle, yet an unprofitable servant, and thereby impedited to sollicite your suit unto her Majesty, wherein I will assoon as I may, imploy my whole power as if it were for my self. And so now I end, wishing to hear of your cure of your infirmity with speed and surety. At Greenwich, Decemb. 7. 1571. Yours assuredly, Will. Burleigh. To my loving Friend Mr. Francis Walsingham, Ambassador for the Queens Ma∣jesty in France. Mr. Walsingham, It is now somewhat long since I wrote unto you of our news, the cause hath been partly for lack of special matter, and partly being at all times absent when your dispatches were made; but having presently some matter of moment worthy the writing to you, I will not fail to deal plainly with you, even as I think, and as the cause requireth. Among other matters that Sir Tho. Smith hath in charge to deal with the King; he hath also certain instructions from her Majesty, which are also to understand how he shall answer, if the mat∣ter of her marriage be any more propounded or talked of with him: and because I have alwaies heretofore seen in you a good inclination to further the same, as a matter for her self, her estate and ours all, through the hope of her issue to be pre∣served by, which, for mine own part, I was and am of like opinion (God is my judge) only for the same respect, being verily perswaded, otherwise hardly shall she her self be in safety for her own time, or her people and Realm left in surety after her, except some such way be taken as marriage, whereof finding now again an appearance of a full determination in her Majestie to like of marriage, and to my judgement, resolved not to refuse any reasonable conditions that to her ho∣nour shall be offered by that King for Monsieur. I thought good to let you un∣derstand it, that if the matter be renewed on their parts, that you may deal accor∣dingly therein, who being in dispair of her good liking (as good cause both you and we here have had so to doubt) might perhaps make the less account of it: and I supposing in dealing with Mr. Tho. Smith, he will affirm thus much of her present disposition, which I assure you she hath so earnestly and assuredly affirm∣ed unto me, as I verily think, yet once again, that with good handling, good con∣clusion will follow. And thus much her Majesty is pleased I should signifie unto you and Henry Killegrew, that you should appoint some trusty and discreet Messenger fully instructed with all the proceedings hitherto
past in this matter touching the Marriage, to be sent to the Admiral, and to im∣part the same wholly unto him, with demonstration of her trust and affiance in him, to give her the best and friendliest advice, and let him know upon what points they stick at it: and if he shall seem to be earnest, and to allow of the matter, and to have it go forward, then would she have him at Court at this present of Mr. Smiths being there, that he may the better from time to time be privy to their dealings, and her determinations also, for that she doth mean free∣ly and frankly to impart all things to him from time to time, that shall concern her therein, not doubting he will have due regard every way of her Mejesties honour, and specially to foresee that she be not abused or ill handled by sinister practises of some that be great enemies to this matter: Her Majesty hath her self, somewhat opened her mind to the Count Montgomery, who this day hath taken his leave and is departed, and the sooner to deal with the Admiral herea∣bout: and as you shall find the Admirals devotion in this matter, so shall it be well done to use as speedy advertisement as you can to her Majesty thereof. You have often times, Mr. Walsingham, wisely warned us and put us in mind to seek some waies to stablish her Majesteries state, and the lacks declared both want of friendship abroad, and of our doubtfull state at home, it falls out daily too manifest, and without some remedy, will prove a danger unrecoverable; the means for help be easily seen and perceived, and I suppose yet not without hope to be obtained, God grant us that foresight and wisdom that we willingly refuse them not: Well, I can but pray for the best, and discharge my duty according to the small understanding I have, that some good may take place, which I shall never cease to wish to supply what else doth want in me: and therefore besides that her Majesty hath here willed me to signifie unto you, which is for the imparting of the proceedings in the case of her marriage heretofore, how it hath from time to time past unto the Admiral there. I have shewed you what I conceive of her Majesties inclination again towards the marriage of Monsieur, which being a matter of greatest importance to her and us also. I thought meet to let you know that the matter as it hath been a long while in a manner dead, may be with more discretion revived, and do not doubt but that it will be opened by the par∣ties there again, seeing her Majesty hath not yet clearly there denied it, nor they fully answered her Majesties demands. Other news we have none worth the wri∣ting, but of her Majesties good estate, which surely is such as I have not known been these many years. Thus with my right hearty commendations I bid you farewell: At Greenwich the 6 of Decemb. 1571. Your very Friend, R. Leicester. Instructions given to Sir Tho. Smith, one of the Q. Majesties privy Councel, and Ambassador in France, and to Francis Walsingham Esq her Ambassador or∣dinary there, and in his absence, to her Majesties trusty servant, H. Kille∣grew Esq. Given at Westminster Feb. 13. 1571. the 13. year of her Maj. reign. YOu shal understand, that after consideration had of all your Letters and me∣morials in writing of the Colloquie that had passed between you and our ser∣vant Hen. Killgrew with you on the one part, and with the President Birae, the Bishop of Limoyes, and Mr. de Foix deputed from the French King to con∣fer with you on their part, from the 10 of the last month, unto the 20 of the same: we caus'd certain of our councel to confer with the French Amb. according to his request upon the same matters, who did exhibit in writing the copies of the pro∣ceedings betwixt you and the said Deputies, agreeable for the most part, to those wch were receiv'd from your self; and he did propound four points comprehending the differences betwixt you and them, the judgement whereof was referred, as he
said, to the King his Master our good brother, and us, pretending with many good words, that since the foundation of the Treaty, was by your good means and the Kings Deputies with you there, made manifest to be without any diffe∣rence, which was a declaration of a natural good will in both the P. to enter into some streight League of amity; he doubted not but that these other particular dif∣ferences (which consisted but upon words) should be easily and speedily com∣pounded. The first doubt, as he said, remaining undetermined, was about the Article for mutual defence of either Prince, against any other person that should invade either of them or their Countries. In that you shall have these words in∣ferted into the Article, Etiam si causa religionis mutatio facta fuerit, whereun∣to with these special words the Kings Deputies would not agree, neither, as he said, might his Master without great inconvenience assent thereunto whereof he doubted not but he would have reasonable respect, and not meaning thereby to forbear to be bound to do that which the special case of these words might im∣port. And so reporting many arguments to our Councel, whereof he had made mention unto us two daies before at his last audience, amongst the which, one was of most weight, as we took it, That if such special mention should be made for the defence of Religion in a publike Treaty, the King should thereby offend not only all other Princes Catholiques his Allies, but also the greater part of his own States and Subjects, which are of the Catholique Religion▪ as the King him∣self also is. And yet nevertheless, the King was content (as he said) to have all other manner of good and effectual words and speeches inserted in the said Treaty, to bind the King to a mutual defence against all manner of invasion, for what cause, pretext, or colour soever it were, yea and that without exception of any manner of cause. Hereunto was answered on our part, That considering there was no other likelihood of any pretence to invade us, but upon the colour of Re∣ligion only, and that on the Kings part there were many other causes and quar∣rels, as Titles to Dominions and Territories, and such like other might be de∣vised for invasion and disturbance of his estate, whereunto our aid or defence should be requisite: It might be thought a very unequal Contract by general words certainly, to conclude all his causes, and by forbearing these special words of Religion, to leave us utterly unprovided of aid; and as to the remedy to have other manner of words inserted, considering they should be but general, it might be doubted, that while the Invasion should be made or attempted against us for Religion, or but for pretext of Religion, and required for the same, the King might then (with colourable reasons, being devised by such as were over-vehe∣ment and passionate in the Religion of Rome, or in that which is called Catho∣like) answer that he might not for his conscience satisfie, or demand for aid in that behalf, and that could not be intended to be lawfully (that is, by the Law of God) included in the general words. To this, although the Ambassador re∣plyed in his Masters name, with the great assurance of his intention to give us aid against any Invasion, though it were indeed for Religion; which he said, could not be but a pretence of the Invader, for that the Invasion of the Realm was to be regarded, and not any cause or pretext: Yet the doubt herein remained be∣twixt them unresolved, and so the Ambassador seemed not therein to be satisfied, saving that in some secret speech afterward with one or two of our Councel apart (although he would not have report thereof made) he thought his Master might be induced by some secret means to make some particular promise betwixt his Master and us, by writing separated from the publike Treaty for a special point of a mutual defence in case of Religion. The second part of the doubt moved by the Ambassador, was, for the forme, manner, time, and quality of the aid that should be mutually given;
wherein he pressed to have had the like manner as was contracted in Anno 1543. betwixt the Emperor Charls, and the King our Father, at which time either of the Confederates was bound to give such aid as might amount to the charges of 600 Crowns by the day for the space of 4 months, in one year, or else some other aid in certainty, which he could not name; but it may be the Kings Depu∣ties there might mean such Treaties as had been before contracted between our Father and King Francis, Grandfather to the King, where there is one example of the Treaty of 1532. betwixt the said two Kings; in both which Treaties the aids were born at the charges of the Confederate Prince, that was required by the Prince invaded. To which motion of the said Ambassador, our Coun∣cel made such Answers by imparting to him the forms of former Treaties, made both with the house of Burgundy, and with the French Kings, as he in the end seemed satisfied with such form of aid to be mutually agreed upon, as you your self have propounded to them in your Paper delivered the 18 of the last, in an Article verbatim, taken out of a Treaty betwixt the Emperor Charls and the King our Father, in the year 1548. being before that first devised in a Treaty at Cambray, in the year 1529, and one principal reason to appoint that manner of aid better then any other, was this: If the aid should be given in a certainty, and at the cost of the Prince that was not invaded, upon every request of a Confede∣rate, there might great inconvenience follow, in that one Prince might oftner burthen his Confederate in demanding succours without great necessity, and in greater numbers then needfull, was, if the charges of the said succours should be maintained by the Confederate that so sent them, and not by himself: Whereas on the other part; if the Prince that should demand succours, should bear the charges of them himself, he would never demand the same oftner, nor in grea∣ter numbers, nor keep them longer in pay then should be needfull. And ac∣cordingly to this reason, it was declared to the Ambassador, That in all Treaties betwixt this Realm and France, and also Burgundy, the like Covenants were made in all Leagues, saving one time with the Emperor Charls 1543. at which time the Treaty was made both Offensive and Defensive against the French King; and yet in the same year 1546. the same clause for aid, was by Treaty be∣twixt the said Princes, revoked, having not been at any time put in execution; and the ancient manner of aid to be at the charges of the Prince demandant: and with these, and such like reasons, the Ambassador seemed to be fully satisfied. The third matter of doubt moved by the Ambassador, was, for the cause of Scotland, that is, in what sort that State might be comprehended in this Trea∣ty; and thereupon it was said to the Ambassador, That we had no other inten∣tion in the matter of Scotland, but to have the hostility and civil wars to cease, and the Government of the Realm to be established to the contentation of the Nation; for which purpose we had sent to both parties at difference, to accord upon an abstinence from war, so as they might the better Treat and accord a∣mongst themselves; which if they would not, we would be content that any such whom the French King our brother should send thither, should joyntly with some of ours, imploy themselves, with the credit and amity amongst us two, to direct them to accord amongst themselves: and therein we had no meaning to withdraw them from the ancient Intelligence with the Crown of France, but that they might have and keep the amity with us both. With which answer and resolution, the Ambassador seemed well content; requiring, as the King his Master had forborn, at our request, to send any force to either party, whereby to hinder any accord, so we would do the like; which was agreed unto him. Lastly, He moved the matter concerning the Article for the resort of our Mer∣chants to some Ports of France, with such liberties and securities
as they had in other Regions, offering that the King his Master was content to yield therein to any reasonable demand, to the benefit of our Subjects. To which, answer was made, That the Case did belong to our Merchants, to consi∣der what was meet for them, who should be spoken withall, and thereupon an∣swer should be given. This was the sum of that which passed betwixt the Am∣bassador and such of our Councel as were appointed to deal with him, who were, the Lord Keeper of our great Seal, the Earl of Leicester, the Lord Admi∣ral, the Lord of Burghly, and Sr. Walter Mildmay. And now, although you may perceive by this Conference had with the Am∣bassador, what be the things that we have cause to like or mislike, upon the que∣stions moved: yet upon some further instruction of you, we will summarily in∣form you what we like of the substance of the Articles sent unto us from you, being propounded as well by the Kings Deputies as by your self. First, to the Articles in Latine, delivered by the French Ambassador, dated the 17 of Janua∣ry, we mislike not of the first Article for the continuance of former Treaties in their force, which is necessary to be specially for the saving of our rights and pretences to Callais, according to the Treaty therefore made, and remaining yet in force; so as it be added to the end of the Article; with Condition that no∣thing in any former Treaty be by this clause continued, that shall be repugnant or derogatory to the Articles of this present Treaty. The second and third pro∣hibiting any aid to be given to any persons that shall invade, and to make a League for a mutual defence against all persons that shall invade upon any cause. We mislike not the Tenor of the said Articles, so as the words added in the second Article of your Writing dated the 18 of January, which are these, Etiamsi fuerit religion causa, praetextu, aut colore, which we would have you earnestly press upon such reasons to be inserted, as your self hath already remem∣bred; and therein we would have you secretly to cause them of the Religion there, to understand of your demand, and to help to further it; and yet if you cannot have the same words to be specially inserted, then you may according to your own offers, insert into the Article these words, ub quocunque praetextu vel colore & quavis de causa nulla omnino qualicunque excepta: and besides these, you shall in secret manner move, and most earnestly press it, that some special promise may be made in a secret writing betwixt the King and us, signed and sealed mutually with both our hands, for that purpose expresly, if any Invasion should be made, as though the same had been expressed in the Treaty; without which secret provision to be made, considering the matter hath been in questi∣on, we would be very loath that you should accord. We do not like that which is devised by them, which beginneth, Conventum est quod quotiescunque ullus princeps, &c. wherein they would have aid given, if any person go about to change or alter any Laws or Edicts against the will of the Prince; but we ra∣ther like to have the aid only given in case of invasion, or purpose of invading: For by the words of this Article, we may percase hereafter be required to aid that King in the breaking of his own Edicts for Religion, in case he himself shall be thereto willing; and that either of this Subjects, or any others shall attempt or alter the Edicts that may be made against the Religion reformed. The Article beginning, Conventum est quod fadus & liga, is not to be misli∣ked for continuance of this Treaty; although the third Article of your wri∣ting beginning, Tempus vero durationis, seemeth plainer and better, and agreeth with the like in former times. The sixth being imperfect, beginning, De tempore antem & modo, would be supplyed with the like Clause and Article at length, mutatis mutandis; and as you have excerped out of the year 1546. and as in the last of your writing of
the 18 of January. Now for our opinion of the Articles presented by you to the French the 18. we do like well enough of the Preface; and for the first Ar∣ticle, you may perceive well enough what we would have added thereto; That nothing should be continued in former Treaties, being repugnant to this. The second for a Covenant of a League to be defensive, we think not amiss thereof, although the second and third of the French contain them plain enough in fewer words, so as the one or the other may serve. To the third of yours, we like as before is mentioned. The fourth beginning, Et quamvis supervacuum, may be forborn, considering the substance thereof is contained in the second, delivered by the French the 17 of January. The last of yours concerning the manner of aid, we like best, as before is said, according to the Article of the Treaty of An. 1549. As to the third Article delivered by you the 18 of January in one writing to the Kings party, concerning the Arrest to be made of the Subjects of other Prin∣ces, if any other Subjects should be arrested in a strange Country for matter of Religion, we would not mislike if you could obtain the same; but for that we think it very hard to be granted by the French King, as the time is, we will not you much to press it. But as to the other matter of our Merchants, we do of the manner of Articles presented by you, and yet we cannot presently in what form to have the same conceived fit for our Merchants, and for ; and therefore except you shall be shortly advertised from us how to ; more particularly we would have you insert some general clause in the Treaty for such a purpose; and besides that, also to move it to the King, that there may be some Colloquie had here betwixt the Kings Ambassador, here Rsident, having authority therefore, and such as we shall appoint after confe∣rence had with our Merchants, to Treat with the said Ambassador there∣upon. Some other doubts may appear in the Writing sent from you, whereof the Ambassador made no mentn, and yet fit for you to understand or mind there∣in, if you shall thereto be pressed: but except you be pressed thereto by the o∣ther party, we think it good that you should not remember the same; but if they will needs move the same unto you, then you shall answer as follow∣eth. First in the paper intituled with the letter B. and brought to you by Monsieur Pinarts brother the 16. there are two doubts moved in the third Article, be∣ginning (A este auxi) and answer made, though not satisfactory in the fourth, be∣ginning, Sur le premier. For the first, we do not mislike, but that one of the Confederates should be bound to defend the other being invaded; although the other Prince may pre∣tend that he hath been thereto provoked by the Prince invaded: So as the pro∣vocation be not first given by any open War, or Invasion made by the Prince that shall require aid; for it is not consonant to reason that the one Prince Con∣federate should be aided by another, where he himself that requireth the aid, hath by his own Invasion of another Prince, provoked himself to be invaded: And if they shall not like of that exception where the Prince invaded gave oc∣casion by former invasion; then you shall accord to have the words general, as have been in former Treaties. And for this matter you may gather some light by the Treaty called L'Esclarissement of the peace made in An. 1545. in the exposition of the sixth and seventh Articles betwixt the Emperor Charls, and the King our Father. The second seemeth doubtfull to be answered, that is, considering the char∣ges
of the aid shall be born by the Prince requirant; it may be permitted that the succours given may continue in the pursuit of the Invader, out of the Coun∣try of the Prince invaded: But therein it is reason that some time be thereunto limited, that is, by the space of 6 or 7 daies at the most, to be out of the said Country, or rather some distance of a league or two; but if the Deputies there treating with you, can be content to have the cause so conceived, as the aid shall not exceed the limits of the Confederate Country, you shall like it best. And so you may let it alone in general words as heretofore the same hath been in for∣mer Treaties, without raising up of such questions. The fifth Article beginning Item à este en avant, we think it reasonable that the Prince that shall defend the other, may continue their treats which he hath with the Prince against whom the aid shall be given, and suffer Traffique and Commerce for their Subjects mutually, saving only it may be provided that he shall not suffer any Armor nor Munition of Warre, or other like things to be carried out of his Countrey to the offence of the Prince whom he shall aid. As to the last Clause of the Writing concerning Scotland, we do not disal∣low of the Answer in the Margent, made by you in Latin, but yet our meaning is not to have any Article in the Treaty comprehending that matter. In this sort we have thought meet to instruct you, and considering the former Trea∣ties betwixt us and the French King, shall continue and be confirmed hereby; we see no cause to remember you of the inserting of any other necessary Arti∣cles which have been heretofore comprised in former Treaties; so as neverthe∣less it be provided by a special Article, that by this Treaty, nor by any part thereof, any thing be derogatory to such other Treaties as we have, and be now in force with any other Prince, and namely with the King of Spain: and as to the comprehension of any Princes according to the ancient manner of Trea∣ties, we would have you to enquire the intention of the French Kings Deputies, whom they mean to comprehend, and as near as you can to comprehend the same, saving only the Bishop of Rome, and that Sea, and not forget the Em∣peror, besides in person the Princes of the Empire, and the Electors of the same, and namely the Count and Countess of Embden, and the Count and Sonetie of Hanze. And if they will needs have mention made of Scotland, we can be content that the same shall be (if we will not accept the name of the King) by the name Regnum Scotiae, or Regnum & status Scotiae, we do for these purposes send you a Commission under our great Seal of England, wherein we have joyned with you our Ambassador Francis Walsingham, and our servant H. Killegrew, who is there with you, wherein our meaning is, that assoon as Walsingham shall come thither, he shall joyn with you, and within some con∣venient time Killegrew may return according to our first order given to him at his departure thither: And yet untill VValsingham shall come thither, Killegrew may remain as joyned. And considering the whole burden of the matter of learning, in conceiving the Articles of this Treaty, shall rest almost wholly in this Treaty, we would that when you are proceeded as far as you can, and as you think meet, that before you shall subscribe the Treaty, you shall send the same hither to us to be more circumspectly perused, and thereupon we will with like speed return it as we shall think meet, and so may you reasonably declare your in∣tention to the French King, pretending your instruction of your self, and there∣with to use the same as they may not suspect it to come of any intention of de∣lay. At Westminster the 13 of February, 1571. Wil. Burleigh.
To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. YOur Letters sent by the Scot, dated the 6 of this month, I have received; he willed me to inform you, that since his coming hither, he hath learned that the King giveth but a deaf ear to their causes, notwithstanding that they hope that upon Graunges brothers coming, who is now at the Court, there will be somewhat obtained for their relief, which if it take not place, then they mean to repair to Flanders, where the Lord Seaton hath received from the Pope 20 thousand Crowns, who is putting himself in readiness to repair into Scotland. Further, he willed me to shew your Lordship that the L. Fleming looketh for a Barque of his own to arrive at New-Haven about the end of this month, in the which he meaneth to repair to Scotland, with such forces as he can get, either by consent from the King, or by stealth otherwise. This in effect is that which he willed me to impart unto your Lordship. I find this he saith, confirmed by o∣ther Intelligence I have. Graunges brother (as I learn) meaneth to protest to the King, that unless they may have Men, Money, and Munition out of hand for their relief, that then they shall be driven to yield to such composi∣tion as will be made to the Queen of England, which will not much tend to the benefit of France. After Sir Tho. Smiths assurance of her Majesties intention, I suppose the King will perswade them to fall to agreement among themselves, without further intermedling in their causes. From all the Ports both innormandy and Picardy, Cane only excepted, I learn there is no preparation of ships: Shortly I hope to understand what is done in Cane. And so leaving further to trouble your Lordship, I most humbly take my leave, at Paris the 29 of December, 1571. Your Honours to command. Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. TOuching your Lordships by Sir Tho. Smith, according to her Majesties or∣der, I have caused the King to understand, as well the trust she hath in him, as also how much she desireth his presence at the Court, whereby Sir Tho. Smith may be the better assisted by his advice; some like office I have also used to∣words I. who hath alwaies been an especial furtherer of the cause. From him who liveth not far from this Town, I have received most earnest promise that he will do his uttermost: and for that he is here imployed by the King in the punishment of those that committed the late disorder; he hath written secret∣ly to his friends to the Court, to sound there in what state the matter standeth; and as they find, secretly to advertise Sir Thomas, he protesteth that he would be loath to see her Majesty abused, as any Subject she hath that loveth her most dearly: He hath great hope that the matter will take good success, for that he seeth the state of both Realms doth necessarily require so strait an amity as mar∣riage bringeth: He promiseth to use the more expedition in that which is com∣mitted to his charge, to the end he may repair to the Court with the more
speed. Lineroles, who by the House of Guise and the rest of the Spanish Faction, was made an instrument to disswade his Master, was slain the ninth of this Month, his death yielded no small furthernce to the Cause: I hope there∣fore Sir Thomas Smiths first dispatch will bring the Olive Branch. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave, at Paris, Decemb. 8. 1571. Your Honours to command. Fr. Walsingham. Your Lordships of the 8, by Sir Thomas Smith, I have received, and according to her Majesties order expressed in the same, I have by means of a third person, who heretofore hath been imployed betwixt us, caused the person you know of, to understand the great trust her Majestie reposeth in him, as also her de∣sire to have him at the Court during the time of Sir Tho. Smiths being there, whereby he may the better have the assistance of his advice. Touching the matter it self, I know not how to judge of it, for that I have been two Months absent from the Court; as I have cause to doubt, so have I cause more to hope; to doubt, for that her Majesties long deferring in sending, may have bred some doubt here of her cold inclination that way, and so cause them to give ear to some other offers, having small hope of this: To hope, first for that there is no o∣ther match worthy the seeking elsewhere; secondarily, for that they begin to fear very much the greatness of Spain, and therefore desire to be strengthned by the Arm of England; and though that may be done by way of League, yet they think the marriage the surest knot of amity. After Sir Tho. Smith hath had audience, it will then soon appear what is to be looked for in that behalf. Lastly, for that Lineroles, the chief disswader of the Marriage is lately slain. Marshal M. who is imploy'd here by the King, in punishment of the authors of the late disorder, meaneth to make the more haste to the Court, to the end to further the matter, whereof he hopeth there will grow success. Thus leaving further to trouble your honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris, the last of December, 1571. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. A minute of my Lord of Burleighs Letter to Sir Thomas Smith, of the 28 of December. SInce your departure from hence, there hath no new thing of vallue hap∣pened; but the discharging of the late Spanish Ambassador, who hath both in Office and out of Office, used himself very crookedly, perniciously, and maliciously against the State; and namely and openly against me, not for∣bearing but in open Cocel, directing his Speech to me, saying, that I had been and was the cause of all the unkindnesse that had chanced betwixt the King his Master, and the Q. Maj. whereunto as it became me for truths sake, I answer'd
with more modest terms then he deserved, and referred my self to all the Lords in Councel, to report of me whether any thing had beene said or done by me from the beginning of these broils concerning him or his Ma∣ster, or the Arrest that had not been ordered and directed by her Majestie in Councel, all which the whole Lords did affirm, and my Lord of Sussex in the Italian tongue did very plainly, and very earnestly confirm it; but yet his cholor would not be so tempered, and so he was dismissed, and Mr. Knolls appointed to tend on him at his house. This was done the thirteenth of this Month; and untill the 24 he could not be gotten out of the Town, and then he went to Greenwich; and on Saint Stephens day to Gravesend, where he yet remaineth; but this day or to mor∣row he is to remove to Canterbury, and Iohn Hawkins (with whom he is well enough agreed, notwithstanding the braw that had been for Hawkins spoyl in the Indies) is now appointed to pass him over at Dover to Callais, in a Ship of the Queens Majesties, and to confirm the continuance of his mal∣lice, where there was a full determination made by Treaty, by one Monsieur of the Low-Countrie, and Thomas Fiascio a Genevoise, for a mutual resti∣tution on both parts, and the same part in writing to have been sealed and sub∣scribed; he hath so handled the matter, as by his addition of certain words, the whole is become void. For if our Merchants should admit his device, they should be without all surety of their Goods in Spain; and contrariwise, the Spaniards should first have theirs arrested here, whereby it is likely that the intent of this Trea∣ty will break off, and therewith our Merchants are best contented: For now considering the breaking off proceedeth from the other party, it is intend∣ed that there shall be a speedy sale of the strangers Commodities; and there∣with our own Merchants shall be duely recompenced. At this present there is another come from the King of Portugal, to move an end of all arrest, and renew the Traffique between this Realm and his; whereby it is manifestly seen, that there shall follow a very good vent for all Commodities that Spain was wont to expend. As yet there is no accord known to us betwixt the Kings party in Scotland, and them of the Castle, for that they of the Castle cannot have their reasonable demands for the restitution of their Lands and Goods well as∣sured. The French Ambassador lately by the Queens Majesties appointment, dealt with my Lord of Leicester and me upon these Points following, which he said he was willed to doe by his Masters Letters of the first of this Moneth. For offer of Amity by Marriage or League. To complain of the intention of her Majestie to send force into Scotland to aid the Kings party, with a kind of threatning, that the King might not endure but aid the other party with force, and in speech hereof, a request that some expedition might be made to procure the Queen of Scots restitution, with the Queens Majesties assurance. To demand restitution of money that was intercepted, being sent to∣wards Scotland for Viraque, alleadging that the one half was the Kings money, and that though the Queen Mother had otherwise at the first spoken to Mr Walsingham, yet she now understandeth the contrary by the Kings Trea∣surers who sent it.
To these was answered. To the first, That you had Commission amply to satisfie the King. To the second, That nothing was intended to be done by force, if they that were of the Castle would abide by their own offers which they had made to the Queens Majestie by Messages and Letters, viz. That they would accord with the other party, so as the Queens Majestie would provide, for their ho∣nours, lives, and their Lands, and Goods, which her Majestie intended to doe, and therein to doe nothing that should be prejudicial to the ancient League betwixt the French King and the Crowne of Scotland; and so was told him that you had Commission to declare to the King; wherewith the Ambassador seemed very well content. As to devise any way expedient for the Scotch Queen, absolutely was answered, That the Queens Majestie would never assent thereto, neither would any Counceller of this estate wil∣lingly permit any consultation to be made thereof, such was her known malice to the Queens Majestie. The third, for the money, we told him as plain a tale to the contrary, and vouched the Bishop of Ross his Confession thereof; but the Ambassador would still have us believe him, which he could not obtain. This Treaty was long on both sides, and ended in good sort and friendly. In the end he was earnest for his freedom of impost for 30 tonn; we said that he should be free from as much as he should spend in his house; but that contented him not: finally, considering the terms of towardness to friendship, he shall have his own desire, whereby spending seven or eight tonn, the rest shall pay for his expences. Of all these things I have thought good to scribble to you this Childermas day in my bed, and am bold to send this Letter unsealed in a Letter of Mr. Walsinghams, because he shall not be ignorant. I think the Duke shall be arraigned on Monday the 14 of the next Month. At Westminster the 28 of December, 1571. Your assured friend, W. Burleigh. To the right honorable and my very good friend, Mr. Francis Wal∣singham, her Majesties Ambassador in France. SIr, You shall understand, that immediately after Sir Tho. Smith had taken his leave of the Court, a servant of my brother Killigrews, named Geofery, came to the Court with Letters from you and from the Court, and before this bearer can come to you, I doubt not but you shall have understanding by Mr. Smith, what charge he hath; and therein here is now an earnest deter∣mination to spend time no longer then honour will spare; and so I thin this bearer will say of his knowledge, who surely maketh good demonstration of his honest meaning to all Parties, and therein he is to be comforted. On Friday last, the Spanish Ambassador was sent for to the Councell, and in the Queens name, commanded to depart the Realme; the same hath beene oftentimes intended, but never put in execution
before this present, and now provoked by intelligence of certain new practises within this Realm, to perswade the Subjects that the King his Master would aid them with power this Spring, &c. he hath also lately searched for certain— Barons Walls, he shall depart by Dover into the Low-Country. I can write no more for lack of leasure, being occasioned to write at this time divers waies, and not unoccupied with feasting my friends at the marriage of my daughter, who is this day married to the Earl of Oxford to my comfort, by reason of the Queens Majestie, who hath very honourably with her presence and great favour accompanied it. I am sorry that your health is not more sperable to be speedily recovered, but I trust after you have rested so in convenient time the Medicines shall have more power to do their effects. My Lord Gray of Wilton hath had the like disease this Summer, and seemeth to be cured or eased by the industry of an Italian Phisitian here in London, called Silva, he is thought to be more experimented in Surgery then in Phisick; for so is his fa∣ther who lieth in the Savoy with the Duke; if you will send me some note or description, and therewith a note of their method in curing of you, I would con∣fer with this Silva, and advertise you of my opinion. I wish to hear more life of the matter of 57. And thus ending with my most hearty commendations, &c. From Westminster, December, 1571. Yours most assured, Will. Burliegh. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq her Majesties Ambassador Resident in France. SIr, Though I had no great matter to you, yet if I had my health, being now subject to a combat with a Feaver, whereof this day I have had an assault of a second fit; I must be excused to hold my hand, where my head is not able to command it, as this bearer can inform you. Since your Letters which came when Sir Tho. Smiths were brought; I received from you two other of the 17. by which I see you are advertised from good places, how things passed at the Court there, and in that matter of the third person newly offered, his age, and other qualities unknown, maketh me doubtfull how to use speech thereof. The Ambassador hath dealt, as he saith, secretly with me: And I have shewed no argument to one hand or other; as I may learn further from thence, I will deal; but fear occupieth me more in this cause of her Marriage, whom God hath suf∣fered to lose so much time, then for my next fit: and yet truely, I have more cause then before time, for it cometh of a great cold, and a Rhume fallen into my Lungs, where it is lodged as yet without moving; but in respect of other things I see and suffer, I weigh not my own carcase. The Queens Majesty hath been alwaies a merciful Lady, and by mercy she hath taken more harm then by justice, and yet she thinks that she is more beloved in doing her self harm. God save her to his honour long among us. Mather hath in presence of my Lord of Lei∣cester, Mr. Treasuror, Mr. Mildmay, manfully charged Borgest the Spanish Am∣bassadors Secretary, that his Master and he both inticed Mather to murther me; and Borgest denying it, Mather hath offered to try it, Con la spada, &c. From Westminster the 23 of January, 1571. Your loving Friend, Will. Burleigh.
To Francis Walsingham Esq the Queens Majesties Ambassador Resi∣dent in France. SIr, I have nothing to write worth your good hearing, for that I might write is not to my liking; but Gods will be fulfilled. This day the Marshal of Berwick and Mr. Randolph, are gone for Scotland matters: I mistrust not the matter by their handling, but they lack that which others should handle; you know what I mean; and yet here hath lacked no solicitation. I have not been able by a cold, to see her Majestie these eight daies, and this day I am in Phisick throughly sick, and I write, as you see, like one unsetled; and surely in mine opinion others, though very few, lack not to sollicite by speech, oportune & importune. The Spanish late Ambassador passed hardly over, conducted by Hawkins to Callais, and like himself at Gravelin, he turned out all the English men that he found; and yet he knoweth that here remaineth Monsieur Swering∣ham at the request of the Duke of Alva. Here is no small expectation whe∣ther the Duke shall die or continue prisoner. I know not how to write, for I am here in my Chamber subject to reports which are contrariwise, Mather and Ber∣ny, besides that they intended to kill me, have now plainly confessed their in∣tention and desire to have been rid of the Queens Majesty; but I think she may by justice be rid of them. Mather denieth not but that he was a 8 2 0 6, and now saith he is a 0 2 1 0 6. I wish him grace: From Westminster, the second of February, 1571. Yours assuredly, W. Burliegh. To the right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq her Majesties Am∣bassador Resident in France. SIr, I heartily thank you for your frequent Letters, and especially for that of the 9. whereby you will not be afraid of the Scotch preparation of force out of that Country; indeed they should much disturb our proceedings there pri∣vatly; for Mr. Drury and Mr. Randolph, are there about this instant, labouring to reconcile them of the Castle to the Kings side; but this French Ambassador understandeth the matter to be only about the Treaty of abstinence untill la Croque may come, whose haste I wish were retarded with a fit of my gout. The Queens Majesty is very earnest that you should return to the Court, specially because she would have you joyn with Sir Tho. Smith in this Treatie; and when I excused your absence for the recovery of your full healing; she said, that she un∣derstood that you were healed almost one month past; and thereto I said, that as you were healed, so was there as much need for you to rest for the confirma∣tion of your healing, or otherwise you should suffer a relapse with as great peril as before. Well, quoth she, see you write to him that it is my desire, and will him to find means to repair gently to the Court, and there he may rest him: But for all this, it were better her Majestie should mislike of your tarrying, if it be necessary, whereby you may after that serve her better, then by going now to doe one piece of service, thereby be made unable to do the rest of many. I cannot write you what is the inward cause of the stay of the Duke of Nor∣folks death, only I find her Majestie diversly disposed, sometime when she
speaketh of her Majesties danger, she concludeth that justice should be done; another time when she speaketh of his nearness of bloud, of his superiority in honour, &c. she stayeth. As upon Saturday she signed a Warrant for the Writs to the Sheriffs of London for his execution on Monday, and so all pre∣parations were made with the expectation of all London, and concourse of ma∣ny thousands yesterday in the morning; but their coming was answered with another ordinary execution of Mather and Berny, for conspiring the Queens Majesties death, and of one Rolph, for counterfeiting the Queens Majesties hand twice to get concealed Lands. And the cause of this disappointment was this, suddenly on Sunday  in the night, the ueens Majestie sent for me, and en∣tred into a great misliking that the Duke should die the next day, and said she was and should be disquieted, and said she would have a new Warrant made that night to the Sheriffs, to forbear untill they should hear further; and so they did: Gods Will be fulfilled, and aid her Majestie to doe her self good. I have signed your Bill with your special money, which though it be great, yet being by you expended, I would not but allow. This matter of Monsieur is here grie∣vously in secret taken, and surely as it was not here well used in drawing it out at length, which was pollitiquely done; so hath it not been there friendly or∣dered; and yet I do not so show mine opinion of her Majesties stomaking of that part which now is to be dissembled where the amity is so needfull. I can write no more. From Westminster, Feb. 11. 1571. Yours assuredly, W. Burliegh. Barker being arraigned the last week, confessed the Treasons, and said, That the beginning of his offence was, in that he regarded more the love and pleasing of the Duke his Master, then of the Prince, and of his Countrey; and so freely confirmed the Dukes guiltiness. The next day Higford did also confess his fault, terming it a concealment of his Masters Treasons, and added, that he did oftentimes disswade the Duke from the same. These two open acts have fortified the Dukes Condemnation. To the Queens Majesty. PLeaseth it your Highnesse, Yesterday the 21 of this Month, Mr. Walsing∣ham, Mr. Killigrew, and I, had Audience, first of the Q. Mother in her Chamber, being by the young Queen, and Madam Margaret; to the Q. Mo∣ther I declared, That I had received a Packet from your Highness to me, and another to the King her Son, which I sent immediately, Yea (saith she) we have received it. The Queen my Soveraign (said I) taketh in very good part the good inclination of the King and his Deputies, towards a more streight amity, and liketh well our doing hitherto, so that we proceed to the perfecting and concluding; and hath sent unto us a Power and Authority under the great Seal of England, to conclude as appertaineth; and so we are ready whensoever the Kings Deputies will, to proceed as we have began. To this the Queen answer∣ed, That she was glad that her good sister took it well; and she may see (saith the Queen) that we mean good saith, and would proceed indeed to the streight∣est
amity and love that can be betwixt two Princes; and if you will even to morrow, it were best to lose no time; we (quoth I) are ready at all times, and would be sorry to protract any time, for both the Queen my Mistress would gladly have me at home, otherwise to imploy me, and I my self would gladly be there; and therefore I pray your Majestie let no time be spared, but from day to day let us be doing, untill it be perfected, which God willing, shall be short∣ly. Ye say well, and it is best (said she;) but Madam (quoth I) there is a matter which I must shew of among other; there is one taken prisoner in Ireland, nam∣ed Stakbold, who confesseth that the Card. of Lorain set him up to stirr up a Re∣bellion in Ireland, to the maintenance of Iames Fitzmorris a Traitor and Rebel. There you say this (quoth she) and laughed, I am sure of the good will you bear to the Cardinal of Lorain: It is true (quoth I) even for the good will I bear him, for I can bear him no good will that attempteth any such thing, and espe∣cially against the Queen my Mistriss; but (quoth I) he indeed did it in the Kings name and yours; the which thing, although the Queen my Mistriss doth know well enough (for the good will that you both do bear her) not to be true; ye she willed me to shew it unto you, and to pray you to call de la Rocha, which is Knight of the Order, and Gentleman of the Chamber to the King, who was the Conductor of it, who can tell your Majestie all the proceedings, and that order may be taken in it, and of this matter Monsieur L. Ambassa∣dor, Mr. Walsingham can tell you more. Then Mr. Walsingham declared the case unto her, and that he had moved her in it almost a year since. I am remembred (said she) that there was such a thing about to be done by the stirring of a Bishop that came out of Spain; it was the Arch-Bishop of Cassils (quoth I) in Ireland, as he calleth himself. You know Monsieur L; Ambassador (saith she) to Mr. Walsingham, that the King my Sonne disa∣vowed it, and staied de la Roche, that he should not go thither, and that he should revoke all his Power: Yet (saith Mr. Walsingham) there be twenty Harquebusiers, or thereabouts remaining still, and have remained there ever sithence in a Castle; if it please you to speak with de la Roche, he can tell your Majestie how it doth stand. He is here in the Court (saith she) and goeth a∣way shortly, he shall be spoken withall, and if any men be there, the King my Sonne knoweth not of it, and they shall be revoked. Then Mr. Walsingham said there was two Hostages taken of that Fitzmor∣ris, who were at Nantes in the Governours House, he prayed that they might also be delivered; the Queen said she would send thither. Then Mr. Killigrew delivered your Highness Letters unto her, which she read very dilligently; and for that matter she writeth to her Majestie, —I am sure will tell your Majesties Highness. From thence we came to the Kings Chamber, where I said to the King, that we received a Packet from your Majestie, and another for him, which we sent to Monsieur Pinart, and that your Highness was well pleased with our doings: I have received the Packet (said he) and I am glad the Queen my Sister doth like of your doings here; I would it were done, saith he, so soon as could be; and if it be the longer a doing, so it be well done, it is well; for I would have it substantially and firmly done as might be. I desire nothing more. I have also (said I) such Power sent me under the Great Seal of Eng∣land as is required; howbeit without that, whatsoever I had agreed unto,  am sure the Queen my Mistriss would not have gon from it; but at the Subscripti∣on it was then necessary to have had the power, the which I have now; and for other matters, I trust we shall shortly make an end. And for the general matters touching the Merchants to bring that Traffique into your Countrey,
and the benefit which the Low countrey had by it, and would not acknowledge it; but for the particularities of the Priviledges, and such things, because it would have some tract of time, the Queens Majestie, if it did so please you, doth wish that you would send some power to your Ambassador Resident to Treat with her Highness Councel thereupon. You say well (saith he) and my Ambassador hath written so to me; and I will send to you when you shall see the power that I will send him, that you may judge of it; but when meet you next? To morrow Sir (quoth I) if you please, and so from day to day untill we make an end: Best of all (saith he) let it be even so. Then I told the King, that even now at this time by chance, in examining of a prisoner in Ireland, it falleth out and appeareth plain, that the Cardinal of Lorain had not done enough to raise up troubles to your Majestie in your Realm, and to trouble England and Scotland, but he could not let the poor Realm of Ireland alone to be in quiet, but there he would stirr upon Sedition and Re∣bellion also; at the which the King laughed heartily; and (quoth I) in this he abuseth your Majesties name; and as of gift he would give the Counties of Ormond and Oosory to one Iames Fitzmorris, a Rebel, and promises aid of men and munition for them there to rebel against the Q. my Mistress. In my name (quoth he) I never heard of it; Jesus! (quoth he) I could never think any trou∣ble or hurt to my good Sister. Sir, (quoth I) here is the Article of Confession of one Stackbold, who affirmeth this: Here is at the Court, as I hear say, one de la Roche, Knight of the Order, and Gentleman of your Chamber, who was the doer of it, he can inform your Majestie at the full of the matter: Well, let me alone (quoth he) with it, I will see it redressed well enough. Then Mr. Walsingham somewhat more declared what had been done in the matter, and shewed the King what the Queen Mother had said to us, that de la Roche was now in the Court, and therefore prayed him that he might be sent for, and see order taken in that matter, as appertained to the good will which he had to the amity of both the Realms, which the King said he would. After he said to the King that Mr. Killigrew should now depart home, seeing he was come to his old Room, but that we desired him to stay a day or two to heare our next meeting, and to see how near we should come to agreement, and so to bring to the Q. Majestie some good contentment. Whereupon the King said that thing should be ordered, and with such expedition, that he should come home well-pleased, and bring the Queens Majestie such word as she should therewith be contented, peradventure more then she would think, and so departed for that day. This day we looked to be sent for, but the King went on hunting, and pretence was made to us that the Councel hath had the Bill which we delivered to the King in consideration, and that they would have his Majesties advice of the day, time, and place of our meeting; after they had consulted upon it to the intent we might after we once began, continually travel untill the end were made. This is so much as hitherto is done. Thus we commit your Majestie to Almighty God. From Blois. Feb. 22. 1571. Your Majesties most humble Subjects and Servants, Tho. Smith, Fra. Walsingham.
To the Queens Majestie. PLeaseth it your Majestie to be advertised, the last of February, when the Treaty of the League was in manner at a point, and Master Killegrew was ready to take his leave of the King and Queen Mother, we demanded audience, and came all three to the Court; we were first brought into the Kings Chamber, where was also the Duke of Alanson, and other Noble∣men; where I first declared to the King, That his Deputies and we were now almost at a point, and in all other things we thought we should agree. He said, he had understood that, and was very glad of it, hoping that this was but a beginning, and that the Amity should increase daily, and bring forth more fruit. But Sir (quoth I) there is yet the matter of Religion not fully agreed upon, without the which well provided for, I know not how the League can go forward, or be sure. The King said he could not have it put in the League, but it should be in such general words made, that the matter of Religion should be contained. Sir (quoth I) that cannot be, nor no general words can contain it, if the party that is bound will say, that it is against his Conscience, or he meant it not. Why, saith the King, for that I will write to the Queen my sister with mine own hand what I mean even to that; and that I will as well defend her in that case, as if it were expressed in words. Sir (quoth I) if you will have it in an Article by it self, and as concluded betwixt you, so as it be put it writing, and sealed with the Great Seal of France, as the true interpretation of your meaning in the League, then we can be content with it, although in the Treaty it be not specially put in, but in general words; for being so made, it shall be of as much force by the Interpre∣tation as the League. Then Master Walsingham declared, That it was more honourable for the King, and more assurance, that it were put ex∣presly in the Treaty; for then not onely the Princes of Germany, but also other Kings, which be of the Religion, would be right glad to enter into it; and by that means onely you should (saith he) be able to coun∣tervail the King of Spain, yea, and all the rest of Europe that should at∣tempt any thing against you; whereas if it be done in general words, or underhand, they will not trust the matter so much, nor have so good co∣lour or occasion to desire to enter into this League with you; and what or whom need your Majestie fear, being so well proped up and fortified with this so strong a League. This may be, saith the King, hereafter, my Councel telleth me it should be dangerous for me at this present, to have it in express words; but what maketh it matter, I mean it so, and what I once say, I will keep it, I will rather dye then not keep my promise: Here I say it to you, and will write it to the Queen my Sister. How do you mean Sir (quoth I) in a writing, after the fashion of a Treaty, and sealed with your Great Seal of France, or but in a Letter close. In a Letter close (saith he) signed with my hand, where I will express the same words are meant as you would have put in the League; and I will promise that I will be ready to defend in that case, as well as in any other, and so I will indeed; and that I say I will keep, to dye for it. Sir (quoth I) for you I do think no less, and I am sure that the Queens Majestie our Mi∣stris and we do take your Majestie to be a faithful Prince, and constant in your words as any is living; but vvhen we speak Treaties, they be
not made in words, nor in such Letters missive, but after another authentical sort sworn and sea led; without which order I cannot, for my part, take that it is sub∣stantially and orderly done; and besides that, this Treaty is not personal, but is perpetual, and is for you and your Successors. Why, saith he, it is made for our two lives and one year after, and then within that year, if I should dye, such a let∣ter may be gotten: And if my Son, or whosoever should come after me, should not keep his promise, which he hath spoken and written, I could wish him stran∣gled, and not alive. Saith Mr. Walsingham, though the Queens Majestie should peradventure be content with such assurance, yet some of her Councel would not, and leagues must be made not onely to satisfie the Prince, but also the Subjects, especially of such a one as this, which is a comfort, and assurance of all parties. For when upon this hope, they shall traffique here abroad in your Countrey and o∣thers, and see in the Treaty no assurance (for general words is holden for no as∣surance) in this case they will be afraid to traffique or travel abroad: And Sir, ye had need consider well of it; for as there be that do favour this league, as we do, there be other I warrant you which be of the Spanish faction, and would be loth it should go forward: and if they taking this advantage, should perswade the Queen from it, and in the mean while bring her some other offer; and then this break off, it would be hard to get it again. Break off (saith he) I had rather dye, I will satis∣fie the Queen my Sister well enough, I do not doubt it, though you be never so stiff; I understand she will be content with such assurance, as I tell you I do assure you. Sir (quoth I) I do not know so much, and think verily she will not be con∣tent; and until know more from her Majestie, I must still think so. Well, saith the King, ye have coursed me a vvhile, novv must I course you again; for the Queen of Scots, I must have that my request put into the Treaty for her, make vvhat ansvver you vvill, she is my Kinsevvoman, and my Sister in lavv, and she was my Soveraign; and you do knovv the league vvhich is betvvixt that Realm and my Realm, I can do no less then have the same inserted into the league. Sir (quoth I) as vve have vvritten to your Deputies, vve have no Commissions or Authority to treat of any such matter. Touching the late Queen of Scots, she vvas your Soveraign, thanks be to God she is not novv (vvith that he laughed) and it is thought, vvhen she vvas Queen here, she deserved not very vvell nei∣ther of your Realm, nor of your House; and she is your Kinsvvoman, so is she also to the Queen my Mistris; but if she vvere your daughter or your son, if he or she vvould procure your death, or to have your Crovvn from you, vvould you not see justice done on him or her that should attempt it. What is that (saith he) so I repeated it again, that if his son should attempt to depose him from his Crovvn, or procure his death, that he should be content that justice should rather be done, then to be still in that danger. Why (saith he) I do not require to have it put in the same league. Saith Mr. Killegrew, fire and vvater cannot be together, the one is contrary to the other; the league is made for a per∣petual and strait Amity betvvixt you and the Queens Majestie of England, and you vvould treat for the Queens most mortal and dangerous enemy; this cannot stand together, you must take her novv for dead, and you can∣not tell vvhether she be dead or alive, and vvhy should you then require her to be put in the league. And if it be so (saith the King) vvhat remedy, then there can be no more suit made for her, and so vve took our leave. And from thence vve vvere conveyed to the Queen Mothers Chamber, vvhere vvas the Lady Margaret, and a great number of other Ladies, vvhere first I declared to the Q. that vvhere she had promised me, that for the Merchants that be in the Staple or Hanse, they might have the exercise of their religion after the maner of the English Church; now when we come to put it in the Treaty, the Kings De∣puties
will not agree to it. They say they heard nothing of it. Yes (said she) I pro∣mised that they might have it in their house, with the doors shut, and in the Eng∣lish tongue. (Quoth I) I pray you let them know so much, for I do not think that ye have told them. Yes (saith she) but you must not have this in the Treaty, but by another way. So (quoth I) Madam, you still cut us off something, as we but half agree to every thing; but how shall it be, that I might once see the manner of it, and judge of it. But for the greater matter we have with the King, as touching the League, in the which except these words be expressed, we think the league not to bear the meaning which we do take it should; and yet to please the King, and to go so near as we could, we were content, if the King will, with another Article or Treaty declarative, made apart betwixt his Majestie and the Q. my Mistris, under the great Seal of England and France, declare that in general words he doth mean, also in the matter of Religion to demand nothing else; but the King now speak∣eth to us to do it by a Letter close missive, the which for my part I do not esteem in such a case as this is, and know not what it is, and how it can be. Why did you think (saith she) that the King my son would deceive you, the Q. your Mistris, my good sister, would be content with it we know well enough. Madam (quoth I) we know not so much, nor I cannot believe it for my part: But if she would, what is that for us that be her Ministers, which must be (so much as our poor capacities will extend) that we do wisely, surely and substantially in such affairs for her Ma∣jestie, as she doth put in our credit, till we understand her mind be otherwise chan∣ged, if you understand her mind to be otherwise then we yet do know, she is our Soveraign and Mistress, we must be content to obey. Other talk we had about the matter, each of us three with her, much after that we had with the King; but ever when she was brought to a strait, that was her shift, she knew well enough her Majestie would be content with such a letter, and that so she was given to understand: Till at the last I said, that except there were further assurance for the matter of Religion, we could not, nor durst not subscribe the Treaty, until we were better certified that your Highness would be so content, for my conscience was against it, to leave so great a point upon so little a hold. Then (as the King said) he would speak with his Councel, and we should know more. The Queen Mother said, she would speak with her son in the matter. Then I required her, that she would do so much as call for Monsieur de Foix, and shew him how she was agreed for the Merchants, and that he would make haste with the Treaty, as it was agreed upon, saving for the mending of three or four words; for I saw novv I must be fain to send into England, before I can subscribe it. She said, she would not fail; but that (said she) if it be but that doubt, or some such small thing, it might be let alone, till one should come out of England. The King my son will send over the Marshal Montmorency, because the Queen your Mistris de∣sired it; and he desireth again that she would send hither my Lord of Leicester, whom he desireth to see and honour for the good affection that he beareth to the Amity betwixt the two Realms, and to acquit himself for the presents which he hath divers times sent unto him, and then she doubted not all things should be done as your Majestie would desire. Nay, Madam (quoth I) I know the fashion of leagues, it must be first agreed upon betwixt the Commissioners, that no words be altered, then subscribed with the hands of both the parties, your Commissioners delivering the part signed with their hands to us, and ours next to them, then the Prince causeth it to be made under the great Seal of the Realm, and so causeth it to be delivered each to others Ambassador; he that cometh to see it sworn to, may make a new League, if the Princes will so, to alter that he cannot; for the Princes be bound to ratifie and swear to that, the which the Commissioners were agreed upon. And it were not wisdom to
send such personages as your Majestie speaks of to an uncertain League, you may consider my Mistress will not do it. Well (saith she) I will speak with the King my self, and send you Monsieur de Foix, who shall treat with you of all these mat∣ters. Then Mr Walsingham asked her, if any thing were done as touching de la Roche and the matters in Ireland. And she said, yea; and that de la Roche saith it is nothing, and that there is not a French man there, and that he will lay his head on it. I pray you send home word, that it may be tried out, and if he do not say truth, that he may feel smart for it, and be well punished. Then Mr. Killegrew took his leave of the Queen Mother and the Lady Margaret, as he did before in the Kings Chamber, of the King and the Duke, for so they name the Duke d'Alanson of all whom he had gracious and gentle words, as he can shew your Majestie he could not, for divers respects, conveniently have taken his leave be∣fore. The younger Queen is taken here to be undoubtedly with child; for she hath all the tokens of a woman that hath conceived, and they gess she hath gone three moneths and more, whereof the King and Queen Mother is not a little joy∣ful. Thus we most humbly commit your Highness to the tuition of Almightie God. From Bloys the first of March, 1571. Your Majesties most humble Subjects and Servants, Tho: Smith, Fra: Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. YOur Lordship by Sir Tho: Smithes Letters unto her Majestie, shall be fully informed what hath passed in Conference, as well with the King as his Deputies, touching the League, to which I refer you. Of late I caused one, un∣der the colour of a Catholique, to repair unto one Darbishire an English Jesuit in Paris, for that I understood that there is a concurrency of intelligence between him and those of Lorrain; as also with those of the Scotish Queens faction. The party I sent, did seem very much to bewail the evil success that the late pra∣ctises took in Scotland, and that now he did fear their case will grow despe∣rate, especially for that Mathers enterprize was also discovered. To this the Jesuit answered, that the evil handling of matters was the cause that they took no better effect; notwithstanding (saith he) be of good comfort, and assure your self there are more Mathers in England then one, who will not admit, when time shall conveniently serve to adventure their lives in seeking to acquit us of that lewd woman (meaning her Majestie) For (saith he) if she were gone, then would the hedge lie open, whereby the good Queen, that now is prisoner (in whom resteth the present the right of this Crown) should easily enjoy the same▪ For besides that all the Catholiques within the Realm of England are at her de∣votion; there are (saith he) God be thanked, divers Heretiques that are well∣affected towards her, which is no small miracle, that God hath so blinded the eyes, as that they should be inclined to her, that in the end shall yeild unto the their just desert, unless they return unto the Catholique faith. The other replye that for his part, he could never hope to see her at liberty, nor long to see her ke her head upon her shoulders, and therefore could receive no great comfort way. Well (saith the Jesuit) I tell you truly, that I dare assure you she shall have no harm, for she lacketh no friends in the English Court. And as for her liberty
saith he) it standeth all good Catholiques in hand, o much to seek it either by hook or by crook, as no doubt but there are some good men that will venter a joynt to bring it to pass: For if she were once possessed of the Crown of Eng∣land, it will be the onely way and mean to reform all Christendom, in reducing them to the Catholique faith; and therefore you must think that there are more heads occupied in this matter then English heads, and that there are moe ways to the wood then one; and therefore be of good courage, and ere ever one year be at an end, you shall know more: Besides his villainous and undutiful language of her Majestie, he used very lewd and bitter speeches against the Earl of Leicester and your Lordship. This was the sum of their talk, which I conferring and weighing with the former intended practises, made me think it worth the adver∣tisement, that her Majestie may see how much they build upon the possibility of that dangerous woman, whose life is a step unto her Majesties death; for that they repute her for an undoubtable successor; or rather (which is a more danger) for a right Inheritor. And though I know her mischievous intentions are limitted, that they can reach no further to her Majesties harm or prejudice, then shall seem good to Gods providence; yet is her Majestie bound for her own safety and her Subejcts, to adde to the same his good providence, her just policy, so far forth as may stand with justice. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Bloys the second of March, 1571.. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Hononrable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. YOur Lordship at large by Sir Tho: Smithes Letters unto her Majestie, shall un∣derstand to what issue we are grown to touching this Treaty: We can by no means nor perswasions we can use, draw the King to any other interpretation of his meaning touching the point of Religion, then by private Letters, for that it should seem that their Ambassador from hence hath assured the King here, that her Majestie will be content therewith. For my private opinion, seeing this League is to indure but during the lives of the two Princes, and that the substance of all Leagues consisteth, chiefly in the sincerity of the matters, and that this Prince hath given great shew to the world of great incerity, I think the private Letter bind∣eth as much in honour, as any other Instrument or Contract that can pass between them can do in Law: For if they should break, the matter is not to be tryed in the Chamber imperial, by way of pleading of what value the instruments are, God and the Sword must be Judges, so that then pleading must give place. But this my good Lord is for my private opinion; in matters of so great weight as leagues are, I profess, altogether ignorance. If her Majestie can content her self with this private interpretation of the Kings meaning, then if it would please her Majestie, through your good motion, to use some words of assurance towards the Ambassador there, of the great good opinion she hath of the Kings sincerity, and that she buildeth more upon his words, then upon contract; I know nothing can more content him, for he desireth to be reputed a Prince that esteemeth his word and honour above his life; Besides, he wisheth himself to be in her Majesties good opinion before all other Princes; and doth often take occasion to say, that he hopeth there will be no less earnest good will and strait Amity between him and her Majestie, then was between her Father and his Grandfather. To nourish this
opinion of Amity between them, I take it to be the office of all those who truly love their Majesties, as that League that tendeth greatly to both their sureties, being knit together in perfect Amity; which beside their particular safety, will breed a great repose in all Europe, especially for the cause of Religion. And surely (my Lord) for the increase and nourishment of this friendship, nothing can yield more furtherance then your access hither in ratification of the League, a thing very much desired of their Majesties here, as you perceive by Sir Tho: Smithes Letter. The motion at the first being made by the Queen Mother, seemed strange unto us for her to name a particular person, but when she shewed unto us, that her Majestie the last Summer desired the Marshal Montmorency, whereunto they did condescend; and that they also mean to send him now for the confirmation of this League, we had nothing to reply. They say that the King, in respect of the good offices that you had done between the two Crowns, the great honour you had used towards his Ministers sent hither, and certain pr∣sents that you had sent unto himself, desireth very much both to see you and ho∣nour you. Besides, she said, that your coming should be so grateful unto her and the King her Son, as you might obtain any thing at his hands for the content∣ment of her Majestie, so far forth as he might with his honour grant. Surely, my Lord, though this voyage to your purse cannot but grow very chargable, yet for the furtherance of the common cause of Religion, for the increase of Amity between the two Princes and Crowns, and for their own particular reputation, never was there offered to your Lordship greater occasion, both generally and particularly to do good, then at this present. Your Lordship can do more good in one hour here, then twenty such petty companions as my self is can do in a whole year, or possible in all our lives time. I would I could so well hope of her Maje∣sties leave, as of your Lordships liking to take this journey upon you, and then I would assure my self of your coming; and by the same, of as great good to ensue, as ever followed of any others imployment in this voyage, &c. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may pleas your Lordship to understand, that Monsieur de la Mothe hath ad∣vertised their Majesties here, that the Q. of Scots cause in England is not so de∣sperate as we make it, for that lately she hath received so much increase of liberty, as that she went a Hawking with the Earl of Shrewsbury; which advertisement here, maketh them more earnest in her cause then they were wont, for that they doubt one day she will come to the possession of the Crown of England, either by succession or prevention; and therefore the Councel here do advise the King so to deal for her, as may continue in her an opinion that he is careful for her well own safety, and cannot but do justice, then call things proceed well; and her Majestie may well perceive, that any favour shewed unto her, doth not onely breed disfavour, but also danger and hindrance towards her self, whereof Mr. Killegrew can inform her Majestie at large. The opinion of the wisest sort of the Gentlemen of the Religion that are here, is, That the League it self shall not do more good, then the imployment of two honourable Personages for the ratification of the same; and therefore they desire me most earnestly to move her Majestie to concur with the King in this respect, who hath to that end made choice of Montmorency, hoping that her Majestie will choose one of quality somewhat answerable to his calling: Besides, the King and
Queens desire, as may appear by Sir Tho: Smithes Letters, the said Gentlemen do desire much the Earl of Leicesters coming, as one very grateful unto their Ma∣jesties here; and therefore shall be able to do very much good by the advance∣ment of their causes, whose increase of credit cannot but be beneficial unto her Majestie, in considering the great good affection they bear towards her, in regard of the great honour and benefits they have received at her Majesties hands; and therefore their increase of credit shall breed increase of Amity, a thing not un∣necessary for her Majestie, considering how she finds some of her neighbours af∣fected abroad, and her Subjects inclined at home. Besides, if her Majestie should not seem to be desirous of Montmorencies coming, considering that he is no less willing to come, then his Master is to send, it might give him occasion to think that her Majestie maketh not that account of him, that his great good will and de∣votion towards her deserveth, whereof he letteth not to make demonstration out∣wardly as otherways; of the which, besides mine own experience during the time of my charge here, Sir Tho: Smith and Mr. Killegrew can give good testi∣mony, and therefore I doubt not, her Majestie wil have good consideration there∣of accordingly. Your Lordship at large, by Sir Tho: Smith, is advertised how strangely the Article of Provision for the King of Spain was taken by his Depu∣ties. Surely if her Majestie persist in that point, to have him specially provided for, I perceive then, that this Treaty is at the best, for that they themselves con∣fess, that the end of this League is onely to bridle his greatness; therefore to pro∣vide for his safety, who seeketh both their destructions, they cannot tell what to judge what it meaneth, especially seeing, that of late he hath no way deserved at her Majesties hands any such favour. If therefore her Majestie do think that this Prince is of any value, who is towards all men sincere, towards her Maje∣stie well affected, towards Religion pius Inimicus, she must not weigh him in one ballance with Spain, who is of word unsincere, in affection towards her Majestie maliciously bent, and the common Enemy to our Religion. If her Majestie mean to take profit of his friendship, the next way shall be, to strengthen her self with the Amity of others in such sort, as she shall have no need of it; for it is the nature of a proud man to make best account of them that least esteem him, for whosoever yieldeth to him, increaseth his pride, which thing those that deal with the Spanish Nation find to be most true. So long as the late Catholique League made remaineth in force, her Majestie, nor any other Princes of the Religion, can promise unto themselves any thing at Spains hands, but as much mischief as he can do them; which thing her Majestie, with the rest, shall find to be true, by too dear an experience, if the same be not holpen by some counter league. The consideration whereof maketh the German Princes now (who otherwise are slow in their counsels & determinations) to think it necessary for them to joyn in this counter-league; which thing your Lordship may perceive by this inclosed letter, which lately I received from the Count Pala∣tine touching that point; whereas he referreth me to his servant Iuniu, with whom I have had conference, I have committed the report thereof to this bearer M. Beal. Touching the Marriage in Treaty here betwixt the Prince of Navarre and the Lady Margaret, Sir Tho: Smith, Mr. Killegrew and I, knowing how much the suc∣cess of the same might further the cause of the Religion; and finding the greatest dif∣culty to be the manner of the solemnizing of the same, we sent unto the Queen of Navarre a Copy of the Treaty of the marriage betwixt King Edward and the lat Q. of Spain, the Kings sister here, wherein it was agreed (as your Lordship know∣eth) that she should be married according to the form of our Church. This Coy of the Treaty, as the Queen of Navarre her self told Sir Thomas Smith and me, standeth her in very good stead, whom she sent for the 7 of this moneth
to come and speak with her. At our access she told us, that she did not send for us, before she did make Queen Mother acquainted therewith; not (saith she) in respect of my self, but in respect of her Majestie, towards whom I would be loth to ingender any jealousie, considering that she is growing to so good Amity with this Crown: For as for my self, I am not afraid to make known to all the world the great good will I bear towards her Majestie, to whom I am as much bound as ever one Prince was to another. And because (saith she) you are Ministers to her Ma∣jestie here, I thought good to make you acquainted in what state and terms the Treaty of the marriage standeth betwixt their Majesties here and me (saith she) there is no difference, but only the manner of solemnization. I have alledged the Treaty which you sent me, whereunto they take exceptions, such as are of no great value; and therefore (said she) I cannot tell what to judge of the matter, because amongst the rest of the exceptions, they say it was no true Copy of the Treaty. I have sent for you Monsieur Smith (saith she) to know, be∣cause you were a dealer in the same, whether you will not justifie it to be a true Copy, to whom Sir Tho: Smith answered, that knowing the great good will her Majestie did bear her, and how much she desired the good success of that marri∣age, as a thing that tended to the advancement of Religion, and repose of this Realm, he could not but in duty avow the same, and be willing to do any good office that might advance the said marriage. She made us acquainted with di∣vers other particularities, which I thought good rather to refer to the report of this bearer, then to commit them to writing. The Copy of the Letter which I send unto your Lordship here inclosed, sent unto her from her Son, which she delivered unto us secretly to read, may shew you how full of jealou∣sie the matter is, and therefore until the same be concluded, I hold it for doubt∣ful. She findeth here a great stay of Count Lodovicus's advice, who surely is the rarest Gentleman which I have talked withal since I came to France, &c. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Queens most excellent Majestie. PLeaseth it your Majestie, the thirtieth of March at night we received your Majesties Letters of the twentieth of the same, whereupon asking audience the next day (because the King himself was yet in his Diet) we did speak with the Queen Mother in her Chamber, where I began to declare unto her Highness, that by Letters from her Majestie we had understood two things, whereof we were sorry; the one, that your Highness having received the dispatch from us of our negotiation here, as touching the league and amity, & willing to dispatch our Currier again with your resolution, which we doubt not should be to her and the K. contention, their Ambassador Resident required that your Majestie would not write your answer or resolution unto us, until he had his Currier come, for whom he looked every day. Saith the Q. that is, because he would coucur with you. I think so (said I) and it is well; and I trust we shall so concur to a perpetual and strait Amity. I hope (saith she) but yet he vvrote not so much to us, that he spake to the Queen to forbear his resolution to you, but onely that he looked for his Currier. The other is more grievous to us, because we take the time lost, and some evil suspicion may be conceived; but I trust the Amity is so be∣gun between the two Realms, that there shall no suspicion have place, after that the one hath understood the other. Monsieur de Crocque arrived into England,
as your Majesty knoweth with Commission from hence to help Scotland to a quietness in her self, and to concur with him whom the Queen our Mistris should send for that purpose for aid, and even at the same time, were letters intercept∣ed of the Queen of Scots to the Duke of Alva, whereby she giveth her self, her Realm, and her Son to be in the proection and government of the King of Spain. And with that the L. Seton, who had been there, and sithence with the Duke of Alva driven by a Tempest into a Haven, which by the Conspira∣tors was appointed where the Flemings and Spaniards should arrive, disguising himself like a Mariner, went from thence and came as I told your Majesty, into Scotland, and into the Castle of Edenborough with some other of the Queens Majesties Rebels; his papers and instructions being ound, declared that in her Majesties name he had assured the Duke of Alva, that with a small power they might bring into their hands the yong King of Scots, and so carry him into Spain. Then giveth comfort to other of the Rebels by other letters, that shortly they shal return into Scotland. This Madam (quoth I) is enough to make the Queen our Mistris to awake, and to look about her, and even at that same time cometh Monsieur de Crocque with the Kings letters, and requireth the Scotch Queen, to be set at liberty, and to be sent into France. Madam (quoth I) I pray your Majestie consider of the case, and imagine you were the Q. of England my Mistris, and that all these things at one time came to your consideration, what would you think. Ah Monsieur L'Ambassador (quoth she) we did know then of no such intent of the Q. of Scots, you may be sure, we would be as loath that any such thing should be attempted and rather loather: Madam (quoth I) I do not doubt, considering this good amity which is so forward betwixt the two Realms. Well (saith she) she is allyed to the King and to me, and brought up here, and we for our part could do no less then intreat for her, what we could obtain at the Queen my sisters hands. She seeketh another way to ruinate her self, to hurt her friends, to deserve no pity nor favor, and sorry we must be for her, and if she be so dangerous (as it appeareth) we cannot nor dare not require liberty for her which is so perilous to the Queen my sisters state: yet if it shall please her for our sake to give her her life, and for the rest provide for her own safety as reason is she shall do a deed of price, and in this matter we will trouble the Q. your Mistris no furth. Then (quoth I) one other thing there is touching Monsieur de Crocque his power or Commission (for so we call it) is not large enough, for he hath (as he saith) but Commission to move them to Peace and Agreement. To the which now of late they of the Castle do shew themselvs very obstinate, perverse and unreasonable by reason of some offers from the Duke of Alva, and some hope peradventure received from hence: For where before they were content to require the Queens Majesties aid to come to a good agreement with the adverse faction, so that the surety of their Persons, Lands, Goods, and Honors might be provided for, now they be so puffed up that they will not come to any abstinence of Civil war amongst themselves. And surely the Queen my Mistris meant no other then to have brought them into quietness among themselves. To the intent that the Realm might after a∣greement within it self, enter into this League with the other two Realms, ma∣king as it were for defence one whole Realm, and so I have always told you Madam. It is so (saith she) and we desire no other. Well Madam (quoth I) if you then will concur with us, the matter will be soon at a point. Then Mon∣sieur Crocque must have a larger Commission then yet he hath; for he saith he hath but (as I said before) a Commission to make them to accord amongst themselves, to choose a number of men to govern the Realm, and never make mention of King nor Queen. Why (saith Master Walsingham) that were a
headless Government, and when will they agree to it? he that knoweth that Nation, will never think that will come to pass; and therefore that should be to make more dissention amongst them, not to make a Peace. Madam (quoth I) that Commission hath no Order nor Authority, but as is said to continue trouble. But Madam, as in all matters hitherto we have well agreed betwixt the two Realms of England and France, I pray you let us a∣gree in this. And if we speak reasonable, the King shall concur with us; if not, let us hear answer to the contrary, and we will answer. The Queen my Mistris hath propounded this, that they shall all agree to acknowledge the young King for King. For as the for Queen, she hath good cause not to trust her, nor you neither. Then for compounding, how one shall agree with th'other for their Lands, Offices, and Goods; that to be agreed by the mediation of wise and indifferent men, whereof your Ambassador, be it Monsieur de Croque or any other, to be an Umpire, and whom the Q. my Mistris shall appoint to be a∣nother. So that they shall well know, that these two Crowns as friends will make them by perswasion to agree to reason, if not to joyn together, to make them take reason against their wills. Ye say well Monsieur Amb. saith she, and you speak roundly and plainly, as you were wont to do; and I will speak with the K. my son, and you shall have answer. Madam (said Mr. Walsingham) Monsieur Amb. saieth here plainly unto you. Yea (saith she) so he is wont, I know him well enough. Yea (saith he) but while two shall be at strife, if ye would set up again the Scotch Queen, whom (by reason) the Queen our Mistres cannot abide, if in the mean time a third should come and set foot in Scotland, would it not trouble you and us also? Yes, saith she, and we should be as loath to see that as you: Well Madam (quoth I) then take heed of the pick-thank, for he is ready; I know whom you mean (quoth she) and he is ready indeed, and loves to be medling in every place, but I doubt not but the Queen your Mistris and we shall agree, it is our desire, and that this amity may in∣crease to make us both strong, for all that Coast, I hope so (quoth I) and would be loath that all labour for so little a matter should be lost. Lost (saith she) fear you not, your Queen can desire no reasonable thing at our hands, but we will agree to it, you shall judge your self, and to morrow you shall have answer God willing, but hear you nothing else of the other matter? Madam (quoth I) I know not what you mean, but surely noting is spoken, not so much as from Mr Killegrew nor of the league, but we look every day that our Currior should be here, and then we shall be able to inform your Majesty. Ye shall not marvail (saith she) that I be so inquisitive, for gladly would I learn somewhat of the Queen my sisters minde, and make this Amity Si estroictè as may be. This is the sum of that which passed at that time. viz. the last day of March betwixt the Queen mother and us. The next day the first of April Monsieur de Foix came to our lodging at afternoon, and shewed that upon our talk with Q. mother, of the which she had at large declared unto the King, because some things were in doubt; the King according to the promise of the Q. mother had sent them to us both to be satisfyed in our doubts, and to give us a reasonable answer: betwixt them and Mr. Walsingham and me, all was repeated again. The doubt your Majestie and your Councel found, and the insufficiency of his Commission was at all points debated again at full, each of us serving others turn to make probable what we said, and they what they said. And first we beat them with reason from the choosing of indifferent men, that should rule neither in the Princes nor the Queens name, that we said was rather the Aristocratia as they would have it. First the Scots will never choose such; they of that Nation were never wont to be governed but under a King, yea and hardly would their Kings govern, of whom the most part they have
slain themselves. Then they have elected already and Crowned their King, to whom by right it is due: For as for their Queen, she is by them deposed. She is in England, and worthily kept so straightly, that when it pleased her Majesty she might justly have the reward of her deserts, and if they were too earnest to set her up, or for her liberty they may peradventure be an occasion to shorten her life, It was also brought in, that the League that France had, was not with the person, but with the Realm and seat thereof. They said the King could not with his honor, so long as she lived consent to the deposing of her, being his Allie and confederate, nor to the setting up of her son, who is not a Kings son, but hath all his right from her onely. Why (quoth we) then you do wrong, will you interrupt the doings of the Realm, whosoever is King there, and acknowledged King, to him are you allyed. They came to this, that if the Scots did universally agree to it, they must be content. And as for the Q. they had heard and known too much by her, and although some excuse may be made for her by the grief of her long imprisonment: yet she hath gone a∣bout too much, and against her own friends, and her own safety, and her sons, and the whole Realms But (say they) Scotland is a free Nation, and we do claim no superiority over them, and therefore the King cannot command them nor compel them, but by perswasion and by intreaty what can be gotten by them to be done, that is reasonable, and now that the Q. is prisoner with you, and not like to come to them, why should they not obey the yong Prince, whom if his mother were dead they must needs obey, and why should not all be done in his name, as when we had King Iohn prisoner, did not all France obey to Charles the fifth his son? To him (quoth we) as Regent: but now if the one shall obey as to the Prince, the other as to the King, there shall be no rule nor order. Upon this was some dispute between us. In fine, we concluded con∣sulere in Commune, that they should send such Instructions to Mr. de Croque for that purpose▪ to make the Realm of Scotland so in accord, that they may per∣fectly agree to oyn with the amity betwixt England and France, and that the Articles of his Instructions might be such, as your Majesty shall think them reasonable for your Majesties surety. And those to be shewed to your Majesty to judge upon, upon which your Majesty shall also joyn for the same purpose, with the same or such Articles as ye shall devise, that by common consent of both the Realms, such an accord shall be made by the consents of the Scots themselves, or by the mediation common of both your Ambassadors, That neither your Majesty, nor the King shall be accounted to lose any thing of the old Amity of Scotland, but joyntly to aid them, to be of one accord, & in subjection to one K. that both your Commissioners or Ambassadors shal declare that as Princes united in most straight Amity, that which shal please the one shal please the other, and to the contrary, who shall displease either, shall displease both. And if any shall be so obstinate that they will not come to accord by good and reasonable conditions, that they shall look for no ayd from hence by any means but rather the contrary. second of April becuse I and Mr. Walsingham both were somewhat sick that night, both Mr. de Limoges and de Foix came to us, and said that Q. mother having again conferred with the King, and they both likeing well our frank and round dealing, willed them to shew us what Articles or Instructions their Majesties had devised for the matter of Scotland to be compounded, be∣cause from henceforth there should be plain dealing, and full union betwixt the two Realms, and all one desire to quiet all parties that way: we seeing the Ar∣ticles, said that for so much as we could understand we liked them well, and they had gone as far as yesterday they told us they could go. But to give judg∣ment of liking or not liking them, we referred to your Majesty. And if du
Crocque do shew the same to your Majesty, we doubted not but whosoever the Q. did send by her commandment, also should be shewn to him or to the Am∣bassador, the Instructions and Commission which your Majesty would send by him, so that there may appear plain dealing and perfect union and intelligence betwixt these two Princes, and that no other subtlety or craft was meant, but sincerely to follow the true amity which now was begun, That both in heart, words, and deeds, it was meant it should go forward to the benefit of all the three Realms, and we trust to the great assurance and contentation of your Ma∣jesty. And if it shall please your Majesty to hear our poor advice, that which is for the assurance of your Person and Crown, as ye are a Prince lawful and natural, and have a Crown Imperial, so to do it by your Laws, as Gods Laws and yours will it to be done. Foraign Princes that be your friends will and must take it well. Such as be not, shall rather laugh at you, and be glad of it that you do it not, and when they shall see time, take occasion to indanger your Ma∣jesty thereby. God long preserve your Majesty to his honor and your Majesties contentation; From Blois the third of April 1573. To the Queens Majesty. PLease it your Highness to be advertised. At the last Mr. Walsingham and I have concluded the League, not without some difficulty for the Scotch mat∣ters, which from the beginning have most interrupted and troubled us, never∣theless we have also passed over them in the end, we trust to your Highness con∣tentation, and all other things, whereof we had instructions by your Majesties letters of the second of April. We can perceive nothing in any wise, but that the King here goeth as sincerely and tam bona fide with your Majesty, as any Prince can, and we suppose and trust certainly by Gods Grace, that this league shall be as great an assurance and defence of your Majesty as ever was or can be. The two Realms being so neer and ready to defend if it be required, if Spain will now threaten or shew evil Offices, as it hath done of late against your High∣ness surety, it will be afraid hereafter, seeing such a wall adjoyned. And if it will not, it may sooner feel the smart of evil doing then it would: if the house of Burgundie will be friend, whereof there is great reason to have much doubt, yet nothing is done on your Majesties part to break the amity. And peradven∣ture this will make him the loather, seeing so good, or neer hand so good, & per∣adventure in time a better vent granted here for your Subjects and Merchants then that is. I thank your Majesty most humbly, that it pleased you in my absence, to bestow on me the Chancelorship of the Order, the which must needs be to me manifold times more welcom, because that without my suit, and in mine absence your Highness of your gracious goodness did remem∣ber me. I pray God I may have that Grace to do your Majesty that service which may be acceptable to you as my heart doth desire. Thus I commit your Highness to Almighty God, with my dayly prayer that your Majesty  long and most prosperously reign over us, From Bloys April 22. 1571. By the Queen. ELIZABETH. R. TRusty and well beloved, We greet you well; where the French King our good brother did of late send hither to us Mr. de Crocque with his letters, signifying to us thereby, that upon such an agreement as had been lately made between you as our Ambassadors, and his Deputies to have some Gent. sent on either part into Scotland to cease the Arms there, he had for that purpose cho∣sen and sent hither the said du Crocque. And besides that, did by the same let∣ters,
give charge to the said du Crocque to make request unto us affectionately, to put the Q. of Scots into liberty, and to send her surely into France, which he did earnestly move unto us in speech, adding another desire by words of his own, that he might also repair to the said Q. of Scots, and visit and speak with her; hereupon you well might think that we did finde all these proceedings very strange, and not answerable to such other overtures of the inward friend∣ship which our said brother hath professed to us by many other ways, nor con∣sonant to such things as you have declared to the said King, to the Q. mother, and other his Ministers on our behalf, concerning the dangerous practises of late time attempted by the said Q. of Scots against us, both for our person and Estate, and so we did in some part declare unto the said du Crocque, and to the French Ambassadors. And yet we did not hereupon refuse that he should repair into Scotland, although we did mislike of the request made for the Scotch Queens liberty at this time, and did deny to him to repair to her; but we did require him by way of advice until he might hear of Scotland, in what terms the parties stood. So as we might before his going, by conference with him consider, what means were best to use to bring the divisions to an accord in Scotland: After which done, within few days we understood that the L. Seaton who had been long in France for the Scotch Queen, and after had been in the King of Spains Low-Countries, with Commission and Title to be the Queen of Scots Ambassador there, had by tempest of Seas been driven into Harwich, and from thence passed disguised as a Mariner into Scotland, and so entered into the Castle of Edenburgh, with no smal comfort to them to persist in their obsti∣nacie to maintain Civil war, and by Gods goodness (which in all causes we find always ready) there were afterwards found in the ship at Harwich, such mat∣ters in writing, to prove the earnest continuance and prosecuting of the Scotch Queens practises against us, the intention, that they in the Castle should by no means come to accord, & that our Rebels in the Low-Countries should short∣ly return into Scotland, that we were justly occasioned further to consider of this matter, and to encrease our doubt herein, we were shortly after these things discovered, advertised out of Scotland, that in very deed upon the Lord Seatons coming to the Castle, upon intelligence of du Croques voyage thitherward, and the L. Flemings journey to come by the West Seas with aid out of Britain, they in the Castle were become very obstinate, to hearken unto the reasonable offers either for Peace or for abstinence of war. Whereupon we did cause by consent of our Councel, to be imparted to the French Ambassador, and to du Crocque the substance of the premisses which moved us to doubt, whe∣ther the journey of du Crocque should be meet for us to assent unto, without we should first impart our Conceptions to the French King, and so required them to allow thereof, and that we would write to the King, and according as we should receive answer from him, so they should understand our further pleasure. At which time we understood that both the Ambassador and he took this stay somewhat strangely, thinking that it might likewise seem strange to the King their Mr. considering that the said du Crocque coming thither was by agree∣ment of you our Ambassador, and the Kings Deputies. And though the same was not denyed, yet in our part it was said, we doubted not but when the King shall understand that new occasions with the matter discovered, tending in this his matter of voyage rather to the increase of the troubles in Scotland, then to the pacifying thereof, and likewise rather to our manifest perils and troubles, then to our comfort and surety, he would as our good brother and friend, espe∣cially at this time, being entring into so straight a profession of friendship, as he maketh shew of, would allow of our considerations of this stay, and by some new order from him, and Commission to du Crocque, would provide for
the remedies of the said inconvenience. Thus much being passed, the said d Croque within two days after desired to speak privately with one of our Councl by name the L. of Burleigh, and for some considerations, it was thought good that he should speak also with some others, and so did with the Earl of Suffex L. Chamberlain, and the L. of Burleigh, with whom together he heard such reasons alleadged for the stay of his journey until the King might be thereof advertised, as in the end he did not shew any other misliking, but that he would willingly tarry here and send to the King his Master, to understand his further pleasure, and wished that we would likewise advertise the King by our Ambas∣sador there. And thus you see how we have dealt with du Croque since his coming, and what either the Ambassador or he shall advertise, we know not; but besides this which we have written unto you, you shall understand by a me∣morial in writing, which you shall receive from the L. Burleigh, the further circumstances of the Conferences had at two several times betwixt our Coun∣cel and him, which when you have considered, with these the premises afore written, we would have you to impart the same to the King in the best sort you shall finde convenient to move him to interpret these our doings to the best as reason ought to do. And in the end to procure that du Croque may have lar∣ger Commission to treat of the matters in Scotland in such sort, as we may ac∣cord thereto with our surety: For otherwise you may well say that the labors of us both shall be but lost. You shall further understand, that since the com∣hither of Mr. Beal with your last letters, and other writings of your negociati∣on about the new Treaty, we have considered thereof, and have forborn to re∣solve what our Answer shall be to the points by you suspended, until we may have further conference with this Ambassador here, who hearing of the return of our servants Hen. Killegrew and Beal, hath required that we would forbear to resolve, and to return our answer unto you, until he might have commodity to speak with us, which he looketh daily to have by the coming of a Currier from thence, which he doth hourly look for, and this is the cause why at this present we do stay the return of Beal unto you, wishing you in the mean time to give them no occasion to doubt, but that our answers of the Treaty shall be found reasonable. Given under our Signet, at our Palace of Westminster, March 20. 1571. In the fourteenth yeer of our Reign. To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Burleigh. SInce I wrote last to your Lp. there hath here fallen out nothing worthy the Advertisement. The matter of marriage between the Prince of Navar and the Lady Margaret continueth doubtful, whereof Sir Tho. Smith and I have more cause so to judge, for that the 4 of this month it pleased the Q. of Navar to send for us to dinner. Immediately upon our coming she shewed unto us how with the consent of the Q. mother, she had snt for us (as the Ministers and Ambassadors of a Christian Princess, whom she had sundry causes to honor) to confer with us and certain others in whom she reposed great trust touching certain difficulties that were impeachments to the marriage, which thing she would communicate to us after dinner. She said to us that now she had the Woolf by the ears, for that in concluding or not concluding the marriage, she saw danger every way, and that no matter (though she had dealt in matters of consequence) did so much trouble her▪ as this, for that she could not tell how to resolve; amongst divers causes of fear, she shewed unto us that two chiefly trou∣bled her. The first, that the K. would needs have her son and L. Margaret, the marriage proceeding to be Courtiers, and yet would not yield to grant him any exercise
of Religion, the next way to make him become an Atheist, as also thereby no hope to grow of the Conversion of the L. Margret, for that she would not re∣sort to any Sermon. The second, that they would needs condition with the L. Margaret, remaining constant in the Catholike Religion, should have whensoever she went into the Country of Bern her Mass, a thing which in no wise she can consent unto, havin her Country cleansed from all Idolatry. Besides, saith she the L. Margaret re∣maining a Catholike whensoever she shal come to remain in the Country of Bern the Papists there wil take her part, which will breed division in the Country, and make her more unwilling to give ear to the Gospel, they having a staff to lean to. After dinner ended, she sent for us into the Chamber, where we found a dozen others of certain Gent. of the Religion and their Ministers. She declared unto us briefly what had passed between the K. Q mother, and her, touching the marri∣age, as also what was the present cause of the stay of the same, wherein she desired us severally to say our opinion, and that sincerely as we would answer unto God The stay stood upon 3 points. First, whether she might with a good Conscience substitute a Papist for her sons Proctor for the Fiansals▪ which was generally a∣greed she might. 2ly, whether the Proctor going to Mass incontinently after the Fiansals, which was expresly forbidden by his letter procuratory, would nt breed an offence to the godly. It was agreed, that forasmuch as he vvas justly forbidden the same by his letter procuratory, the same could justly minister no offence, for that he vvas no longer a Proctor then he kept himself vvithin the limits procuratory of the letter procuratory. 3ly, Whether she might consent that the vvord Fiansal might be pronounced by a Priest in his priestly attire, vvith his Surplice and Stoal. This latter point vvas long debated, and for the Ministers concluded, that the same, thought it vvere a thing indifferent, could not but breed a general offence unto the godly: she protested that she vvould never consent to do that thing vvhereof there might grovv any publike scandal, for that she knevv, she said, she should soincur Gods high displeasure: upon vvhich protestation it vvas generally oncluded, that in no case she might yield thereto, her ovvn Conscience gainsaying the same▪ so that novv the marriage is held generally for broken. Notvvithstanding I am of a contrary opinion, and do think assuredly, that hardly any cause vvill make them break, so many necessary causes there are why the same should proceed. By the next I shal be able to advertise your L. of the certainty of this mariage. What hath been done upon the receipt of your Lps. dated th 6 and 11 of this month, you may perceive by Sir T. Smiths letters vvritten at large. Of late I learn by one that lately is come out of Denmark, that there is a great league grovvn be∣tvvixt the D. of Alva and the K. there, and that there should be some practise in hand there, for some enterprise to be done, either in Scotland or England. For the accomplishment thereof the D. desireth of the K. certain ships. Touching the said amity grown of late between the K. and D. this Ks. Ambassador there, doth advertise thereof, and sheweth that the same cometh about by the corruption of M. a Burgonian, who altogether ruleth the K. He therefore adviseth the K here to enter into amity of Suevia, who shall always be abl to bridle Denmark, and that he findeth by advice had from Suevia, that the K. will most willingly enter into league with him. Standen who lately came out of Spain, and arrived here se∣cretly the 23 of this month, gave out some speech unto a Frenchman whom he trusted, of some hope there would be in England of change or ever Summer en∣ded. He staid here only one night. I have written to Paris to have his doings ob∣served, to which place he is repaired. At our access unto the Q. mother I shewed her what I had heard out of Britain touching the L. Flemings doings. I there∣fore desired her M. to move the K. to write to the Governor of Britain to have
an eye unto him, and not to permit him to do any thing more then his pasport beareth, lest otherwise it might breed some jealousie, which thing she promiseth to do. I know the K. hath lately written to the Governor of Newhaven to suffer none to imbarque for Scot. nor to do any thing that may any way offend her M. I send your Lp. here inclosed, that lately I received from Paris from a Spaniard of mine acquaintance, who is both wise and religious, honest and learned. The only cause why I send it, is for that it toucheth an imprisonment. I refer it to your Lp. to judge thereof as you shall think good. I used the less hast in adverti∣sing, for that otherwise advice hath been given in that behalf. The Navar mar∣riage is not yet concluded, notwithstanding there is great hope that the same wil take place. I forbear to send with the Ks. pacquer, for that I attended the dis∣patch of Count Lodowicks man, thinking to have sent by him, but after that he understood her M. had banished these leud sea-robers, it caused him to stay, and yet he meaneth to send a gentleman to thank her M. for that undeserved favor she had shewed to these lewd Ministers. He hath great conference with Q. mo∣ther and Monsr. daily, which maketh men to discourse diversly. As soon as he is grown to some through conclusion he telleth me, that he will send a gentleman over to her M. The Admiral is shortly to be looked for here, and great hopes conceived of the compounding of the discord between him and the house of Guise. For the conclusion of the Navar marriage, there is 8 chosen, to whom the matter is committed, 4 for the K. and 4 for the Q. of Navar. For the K▪ is chosen Birage, Count de Rets, Biron, Malalieur. For the Q. Count Lodowick, Francourt her Chancellor, De La Nove, and her Secretary. They are all as it is thought, so well affected to the marriage, as there is no doubt made of some good conclusi∣on, and so having nothing else to impart to your honor at present, I most hum∣bly take my leave, At Blois, March 29. 1571. Yours to command Francis Walsingham. To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Burleigh. YOur Lp. may perceive by Sir T. Smiths letter unto her M. what we have done touching the inlargement of La Crocques Commission, if the doubt of the Q. of Scots possibility were taken away, the K. here would be content to yield to any thing that may tend to her M. safety, but the same still hanging in suspence her M. must neither look for sound subjects at home, not sure friendship abroad, By letters from Paris March 28, I learn that Higgins is returned thither, who as I am informed, hath been at Rome; he resorteth to the Scotch Ambassador, as he was accustomed, to which place also Standen repaireth since his return out of Spain, where they have their conferences. Higgius at his departure from Paris protested secretly to a friend of his, that he would not return thither in 1, or 2 yeers, seeing he saw no way with his Mr but one: his sudden return shews there is somwhat a brewing. At present there is also there Egmont, Rteliff, and Genny; they past lately out of Spain this way. One Chamberlain, who conferred here with the K. Secretary of Spain, is now repaired to the D. Alva. Stukely is retur∣ned into Spain, in company of I: Doria; he received great honor from the K. & is put in hope shortly to be employ'd. I send you by W: Williams advertisements out of Britain, touching the L: Flemings doings; besides, I have twice moved the Q: Mother in that behalf I did also at our conference with Mr. Limoges and du Foix, make them acquainted with the matter, who did assure us there should be redress  out of hand. From Bloys April 4. 1571. Fr: Walsingham.
By the Queen. ELIZABETH R. TRusty and right well-beloved, We greet you well. Since the receit of your Letters to us from you, both joyntly dated the first of March, and o∣ther your later Letters of the 8 directed to the Lord Burleigh, in which your later Letters you did at length expresse your Negotiation in this matter of Trea∣ty with the points not resolved; we have had some cause to prolong our an∣swer otherwise then we thought at the first, partly at the request of the French Ambassador here, who motioned unto us not to proceed to a final resolution of the matters in doubt, untill he might receive some direction from the King his Master; which when he had, then were we also impeached from consideration of the same, by reason of sudden sharp accident of sickness, which as it conti∣nued with us some time; so nevertheless in 7 or 8 daies, by Gods goodness, we were eased, and do now take our selves to be very well recovered, both of the danger and trouble thereof,  lacking nothing but some small time to recover the strength which we lost with the sharpness of the sickness. And so now we have after some conference had with the Kings Ambassador, resolved upon the matters in doubt, and all the rest of the Articles of the Treaty, which you shall understand to be in this manner following; Where you did move to have inserted into the said Article, the Clause of the mutual defence, to be by special name for Invasion upon colour of Religion; considering upon debate thereof, the King hath offered to expound the same Clause, to be meant by a special Let∣ter according to a Coppy sent to us by you, dated the 8 of March, and on the backside marked with us. We do not mislike the Contents of the Letter, sa∣ving we would wish the effect thereof to be written in Latine, as the Treaty is with the Kings stile, so as it may also have the great Seal annexed thereunto. The like thereof we will for our part accomplish and deliver to this Ambassa∣dor. And so have we caused our resolution to be declared to their Ambassador; and in some part of the Letter we have added some words to make the same both plainer and fuller, whereof we send you a Coppy in English. And yet if you cannot obtain it to be put in Latine and under the great Seal, we find no cause to stay the Treaty for that, but to accept it as a Letter missive under the Kings hand and signet, as it hath been already offered. The second matter concerning the aid which now is by the Kings Deputies reduced to a specialty, although we could have been content to have had it re∣main in generality, yet the same being no greater then it is, and the charge to be borne by the requirant, we are contented therewith; and think it neverthe∣less meet that the causes appointing the wages and stipends by either of us, might be more particularly and certainly expressed for avoiding of ambiguity, that is, that the Prince requiring the aid, and to pay the wages, shall pay to every per∣son, both Captains, Soldiers, and Officers, according to their several qualities, both by Land and Sea, wages certainly expressed how the numbers shall be ac∣counted, whether fully, or with allowance of dead paies or lacks; wherein be∣cause there may be diversities betwixt the usage of the two Countreys, the cer∣tainty would be set down according to our manner. As for example, in the computation of the Band of 100. the manner here is to allow 8 dead paies to the hundred, and no more; which if they like they shall be so accorded; or other∣wise as they shal think it meetest, so as the Article may be reciproque for us both, as well in charge as in number. The third matter in question is for Scotland, wherein we have found great
difficulty, finding the Ambassador here more precise then we looked for, or was reasonable, considering the foundation and scope of this Treaty is to make a streight friendship betwixt the King and us; and directly now to the contrary, we see the pressing of the matter for the Queen of Scots, as it is urged by the Article offered unto you, which may seem to be of a strong Condition to be in∣serted into a Treaty containing a Form Historical, or Narrative (as they call it) and not conventional. The like also we find by the manner of du Crocques pro∣ceeding here for the said Queen of Scots, neither of both being agreeable with the scope of the amity pretended. And therefore we have caused the Ambassa∣dor to understand how much we mislike this manner of proceeding, shewing him reasons for the same, which we need not report unto you, for that the argu∣ment therefore is at hand to every indifferent person. And we have moved him, that either the matter of Scotland might pass now in silence, or rather the King would be contented that it may be Covenanted that we both shall defend the Kingdom of Scotland as it is possessed by the King, as in all like cases in fa∣vour of the King and Prince being in possession, that hath been used by other Princes neighbours and onfederates: But hereunto the Ambassador would in no wise agree, using no other reasons of value, but that his Master shall thereby be taken as one that hath deprived the Queen of Scots his good Sister of her e∣state; which indeed cannot justly be gathered, for that our meaning is not to have it otherwise ordered, but to have the state of the Realm to be preserved as we both find it, which we take to be in the possession of the King, being already Crowned and acknowledged by the 3 Estates of the Realm in full Parlament, and acceptance of the Realm shall alter, we must and ought to accept it as we should find it. But this not satisfying the Ambassador, we caused the writing which he required to be further considered; and hereupon have caused another form to be drawn, agreeable to such part of theirs as we may like; and leaving the other part not by us allowable, which hath been shewed unto him, and af∣ter much argument, not utterly misliked, so as he might have some words of his own inserted into the same, altogether prejudicial to our meaning, which was declared unto him to be: and so we would have you to do the like, that coni∣dering the King is possessed of the Crown for the present, and come to the same by order of the Laws of the Crown, with the consent of the 3 estates, and in Parlament; our meaning is, that he should be also defended by the form of the Article by us devised. And so we send you the same Article in Latine, although it was to him shewed in French, which we would have to be inserted, except o∣therwise they will be contented that the whole matter of Scotland be put in i∣lence; and yet if they shall content themselves with the Article in form by us conceived; then you shall move them to assent, that in some one Article there may be a reservation made for the King of Spain and his Countries by name; or if that cannot be contained, then we would have you to procure that in a ge∣neral Article, being the 23 in number, which Monsieur de Foix hath noted (De∣lendum) may be restored into the Treaty. Of which Article mention being made to this Ambassador, he seemeth to allow thereof. The Article devied for the suspencion of the Law of—Aubani for Goods of strangers dying in France, we like very well according to the Coppy brought to you the ninth of March by Florence; which we return to you by these our Leters, so that you make the word Francia, Gallica, or else add to the words, in Francia, sive alibi in dominiis regis Francrum. Lastly, We think it good that some special Article be conceived to bind the King that all these things concerning the matter of Merchants within the Trea∣ty, should be inrolled and emologed in their Parlaments within some conveni∣ent
time, and the like to be done as the case shall require within our ordinary Court of Records at Westminster. As for Commission to be sent to you Francis Walsingham our Ambassador Resident concerning some Treaty with the Merchants of that Country, as is re∣quired, We will understand the manner of the Commission sent to this Ambas∣sador, and so give order for the like. This Ambassador hath been very earnest with us that Du Croque might repair into Scotland, and until we may hear what the French King answereth to you in that matter, upon the reasons as we did lately impart unto you, whereupon we did stay him; we have no meaning to let him depart: For certainly we perceive that if the L. Seton had not come out of Flanders, nor his coming expected from hence, the matters of Scotland had been at an end before this time, and now we go forwards. Since we had de∣termined upon the Articles of the Treaty, the Ambassador hath dealt with him very earnestly to have some change of words, which we newly sent to you to be placed instead of the Article that du Foix would needs have had for the matter of Scotland, first in the second Article and fifth, he would have praesentis status commutandi conditio. And in the beginning of the eight he would have these words added, Aut unus illorum seperatim, de consensu tamen alterius; but we did not accord thereunto; whereof he seemed very doubtfull how the King would assent to the rest; and although it may be that he shall be also earnestly pressed therewith, yet except you should see it stay the Treaty, we would not have you yield. But otherwise we do not mean you should stay the Treaty for these few words. And where in the former part of our Letter we have willed you that there may be a special Article of reservation of Treaties with the King of Spain; if you find that offensive to the expedition of the Treaty, then we can be content only with the general Article of the 34. We require you to use all speed that you can herein, for it may be we shall send the person that shall come from hence, within eight daies after we may have knowledg thereof▪ and then it may be that the same shall meet with you, and Sir Tho. Smith, return you back with him in Commission, whereof you shall certainly know our mind by the next. Given under our signet at our Palace of Westminster, the second of April, 1571. in the 13 year of our Reigne. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq her Majesties Ambassador Resident in France. SIr, I heartily thank you for your sundry Letters, all which with one Letter and many thanks must be answered. I have imparted unto Mr. Smith such things of publique as I know he will impart unto you and the rest, as common to you both by the Q. Majesties Letters. I am very sorry to see you so decayed by service, and of so good cause, I mean good sound service, so evil effect: but so blind is Fortune, as sometimes she dealeth blanks instead of good pay∣ment. I have not omitted to express your charge, your expence, your decay, and yet your request to return without her Majesties burthen; but as the first have been and are hurtfull unto you, so the last, which is your return, shall be most hurtfull to her Majestie, and so she well considereth. And so I trust she will presently refresh you, though not restore you as I have desired; and so I think you shall understand from Sir Walter Mildmay, your very friend, and mine also in very deed most assured, who was present when her Majestie yielded to some part of my request for you. You did very well to press the King as you did in the case
of la Roches practising in Ireland, which is very true, howsoever he denieth it, and you may avow that he hath the Rebels son, I mean Iames Fitzmorris, son in Ho∣stage at Britain, he would be hearkened for, and demanded to be delivered. We hear daily of great preparations in Britain, upon pretence of a Voyage into the Indies, or into Flanders, I wis they seek no Indians in Ireland or in Scotland. As soon as it shall be determined who shall come from thence, I will send thither, or deliver to this Ambassador a safe conduct, for so the Ambassador requireth. By my next you shall receive a Commission for your self to Treat for the matter of the Merchants. And so now wearied, I end. From Westminster the se∣cond of April, 1571. Yours assuredly, W. Burliegh. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. BY your Lordships of the second of April, I perceive that through your Lordships most carefull and friendly declaration made unto her Majestie of my decayed estate, she doth graciously consider thereof, and meaneth to doe somewhat for my relief, that I may with the better courage imploy my self in her service: I hope her Majestie shall find my care and diligence in this service such, as she shall have no cause to think any consideration had of me evil bestow∣ed. I crave no recompence, I only desire to return home in no worse state then I went forth. Touching the chief stay here made in the conclusion of the League, I refer your Lordship to Sir Tho. Smith. Such as here do not affect the same, did what they might to procure a new sending about the Scottish Earl, think∣ing that time by delay, might have brought forth somewhat to have overthrown the whole. Both Monsieur Montmorency and Monsieur de Foix, did deal ve∣ry effectually and earnestly to bring the matter to that good conclusion that it is come to. And the King in the end shewed himself very resolute in the mat∣ter, as he doth in all those things that concern his honour and benefit, and mis∣liked the doubt propounded by those that went about to perswade him to think otherwise then honourably touching her Majesties intention concerning the Scotch Affairs: That Strozzas preparation should tend either for Scotland or Ireland, your Lordship need not to fear; such as he is chiefly guided by in that matter, are very well affected towards her Majestie. Of late there hath been hard hold for the overthrow of this enterprise; the King is resolute in the mat∣ter, otherwise it had been quite broken. They of the Robe Longue do fear that it will breed a pile betwixt this Crown and Spain; and they would be loath the King should now enter into Wars, for that they doubt that the managing of the Affairs should come then to the hands of others. They perswade —2—i diminish. They perswade 4 that if 3 have good success therein, it will dimi∣nish his reputation. These respects do make the said parties to become enemies to the Wars, because lack of money is the only let that is alleadged; they do all that they may to hinder all such devices from taking place as lately have been offered to supply that want. Amongst these difficulties it will be hard to judge what will be the issue of this matter.
By the last advertisement out of Spain, they write that D. Medina Celi stay∣eth his Voyage into Franders, only in doubt that Strozza should doe some enterprise in those parts; I am assured that they have seen A z. with 1 T t) 6 a. Egremont, Ratcliff and Genney are departed from Spain, they giving out be∣fore their departure, that they went to return into Flanders. This day there is a Gentleman arrived sent hither from the Kings Agent in Flanders, who bring∣eth word of some alteration there, the particularities I cannot yet learn. The T. sent me word that he was glad that the League was concluded, not∣withstanding he willed the messenger to tell me, that unless the Queen my Mi∣stress did proceed roundly in cutting off the inward diseases at home, this out∣ward medicine would stand her in no stead; and hereof (said he) you shall see by dangerous experience, unless the remedy be applyed in time. The same party (if your Lordship remember it) gave me warning of a practice for the de∣livery of the Queen of Scots; and therefore it is the rather to be weighed; and I judge it cometh from the L. who hath it from A. he will by no means make me to understand any particularities: for fear of w. he dares not repair to me▪ And so leaving any further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most hum∣bly take my leave, from Blois the 22 of April, 1571. Your Honours to command, F. Walsingham. To the right honorable and my very good friend, Francis Walsingham Esq, her Majesties Ambassador in France. SIr, Now that this Treaty is so well concluded to the apparent contentation of her Majestie, and with the good liking of the French King, I wish all good means used on all parts to nourish your planting, that first the glory of God, and next the two Realms and Princes, may long see the fruits to grow thereof. The matters of the Low-Countries are now in farther terms to relieve them∣selves of Pharaohs cruelties used by Duke Alva, then when you wrote last hi∣ther of the Communication which you had with the Count. Here is all covert means to let them of the Low-Countries pass home, to the help of the liberty of the Countrie; and I wish it were done rather by themselves then by others, that percase would not suffer them long to enjoy their liberty when it should be recovered, percase it will not be liked here. I cannot write more presently; for I do this in haste, being absent from the Court, and have not your Cypher about me. I have written of more matters to Sir Tho. Smith, who will make you thereof partaker. From my house in Westminster the 23 of April, 1571. Your assured friend, W. Burleigh.
To Francis Walsingham Esq the Queens Majesties Ambassador Resi∣dent in France. Mr. Walsingham, Like as I am to yield you my hearty thanks for your pains and travel bestowed about the recovery of Clerk my boy; so do I most earnestly pray you to present my humble thanks unto the Kings Majestie there, for the honour and favour it hath pleased him to do me in that behalf. I under∣stand by the Post of Roan, he is retained with the Cardinal of Burbon, in which respect, because I have not my self any acquaintance with the said Cardinal. I have written my earnest Letter to Monsieur D' Anville, requesting him to deal earnestly with the said Cardinal for restitution of the boy, which I do not desire so much for any account I make of him, as to make him an Example unto o∣ther our servants, not to persume hereafter so to abuse their Masters. The truth is, he was a poor mans son, being left unto me, I had some care to see him well brought up in vertue and good qualities, especially in Musick, wherein finding himself to have a little cunning, away he is thus run from me (desirous belike of more liberty) without having been any waies evil intreated, or for any other cause in the world; the which if I should over-slightly let slip, it would no doubt give too much encouragement to others his like after, to play the like lewd part. Therefore as you began, so I pray you continue your friendly travel therein, that I may have him sent over unto me again; which I only desire (as I said) for example sake: For if I wisht that the said Cardinal or any other Noble man in those parts had any liking to him, I would most willingly either send him again, or some other of that profession, perhaps better quallified then he, and so I pray it may be signified unto them from me. Thus with my hearty commendations I bid you farewell. From the Court the 23 of April, 1571. Your assured Friend, Ro: Leicester. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to understand, that La Croques long stay bred in them here some strange imaginations, as also the slow proceeding in the Trea∣ty. Touching Merchants Causes, I hope by the Ambassadors last dispatch, by the which I received your Lordships of the 22 of April, all will be salved, where∣by this last Treaty lately concluded may yield that good fruit that is hoped for. I send your Lordship here inclosed, Mr. Mounts Letters, to the Contents where∣of I refer you. The Count Palatine by a servant lately sent hither, desired me to write unto your Lordship, that he may be informed what Pacieco is, and whether he apper∣tain to her Majestie, as he pretendeth. This he desired me to procure with as much convenient expedition as I might: I beseech your Lordship therefore by the next, that I may understand what I shall write to him in that behalf. These advises out of Germany and Swisserland, I received from  your Lordship thereby may perceive, that the holy Fathers intention is not only to trouble England, but all other places that profess the Gospel. For the avoiding to trouble your Lordship with C. within the ,
I send you herewith inclosed; you shall find what I know concerning Blasco. Monsieur Montmorency stayeth his setting forward from hence, untill I know the certain day of my Lord Admirals departure from hence. The King, as Monsieur Lansac told me (who came lately from the Court) about the latter end of this Month will be at Madrill. So leaving to trouble your Lordship any further, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the 9 of May, 1571. Your Honours to command, Fr. Walsingham▪ Letters to my Lord of Burleigh. MY very good Lord, what hath passed between the King here and Q. Mo∣ther and us, we have at large written to the Q. Maj. what hath past between the Deputies and us, You shal perceive by the whole draught of the League now ready to be signed unto us: But because in the instructions we were command∣ed to signe it before it were sent thither into England to be better considered, we thought best to make the stay thereupon, that except the express words for Religion were in it, we durst not signe it, and unless we did first understand her Majesties pleasure, whether so she would be content, there is no alteration from the Article of 1546. in the Esclaircissement, which Article is also in three Treaties with France, 1515. and 1546. saving they have specified the number of Souldiers both by Sea and Land. The which we could by no means obtain of them to leave it in generality. After that we had gotten of them that it should not be sumptibus requisitis, which to bring to pas we had very much to do. And seeing it is reciproque and no great number, we thought it not much amiss: All the rest went easie enough, even that of the Merchants, and they confessed that in these general words the matter of Religion is also contained: So that if for the inquisition our matters be staied, if the Queens Majestie do require that aid for their deliverance, as is there expressed, the King is bound to do it because there is—Iusserit aut permiserit. The greatest debating was for two things, The one to have Religion expresly mentioned in the Treatie, the which I perceive some of the Deputies, partly having benefices, and looking for more Buls from Rome, and partly fearing that some change may come, and then it may be laid to their charge, would needs shift it from them, and let the King do it alone. And when once they had hope given them by their Ambassador in England, that the Queens Majestie would so be content to have it in general words, you might be sure we should never get them further, but to be delivered as slightly as they could of that matter; ye shall receive that fashion that we required in the figure O. delivered to Monsieur de Foix, Feb. 28. ye shall receive also that which Monsieur de Foix delivered to us, as a copie of a Letter whereby the King doth think w should be satisfied, noted and delivered to us the 29 of February; and to it we have put what fault we do find with that Letter, although the Queens Majestie should be content with that form. This is the issue whereupon we do now stand. The other great debatement was for the Queen of Scots, which held us al∣most at every meeting to have her mentioned in the Treatie, and that earnestly handled of them the 23 and 26 of February, that I was fain once again to de∣clare the evil deserts of the late Queen of Scots towards the Queens Majestie,
with her other behaviour at the whole length, because Marshal Montmorency was not at the first Declaration; and there Mr. Walsingham and Mr. Killigrew helped me with supply so far, that at that present they seemed to give over, and we in no wise would have her mentioned in this Treaty; yet the 28 of Februa∣ry Mr. de Foix brought to us a writing for her, which we send you noted M. to which you sent him the next day a Coppie of the same noted with our answer N. The same day at the afternoon we had audience of the King, where he was also earnest with us, as you may perceive by our Letters to the Queens Maje∣stie B. the Queen Mother that day, as good chance was, had forgotten her self; but the next day, the first of March, Mr. de Foix came to us and brought us a draught of the whole League in French, because he said he was commanded to translate it into French, that the King might understand it; and so he gathered it as he thought of that which we were accorded, we perused it with our Pam∣phils, as Mr. Hall termeth them, schediae or adversaria, I mean those which one way or other by yea and nay had gone betwixt us (some other tho will have them called pieces, as some Frenchmen do name them) and we did not much dis∣agree; and although he had made a new Preface in such matters, we do not stick. I am old, I love not much talk, and I would fain be dispatched honestly home∣wards; so the effect be there indeed, and our Queen not deceived, I care for no more, that done, and referred again for again, seeing they were offered unto us in Latine, he came to us with a new Charge of the late Queen of Scots, in the Queen Mothers name, saying, that by our other talk she had clean forgotten her; but to do that thing which should do our friend (he meant the King his Master) good, and us no hurt, vve could not say nay; he for affinity and consanguinity, and that she vvas once his Soveraigne, vvas bound in conscience and respect of the vvorld to require so much, and to have it testified to the vvorld that he had done those good offices; vve may ansvver as vve vvould it should not touch us, they vvould take our ansvver, vvhatsoever it vvas. I told him vve had ansvvered first to the Deputies in vvords, and had good causes vvhy vve could not do it, of which she was one, after that we had given our answer to him in writing. Third∣ly, we had also spoken with the King, and made him a direct answer, that we could not meddle in any wise with that matter in the League, we had no Com∣mission, we were precisely forbidden to meddle in that matter: And therefore I never spake more of that matter to have that put in the Treaty, for that will not be. Upon that he began to amplifie in another long Oration; for all his Reasons, I was fain to say, he must pardon me, I know he is a good Rhetorician, and he had Rhetorical ornaments at will to make; and so had I on the contrary side, if I would bestow my time on that sort: We were the Queens Maesties Ser∣vants, we have shewed our Reasons so good that no man could deny that we should not agree upto it: We have written the sum of our answer also, where∣with they ought to be content. Oh (saith he) she hath great kindred and alliance here in the Court, and they will say that the King nor we have done our duties. Will ye see the ansvver (quoth I) I thought once to send, mary I vvould not have it sent. This I send your Lordship to see it N. noted, not to be declared (quoth I) because we would be dispatched of such matters, yet as gently as we could, and with as little evil speeches, especially of such persons. This I like well (saith he) let me have it I pray you; belike (quoth I) you vvould please Mr. d' Aumale and the Cardinal of Lorrain vvith it. It is even for that (saith he) they shall see that the King hath done so much as he can. No (quoth I) it shall not need, you have our ansvver already: and if you doubt of it, you
It is no marvel though other would Inire gratiam cum anula & hoste ejus quam aliquando regnaturam putant culpa sua, and we thought not good to leave in their hands in writing, tam acerbum, de illa testimonium. But surely if her Majestie go no better about to establish her Crown and surety, she doth not then follow Solomon, in making away Adonias and Ioab for the same purpose: And I am afraid, quod erit novissimus error pejor priori. I thank your Lord∣ship for your Letters of the 16 of February by Edwards, and also of the 22 of the same by the Post. Although you write not so many Letters as I, yet if you write so much stuff, and answer all, it is all one to me; but in two things I yet find fault; the one, that in the Letter of the 22. you wrote nothing of the Of∣fice, and that you make no mention at all of the Duke of Alanson. They here look very undoubtedly for some hope The other grieveth me most of all, that now the League is full done (as I take it) and almost as well as we can with, yet I must not come home, but tarry here still in this Countrie, where I have felt since Candlemas, the greatest cold that ever I felt, and most continual, except it were at Tholous, where it did al∣most cost me my life, and there had made an end of it, if it had not been for the strong matters which I do use for my stomack morning and evening, and yet it is scarce able to resist the extream cold of the weather, and now about 30 daies continual frost and snow, and here is neither wood plenty, nor good chimneys for fire, and in my bed-chamber I can make no fire: Good my Lord dispatch this Bearer with as much speed again as may be, as it is promised in the In∣structions. This day the Queen of Navarr is looked for in the Court, and hoped that the marriage shall go forward. The foolish Cardinal went away as wise as he came, he neither brake the marriage with Navarr, nor got no Dismes of the Church of France, nor perswaded the King to enter into the League with the Turk, nor to accept the Tridentine, or to break off Treaty with us; and the foolishest part of all at his going away, he refused a Diamond which the King offered him of 600 Crowns, yet he was here highly feasted; he and his Train cost the King above 300 Crowns a day, as they said. Thus I bid your Lordship heartily fare∣well. From Blois March 3. by English account. Th. Smith. To my Lord Burleigh. MY very good Lord, I received your Letters by Monsieur de Crocques Kinsman, after Mid-Lent-Sunday, which was dated the sixth of March: the King had then entred into a Diet, which he keepeth still in his Camber. Some said it is because he had some hurt in one of his leggs, which I could ne∣ver perceive but he was one of the activest in all his actions as the Barriers, Justs, and other such Martial feats, which were simulachra belli of all the rest in the Company. Other (of whose opinion I am) think it is the Mothers drift to make him take (under pretence of Phisick) some rest from his inordinate hun∣ting so early in the morning, and so late at night, without sparing frost, snow, or rain, and in so desperate doings as makes her and them that love him, to be often in great fear. And the Queen possibly being now undoubtedly with child, to cause her also to rest from that travel, that both he may get somewhat more flesh, and the Queen to retain more surety of that which is conceived.
Because of that Mr. Walsingham and I wit not what to do; but Monsieur de Malvosire coming to us as he is appointed, to see that we lack nothing, and sup∣peth and dineth commonly with us, we told him merrily, that his Mistress (for so we call the Scotch Queen) had played now a wise part, for she hath opened her self again, and the good favour she beareth to Spain, to make a perpetal broil if she could betwixt England, Scotland and France, for she hath practised by Letters of late, and sith the Dukes trouble, which Letters are now come to light, and known to have practised with the Duke of Alva, to convey the young King out of Scotland into Spain; the which thing I am sure you would like as ill as wee. Yea (saith he) they may be counterfeit and made to hurt the poor Queen. No (quoth I) the original Letters were shewed to Monsieur de Crocque and de la Mott, and yet by the same de Crocque, the King wrote to the Queens Majestie for her deliverance and sending of her into France: What would she do here at liberty, if being streightly kept, and the matter so plainly known, for the Bishop of Ross wrote sith he was in the Tower to her, that all was discovered, which he could not denie: Well (saith he) indeed I have heard of such a thing; but will you tell the King (quoth I) that so much I have told you, and that the Queens Majestie is not very well pleased, that she hould write so earnestly for her who will never cease to seek mischief and trouble to her Maje∣stie and her Realm, yea and set all the Princes together by the ears if she could; he said he would: and when we would come home to walk in the Garden, at such time as the Queen Mother doth customarily walk there, he would find the means we should speak with her; when he came again he brought us word that it was true that he said, for de la Mott had written the same to the King, and the King so told him that it was true, and said, Ah! the poor fool will never cease while she lose her head; In faith they will put her to death, I see it is her own fault and follie, I see no remedie for it; I meant to help, but if she will not be helped, Ie ne puis mais, that is, I cannot do withall. The 17 of this Month at afternoon, Mr. Walsingham and I went with Mr. Malvosire into the Kings Garden at Blois, and after a while walking, the Queen Mother came to us; to whom we declared, That of late there was Letters in∣tercepted of the Queen of Scots to the Duke of Alva, the effect whereof we were willing to declare to the Kings Majestie or to her, which was indeed to make a perpetual pique betwixt England, Scotland, France and Spain, for that it was, that he should take and convey away by his practise, the young King, and convey him into Spain. And so (quoth I) where now by Gods grace we go about to make a perpetual amity betwixt England and France, and by that joynt∣ly to make a good union and peace in Scotland, that the civil Wars might be compounded and cease, and so these 3 Realms to be as it were all one for mutual defence; this is a devise to make a perpetual pique, broil and jealousie amongst us all and Spain. Sait Mr. Walsingham, betwixt England and France, thanks be to God, no quarrels be pretended: We demand nothing of you at this time, nor you of us. The occasion vvhy your League vvas so sure vvith Scotland to annoy us, novv there is no such cause standing so sure on amity, and therefore belike Spain vvould make that a pique to trouble us vvithall both, and make us Warr and trouble that vvaies. Saith the Queen, There is no doubt but they vvill do vvhat they can, for the King my Son is advertised that there is nothing that grieveth him more then to understand of this good League and perfect Amity vvhich is begun, and I trust, novv at an end betvvixt us; they vvote not vvhich vvaies to turn them to break it. But Madam, (quoth I) these tvvo things coming together, she to
go about that disturbing of Scotland and England, and that thing which should be as much displeasant to you as to us, if your Majestie do well mark it, and at the same time the King here to write for her delivery, and to come into France, and that when the chief treating of amity is in hand, you shall not marvel though her Majestie do take it ill, and I assure you that it is written to us, that but that her Majestie hath known of long time the good affection that you Ma∣dam and the King your Son did bear to her, and that we that are here now Am∣bassadors, and Mr. Killegrew, all with one tenor have written so much of the sin∣cerity and sound dealing of the King and you, and bound our credit therein, that good faith was meant in all points, her Majestie would have doubted; and so we are willed to tell you. The King my Son (saith she) meant no evil in it, she is allied to him, she hath many friends here; and I tell you she hath one of the fairest Roses or Diamonds in France; she meant her Dowry, which is, as is reported, 120000 Franks by the year, and therefore my son could no less doe then write earnestly for her; mary not to offend my good sister the Queen. We think surely that the Queen your Mistress will shew mercy unto her, she is of so good nature; and then if she were here, she should be the less able to trouble you. Yes Madam (quoth I) and you to, she is now kept streighter then ever she was, and hath not past ten, as I hear say, allowed about her of her own, and yet she can do this, and still practice the disturbing of the Queens Majestie and her Realm; what would she doe being here at libertie, it would not be long before she convey her self into Spain, and then I doubt whether you or we should be long without Warr. Because you say so (saith she) he that is the King my sons Ambassador in Spain, now wrote of late that the Duke de Medina Celi is yet in coming, and taketh in men daily; but he doth it with more leasure, because he doth attend to hear word of some attempt to be done in England, and then he cometh away strait. This they look for still there, whatsoever it be, and so you may write to the Q. your Mistress. Then she asked whether the Duke were executed; we said no, that we could learn. No (saith she) belike the Queen will pardon him. We answered, we could not tell; I would (saith she) she were in quiet from all these broils: doe you know nothing how she can fancie the marriage with my Son the Duke of Alanson? Madam, you know me of old, except I have a sure ground, I dare affirm nothing to your Majestie. Why (saith she) if she be disposed to marrie▪ I do not see where she shall marrie so well; and yet (saith she) I may as a Mo∣ther, justly be accounted partial; but as for those which I have heard named, as the Emperors Son, or Don Iohn d' Austria, they be both lesser then my Son is, and of less stature by a good deal; and if she should marrie, it were pitty any more time were lost. Madam (quoth I) If it pleased God that she were married, and had a child, all these braggs, and all these Treasons would soon be appaled; and on conditi∣on she had a child by Mr. d' Alanson, for my part I cared not if ye had the Q. of Scots here; for ye then would be as carefull and jealous over her for the Q. my Mistresses suretie as we, or as her self is. That is true (saith she) and without this marriage (saith she) if she should marrie in another place, I cannot see how this League and Amity would be so strong as it is. True Madam (quoth I) the knot of bloud and marriage is a stronger Seal then that which is printed in wax, and lasteth longer if God give good successe; but yet all Leagues have not Marriage joyned with them, as this may, if it please God. I would it had (saith she) then surely would I make a start over and see her my self, the which I do most desire of all things. Madam (quoth I) if I had now as ample a Commis∣sion
for Mr. de Alanson, as I had at the first for Monsieur, the matter should soon by Gods grace, be at an end: Would you had (saith she) and if you had such a one when you are in England, would you not come over again to execute it? Yes Madam (quoth I) most gladly to so good an intent I would pass again the Sea if I were never so sick for it. Then saith Mr. Walsingham, And surely it was no Religion that made that stop in the marriage of Monsieur, but some other thing: No surely (saith she) he never shewed to me any other cause. I as∣sure you Madam (saith Mr. Walsingham) I can marvelous hardly believe it, for at Gallion he was so willing and so well affected, that me thought it did me much good when he spake of the Queen my Mistress, or with any of her Ministers, I perceived it in his words, in his countenance, in his gesture and all things; but again, when he came to Paris, all was clean changed. It is true Monsieur L. Ambassadeur (saith she) and it made me much to marvel at it; but even at Gal∣lion all other things liked him well; but at the Religion he made a little stop, but nothing so as he did after. Upon this I bare him in hand (for it grieved me not a little, and the King my Son, also as you know) that of all evil rumors and tales of naughty persons, such as would break the matter, and were spread abroad of the Queen, that those he did believe, and that made him so back∣ward. And I told him it is all the hurt that evil men can do to Noble women and Princes, to spread abroad lies and dishonourable tales of them, and that we of all Princes that be women, are subject to be slandered wrongfully of them that be our adversaries, other hurt they cannot do us; he said and swore to me, he gave no credit to them; he knew she had so vertuously Governed her Realm this long time, that she must needs be a good and vertuous Princesse, and full of honour, and other opinion of her he could not have; but that his consci∣ence and his Religion did trouble him that he could not be in quiet, and nothing else. Other communication there was, as is commonly wont to be in such meet∣ings; but this is the sum of that which is worth the writing, that passed be∣tvvixt us. The 21 of this Month I received your Lordships Letters dated the 10. of the same. The next day I spake again with the Queen Mother in the Garden, and shewed her that the Queens Majestie did perceive that the King and she were carefull to advertise any such occurrents as might trouble her Highness and e∣state, the which as she must needs take in most thankfull part, so she had a de∣sire to acquite the same with as much carefulness as may be, and therefore willed me to signifie unto their Maj. such things as now of late be come to her know∣ledge: And say that at Harvvich, vvhich vvas the Port that Rodolph, and other of that conspiracy, appointed that the Spaniards and Flemings should arrive at from the Duke of Alva, if the Treason had gon forvvard. At that Port arri∣ved the Lord Seaton, whom she knevv vvell enough, and from thence vvith tvvo other of the Earl of Northumberlands men disguised, vvent into Scot∣land, and novv be in the Castle of Edenburgh; and this being understood, the Ship vvas stayed and searched; and amongst other, the confirmation of that vvhich I told you before, vvas in the Scotch Queens Letters, that she gave her self and her son, novv the young King of Scotland vvholly into the hands of the King of Spain, to be governed and ruled only by him, and assure him that if he vvould send any povver, the young King should be delivered into his hands. For in the Ship it doth appear that the Lord Seton by his instructions is named the Scotch Queens Ambassador tovvards the Duke of Alva. A good∣ly Ambassador (saith the Queen.) And there in his Ambass. he offereth the young King to be delivered into his hands, to be conveyed into Spain. And
to animate him more to set up again the Scotch Queen, and take the protection of her, that she hath right both by Gods Law and mans Law to be Queen of England and also of Scotland, and that she hath not only all those that be in trou∣ble now, but a great sort more in England on her part, so that the King by set∣ting her up, should not only govern both these Realms, but shall also set up in both again the Catholique Religion. Alas (saith the Queen) that head of hers shall be never in quiet. This (quoth I) toucheth us most, the next toucheth the King your son. I will shew unto you as I have it, my Lord Burleigh writeth it unto me. In the same ship a∣mongst other was found a Letter of the Countess of Northumberland, who was one of the chief stirrers in the last Rebellion. Her husband the Earl is now prisoner in Scotland for the same purpose. The Countess in her Letter writeth to her husband, that the Duke of Guise hath of late been with the D. of Alva disguised, and she affirmeth to her husband for certainty, all the house of Guise and that faction will follow in all points the direction of the King of Spain. Saith the Queen, he was not, for by reason of his Treaty of accord, (she meant between the Admiral and him) which hath been long time in doing, and yet taketh that small success; every four daies we either hear from him, or send to him, so that we know certainly where he is, and that he hath not been there; he might well enough send some other person; but somewhat there is we know well enough (saith she) that they incline somewhat that way of Spain, and it may be nothing, for it is the Spanish practice to aid themselves with lies, and spread abroad, that those and those be of the Faction, to bring other in, when indeed it is nothing so; that used the Emperor Charls, and so brought some by this means unto his lure before they were aware: and that is a shrewd art (quoth I) to abuse rash fools. Yes (saith she) but when at the last it is espi∣ed, it makes them the more to be hated, and other the harder to be abused by them. Then she left that matter. Jesu! saith she, and doth not your Mistress see that she shall be alwaies in danger untill she marry? That once done, and in some good House, who dare attempt any thing against her? Madam (quoth I) I think if she were once mar∣ried, all in England that had any traiterous hearts, would be discouraged: for one Tree alone may soon be cut down, but when there be two or three toge∣ther, it is longer a doing, and one shall watch for the other; but if she had a child, then all these bold and troublesome Titles of the Scotch Queen, or o∣ther that make such gapings for her death, will be clean choaked up. I see she may have five or six, saith she, very well; I would to God we had one. No, saith she, two boys, let the one should die, and three or four daughters to make alliance with us again, and other Princes, to strengthen the Realm. Why then (quoth I) you think that Monsieur le Duc shall speed. With that she laughed, and said, Ie le desire infinitement; and I would trust then to see three or four my self at the least, of her race, which would make me indeed not to spare Sea nor Land to see her and them. And if she could have fancied my son d'Anjou, saith she, as you told me, why not this of the same house, Father and Mother, and as vigorous and lusty as he, and rather more, and now he begin∣neth to have a beard come forth, so that I told him the last day that I was an∣gry with it, for now I was afraid he would not be so high as his brethren. Yea Madam (quoth I) a man doth commonly grow in height to his years, the beard maketh nothing: Nay, saith she, he is not so little, he is so high as you, or very near: For that matter, Madam (quoth I) I for my part make small account, if the Queens Majestie can fancie him. For Pipinus Brevis, who married Bertha the King of Almains Daughter, was so little to her, that he is standing in A∣quisgrave,
or Moguerre, a Church in Almani, she taking him by the hand, and his head not reaching to her girdle, and yet he had by her Charlemain the great Emperor and King of France, which is reported to be almost a Giants stature. And your Oliver Glesquim, the Briton Constable that you make so much of, and lieth buried amongst the Kings at St. Dennis, if he were no bigger then is there pourtrayed upon his Tomb, was very short, scarcely, four foot long; but yet he was valiant, hardly, and couragious, above all in his time, and did us Eng∣lish men most hurt. It is true, saith she, it is the heart, courage, and activity that is to be looked for in a man; but hear you word of the Queens affection that way? can you give me no comfort? No I assure your Majestie (quoth I) for the Letters were written the 11 of this Month, the same day or the next that our Currier went with the dispatch from hence. Thus, with much other talk in such sort, the time was passed that day betwixt her Majestie and me. All the world doth see that we doe wish her Majestie surety and long continuance, that her marriage and issue of her Highness body should be the most assurance of her Highness, and of the Wealth of the Realm. The place where, and the person whom, I for my part remit to her Majestie; but what doth her Majestie mean to maintain still her danger, and not pro∣vide for her surety? I assure your Lordship I can see no reason. God preserve her Majestie long to Reigne over us by some unlooked for miracle; for I can∣not see by natural reason that her Highness goeth about to provide for it. Thus I commit your Lordship to Almighty God. From Blois, March 22. 1571. by English account. Th. Smith. To my Lord of Burleigh. MY Lord, You must excuse us, if the Queens Majestie or any other body do find fault that we send this man away, we do long so much for answer out of England, it being 22 daies since Mr. Beal departed from hence, and we thought but upon 15. the thing being here so desired of them, so necessary as we think for us, that the fault we find there, we will not have found in us, but rather send all that we have here, and be sick for grief that we hear nothing from you: then you would excuse us there, by our like doings here. Your Lord∣ship may be well assured there is nothing more expected and looked for then the Queens Majesties resolution in these two points, whereof for the one, the League is accounted a sure, both of us and them; the other, for the marriage although in suspence; yet in great hope, so much as they get in uncertainly in such a mat∣ter on their side; for our parts, as we have said, we can say nothing whereof we are more sorry and do lament in our hearts, to see such uncertain, so negligent and irresolute provision for the safety of the Queens Majesties person, and of her Reigne over us. God of his almighty and miraculous power preserve her long to Reigne over us. What shall we say more that is done heretofore even to this day, is written fully, what shall be written fully, what shall be written for you, and what God hath disposed to be done, we cannot know till we hear from you. His grace and mercy turn all to the best, and preserve her Majestie and your Lordship with long life and felicity. From Blois this Palm Sunday, 1571. Th. Smith.
To my Lord Burleigh. YOur Lordships Letters of the 20 of March made us, both Mr. Walsing∣ham and me in the reading, for we read them both together in a marvelous agony; but having the medicine ready, that her Majestie was within an hour re∣covered, it did in part heal us again; but as your Lordship writeth the care doth not yet cease in you, you may be assured it doth as little cease in us: calling to our remembrance, and laying before our eyes the trouble, the uncertainty, the dis∣order, the peril and danger which had been like to follow, if at that time God had taken from us that stay of the Commonwealth and hope of our repose, that Lanthorn of our light next God, whom to follow, nor certainly where to light another Candle; but if the Queens Majestie do still continue in extremi∣ties to promise, in recoveries to forget; what shall we say but as Italians do, Pas∣sato il pericolo gabbato il fanto: And you shall perceive by our proceedings, what justly may be required, is easie to be done, and done if her Majesty deceive her self, and with irresolution make all Princes understand, that there is no certainty in her Majestie nor her Councel, but dalliane and farding off of time; her Majestie shall first discredit her Ministers, which is not much; but next, and by them, discredit her self, to be counted as uncertain, irresolute, unconstant, and for no Prince to trust unto, but as to a Courtier, who hath words at will, and true deeds none. Your Lordship must pardon me, for I have here kept so long, that I am now in an Ague, both in body and spirit: nor seeing no cause why Mr. Beal cometh not, nor any reason shewed neither in her Majesties Letters nor yours, why he doth not come; as the humours in my body maketh an Ague in my bo∣dy, whereof I would it should make an end; so this irresolution there with you I hope will help to conclude, that I shall feel no more miseries, which I fear those that come after us shall feel, Quia non videbimus tempus visitationis nostrae. Thus I commit your Lordship to Almighty God. From Blois this Good-Fri∣day, 1571. Because the French King doth deal so plainly, faithfully, and frankly with the Q. Majestie at this time touching the matters in Scotland, I pray move her Ma∣jestie to deal as frankly with him, and let de Crocque be privy to your Instructi∣ons, and let them be conformable to his; and if he shall think so meet, you may add more to them, for they would have the Commission to be, joyntly to doe, and with common consent, all things. To my Lord Burleigh. MY very good Lord, With much difficulty at the last we have concluded the League, and r. Walsingham and I were fain to stand even to the brea∣king of all together. The last Instructions seemed to us so precise for the Scotch matters, we taking them as concluded between the Queens Majestie and Mr. de la Mot their Ambassador Resident there, that he did not so conclude, nor had no such authority, but that it was referred again to us. In fine, after five or six daies debating, the 14 of this month we came to this▪ We yielded to put out, and in those words as be in the Instructions, as de la Mott required, and to change one or two more which varied not the sentence, but made it more clear▪ and remitting to us the last Article of reservation to the Scots; we remitted also to them the 24. because we would once be at a point. And where reservation is needless in a League defensive, where is o derogation to other Leagues defen∣sives;
yet we would not that the Queens Majestie should seem any more to relent to them, then they to her Highness. All the rest they accorded to us as we would desire, and in all points as is required in her Highness Letters to us, as ye may perceive by the Treaty, and by our demand in Latine; and that which we followed▪ or gave us reason, why not; which we send unto you; indeed that word present, is not so necessary nor effectual: for when we speak Statum Scotiae; and if you put praesentem, and now it is in trouble, and doubt may be made whe∣ther you would maintain the troubled State or no; and so present shall be, De∣terminatio diminuens, as homo furibundus, seminectus, moribundus, moriens & somniens, for so is a Commonwealth in sedition. And again, when you say Con∣tra publicas Soctiae Leges consuetudines & Parliamenta, it is understood by common sense, praesentes, for Laws and Statutes abrogated or antiquated, be not Laws; so they confessed unto us that they got nothing by putting out prae∣sentem, or praesentis; but that it lay not so open unto cavillations, as though they should by special words maintain the troubled State, or allow the Parlament, whereby the Queen was deprived, and the King allowed; although indeed in ta∣cite they would not deny but it was allowed; and in the plain sense of the words wherein they said they did much for the Q. Maj. that they were content to make no mention of the Q. of being so their friend and allie, but gave her over to the Q. Maj. and in all things relent to her Highness desires, so they may have any colour to sve the K. their Masters honour. Likewise where the maintaining of Rebels, done by the Scots, and the expulsion to expell them, was set in the writing as a thing confessed, both by the King here, and the Q. Maj. they would have the rehersal made, as of her Majesties relation; and yet the thing done as her Highness requireth, as you see in the Treaty. These things when they come to conclusion, your wisdom knoweth be not to be sticked upon; so that the Q. Mo∣ther with her Honor hath done all that is desired of her Highness. And as I hope and trust, the best League that ever was made with France or any other Nation for her Majesties surety. As yet we have not signed the Treaty, but to morrow or the next day we shall have. There hath been such variance betwixt us for some words, and somewhat for slowness of Writers. Thus in few words you have the reasons of our variances and agreements, so that with the said, and other which your Lordship can adjoyn, all doubts and objections if any, may be answered. And so I commit your Lordship to almighty God, from Blois, April 17. 1571. To my Lord Burleigh. MY very good Lord, After the dispatch of our Post, this here inclosed was brought to us to look upon, to know what we thought upon it; we answer∣ed, for us we could not judge, but her Majestie had well considered of it, and we doubt not, will either signe to the like as it is, or with some other amendment; but because the League is concluded and signed, we have no more to do. D Florence brought it, and was content to leave it with us, the which we thought convenient to take of him and send it your Lordship by Cavalcant, somevvhat to consider of it before, for their Ambassador shall present it to the Q. Majestie, to have the like of her Highness. Mr. Cavalcant also doth partly understand the reason of it, vvhich is to satisfie such as would be glad to find any cavellation to mislike the League. And therefore for our part vve vvish that her Majestie should condiscend to so much as conveniently her Highness may do, because the King here dealeth so frankly and roundly vvith her Majestie.
And straightly after that I had written so farr, came Monsieur—brother, and brought us a copy of a League in French, and also of the reciproque Letters for the explication of the general words thereof, to be understood also in matter of Religion. This League in French serveth for three purpose; the one, the King here understands French, and not Latine; the other, for the aid of horsemen and footmen. The Latine at this day is forced to signifie the manner as it is now dif∣fering, although it be the manner of the Romans: the French is proper to the or∣ders of the War at this day, which be better known by that Language now then by Latine. Now you having both, the one may serve for the interpretation of the other; although the very League is that which is in Latine, and signed with ll our hands and Seals. Thus I commit your Lordship to Almighty God. From Blois, April 22. at night. To my Lord of Burleigh. MY very good Lord, I most heartily thank you for your Leters of the 28 of April, wherin I greatly rejoyc'd that du Crocque is sent at the last into Scot∣land; the staying of him was not well taken here, for it bred some suspicion as of no plain dealing; and the King here meaning surely, for any thing I can yet per∣ceive, nothing but sincerity and plain and faithful dealing towards her Maj. is a∣gain for his part suspicious; but I wil not swear for his Councel: within these three daies there was a Letter of du Crocques to the King, sent from the Court hither to Mr. de Montmorency and du Foix, who sent to us immediately du Florence, com∣plaining very much that du Crocque had written to the King that he was in de∣spair of his going into Scotland, he thought verily the Q. would not let him go. This thing somewhat amazed us both; but so soon as we received your Letters, which was yesterday the 8 of May, and with them a Letter of Iohn Woods, that du Crocque went into Scoland in May; we went streight to visit the Marshal and du Foix, imparted to them the news we knew, and especially that du Crocque was gon; we shewed them also the Articles propounded by her Maj. and their answers of the Castle, wherein they might understand how sincerely the Q. Maj. meant. Be∣fore du Crocque came, they all liked very well, yea and also that de la Mott and du Crocque did accept instead of that 5 Article, and they doubted not both the Prin∣ces once binding themselves together to set a quiet in that Realm, both the parties must needs content themselves to yield to reason. And if the young King be esta∣blished there, as I have often written, the K. here, and the wiser of his Councel do desire no other. Marry he must not seem to be the doer of it, nor the condemner of her cause. As for those Articles, neither I nor . Walsingham, as we told plainly, and I am sure Mr. du Foix will say as much in England, did neither allow nor dis∣allow, for we had no Commission, as we said; and because it was referred to her Maj. we could not but leave them whole and intire for her Highness to judge up∣on. I marvel my L. Admiral is so long before he set forward; Marshal Montmo∣rency and du Foix, and all that should go with them, be ready, and attend only to hear when my L. Admiral doth set forward. A man would marvel what a number of great persons both of the long and short Robe, do desire to go with the Mar∣shal and to see England, and what shift he is fain to make to cut off his train, and shake them off that desire to go, let he should have too many; he is surely a great Prince here, marvelous wel belov'd, and one that loves the Q. Maj. and our Nation as much as any Noble man in France. I hope the Q. Maj. will give him the Order at his being there, that he may follow his father therein; he will esteem it much: and I know not how it cometh to pass, here is a rumor already spread, that he a∣mongst
others, was elected on S. Georges day, and your Lordship also, whereof I pray God give unto you long joy, and many years to wear that Order. I am glad the Treaty is liked. Now it cannot be said her Maj. is altogether alone, having so good a defence of so noble, couragious, and so faithfull a Prince of his word, and so near a neighbour, provided for and bespoken before hand against any need, partly that, and partly the trouble in Flanders, which I trust God hath provided to deliver his poor servants there from the Antichristian Tyranny, shall make her Highness enjoy more quietly both England and Ireland, and a better neighbor of Scotland. Thus I commit your Lordship to Almighty God. Paris, May 7. 1571. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to understand, that the last of this month the Mar∣shal Montmorency will be at Bulloign with his Train, who is glad to have the commodity to pass over in her Maj. ships, Mr. de Battail is dangerously sick in this Town, and is not in case to pass over at this present. The 19 of this month, when we went to take our leave of the Marshal, he shewed unto us that certain Englishmen had made means unto him to go over with him, whom he refused, unless they could bring testimonial from us that they departed the Realm with her Maj. favour and licence, notwithstanding I judge there are some under the co∣lour to be of his Train, that wil pass over; wherfore I thought good to advertise your Lordship, to the end there may be some order taken in that behalf. There is one Chambers a Scotchman, somtimes a Mr. of the Requests in Scotland, who in Sir Hnry Norris his time was a great doer for the Duke of Chastelheraud, he came over in Mr. de Foix Train, whom I made privie that he was not very grate∣ful to her Maj. and therefore wished him to leave him behind him; he shewed, that though heretofore he hath not bin the best instrument in the Scotch divisions, yet he now wisheth nothing more then accord, wherein he promiseth to do his ut∣termost, and thinketh he may be able to do a great deal of good; whereupon he hath made choice of him at this present, for that he thinketh that if du Crocque do no good in the appeasing of the Scotch troubles, that then the Kings pleasure is to imploy him in that behalf; not withstanding he telleth me that his meaning was never to have him with him into Scotland, if percase he shal be imployed in that behalf, without making her Majestie privy thereof; for that the King his Mr. hath no other meaning but to consult in common with her Maj. touching the best means to appease the said troubles; for the best justifying of the said Chambers, he did protest unto me most earnestly, that both the Cardinal of Lorrain, and the Bi∣shop of Glasco, did what they could by their friends in Court, to impeach that Chambers might not go. If du Crocque do no good, I hope her Maj. shal find Mr. de Foix a very good instrument in those affairs. Touching Flanders matters, if the long gowns had not done somewhat to im∣peach them, the matters had bin so forward, that the Spaniards had never landed in Zealand to have hindred the siege of Middleburgh. I hope shortly to send you word of somewhat done and put in execution to divert the said Spaniards, for that I think it necessary for her Majesty to know how this thing past; I mean to ad∣vertise often when any thing hapneth worthy of advertisement: Count Lodovick departed this Town the 19 of this month, with whom I have placed Mr. Morgan, who will advertise from time to time how things do pass: and so having nothing else to advertise your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris, May 21. 1571. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham.
To the Right Honorable Fr. Walsingham Esq her Majesties Ambassador resident in France. SIr, I have long forborn to write to you, partly for want of leasure, partly for lack of special matter. I doubt not, but others do certifie you of our Parliament proceedings, wherein there can be found no more soundness then in the common house, and no lack ap∣pearing in the higher house, but in the highest person such slowness in the offers of surety, and such stay in resolution, as it seemeth God is not pleased that the sure∣ty, shall succeed. To lament that secretly I cannot forbear, and thereby with it and such like I am overthrown in heart, as I have no spark almost of good spirits left in me to nourish health in my body, being every 3d day thrown down to the ground, so as now I am forced to be carried into the Parliament-house, and to her Maj. pre∣sence; and to lament it openly, is to give more comfort to the adversaries. These are our miseries, & such as I see no end thereof; and amongst others, shame doth as much trouble me as the rest, that all persons shall behold our follies as they may think, imputing these lacks and errors to some of us that are accounted inward Counsellours, where indeed the fault is not; and yet they must be so suffered, and to be so imputed, for saving the honour of the highest. I think to send you pre∣sently the Commission to authorize you for treating of the Merchants causes, not determined by the Treaty, but hitherto I am not informed how to instruct you; for indeed I see no likelihood of any great moment thereby, so are our Merchants affected to traffique by the Low Countreys, or to Germany. My L. Admiral meaneth to be at Dover the last of this moneth. At some length I have obtained the suit for you to the Q. Maj. which this day I will deliver to M. Dodington, who surely hath as much care of you, as if he were your brother, or your servant. Le Crocque is in Scotland, where I think he shall do little good. The matters of the Low-Countreys were hot awhile, but now the Flemings are be∣come cold. The Duke incroacheth upon them of Zealand, having by the treason of the Townsmen in armour, recovered it, and put in Garisons of the Spaniard. Now notwithstanding Flushing, which is not well governed for lack of a head, we have suffered as many of the strangers to depart from hence as would, but that is but a simple help. If the Prince of Orange doth not follow this opportunity, his case will never be recoverable hereafter. From S. Iames the 21 of May, 1572. Yours assured, Will. Burleigh. I pray you send me a particular declaration of the states and degrees of the principal persons that come with Montmorency. To the Right Honourable, and his very friend Francis Walsingham Esq Am∣bassador for the Queens Majestie in France. MR. Walsingham, I have received your Letter touching my boy Clark, I would have him again by his own submission, for he hath made often means, but in no wise will I receive him so, for I stand to have him otherwise, that others may fear to attempt the like, when they shall perceive the friendship that I shall have there; for it is not so much for his excellency, or that I mean to make store of him again, but rather to make him an example to run from his Master: Therefore I pray you be most earnest to have him delivered. As for Religion, upon my cre∣dit he never knew what a Papist was till he came there, from his cradle he hath been bred a Protestant, but his brother served me thus before, which if I can∣not, it will make me think unkindness, and shew as little friendship, if ever like cause serve on this side. Our news is, we are presently in hand to attaint the Scotish Q. of treason, and yet we fear our Q. will scant agree to it. Great suit is made by the nether house to have execution of the Duke, but I see no likelihood. I have no leisure, therefore I commit you to God. In haste this 21 of May, 1572. Yours assured, Ro: Leicester.
To the Right Honourable his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. YOur Lordships of the 21. I have received touching your servant; I shall not need say more then was contained in my last Letters. Here at this pre∣sent we are altogether entertained with Flanders matters, having received cer∣tain news from thence, that certain by order from Count Lodovick, are seised of Valentiennes and Monts in Henault, where it is said the Court remaineth, and that from thence he sent Mr. de la Nue in great diligence towards Bruxels with six hundred horses, where if he hap to find the Duke de Alva, he hopeth to make short Wars, the Town of Bruxels being better affected to the Count then to the D. It is said here that Doway and Lisle should also be taken by cer∣tain appointed by him for the purpose; but that is not certain. If the Duke of Alva retire to Antwerp (as it is thought he will) then those of judgement here are of opinion, that the whole Country will revolt. The heads of those that he doth imploy of his Country are, Ianlis, de la Nue, Buckanans, the number of his horsemen are twelve hundred, the most part of them Gentlemen. Of footmen he hath only five thousand, the most part of them Gascoins. It will shortly be seen to what issue this Tragedy will come. If occa∣sion so fall out, I mean to advertise often, thinking it necessary for her Majestie to know how things proceed there; and yet when I consider how things of mo∣ment tending to safety proceed at home; I know not what to judge necessary, unless it be for every man particularly to provide for the cross. And so leaving further to trouble your Lordshop at this present, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the 29 of May, 1571. Your Honours to command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. AS I wrote unto your Lordship in my last Letters, that I thought it necessa∣ry for her Majesty to know how things proceeded in Flanders, so I thought good to put the same in execution at this present upon certain advertisements lately come from thence. A Currier past this way, as I am credibly informed the 27 of this month, sent by the D. of Longueville to the King, with this news, that on Saterday last the 24 of the same, Valentiennes should be taken, and the next day after Monts in Henault; and that from thence with great celerity the C. Lodovick should send five hundred horse to Bruxels, under the conduct of Mr. de la Nue, where if he hap to find the D. of Alva, it will grow to short Wars, in respect of the intelligence they have with the Town, who undertook with the aid of 100 soldiers, to take the D. prisoner: if he retire to Antwerp (as it is thought he wil) then is it likely that all the whole Country will revolt. I the rather credit this news for that it agreeth with the plot laid by C. Lodovick before his departure from hence, who told me that he hoped to give the Duke of Alva an alarm ere 8 daies came to an end, in place where he should least look for it. There will shortly be great guess given what wil be the event of these matters. The Prince of Orange most assuredly is onward on his way with 4000 horse, whose enterprise on the other side is like to have the better success upon this good beginning laid by his bro∣ther.
I hope things will be so ordered, as others shall not grow over great, wherein I have been no evil instrument. I send your Lordship by this bearer, a note of the names of those of quality which doe accompany the Marshal, as also the number, which I had sent before with this bearer to deliver a note thereof to such as shall be appointed by her Majestie to receive the Marshal at Dover. M. de Battali, who was the third Commissioned, is departed this world, who before his death did much lament the dissembling of his religion, and advised to resort to the reformed Churchs, and to bring up his children in the Religion pro∣fessed in the same. I forgat in my last that Mr. Montmorency at the request of certain Italians, whom he favoureth, moved me to write unto her Majestie that it would please her to write a Letter unto his Master, desiring him to write unto his Ambassa∣dor at Rome to deal with his friends there to procure the delivery of Guidi Gio∣vetti, who is imprisoned there by the Inquisitors; a thing, that his service done unto the Crown of England, did as it were crave at her Majesties hands, who he knew being naturally pittifully inclined, would do any thing that might seem to tend to his delivery. For mine own opinion, I think her Majesties Let∣ters unto Queen Mother, would do a great deal more good, who by the Duke of Florence his means, may bring it the more easily to pass, especially this Pope being his Creature. And so leaving to trouble your Lordship any further, I humbly take my leave. From Paris, May 29. 1571. Yours Honours to command, F. Walsingham. To our trusty and well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esq our Ambassador Resi∣dent with our good brother the French King. TRrusty and well-beloved, we greet you well. Where in the last Treaty concluded at Blois betwixt our trusty and well-beloved Councellor Sir Th. Smith, and you as our Ambassador, and the Duke of Montmorency, and other of the Commissioners and Deputies of the French King our good brother, it was amongst other things covenanted, That within four months after the date of the said Treaty, the same should be by us ratified, authorized and confirmed by our Letters Patents, signed with our own hand, and sealed with our great Seal, and de∣livered to the Ambassador of the French King, having authority to require the same. For this purpose we would first have you to understand of some of the Kings Councel, or of the Queen Mother, the Kings pleasure at what time you might attend on him to receive the same ratification. For the receiving whereof you shall say you are authorized by our Letters directed to the said King, being in your custody (which we therefore do now send you) and so you shall at time convenient receive it, and safely send it to us, affirming that we on our part are also ready to deliver the like ratification to his Ambassador whensoever he shall require the same. Given under our signet at our Mannor of St. James, the 26 of May, 1571. ELIZABETH. ELizabethae Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, & Hiberniae Regina fidei Defensor, &c. Fideli & praedilectissimo Consiliario nostro Francisco Walsingham Le∣gato nostro apud serenissimum potentissimum & principem fratrem nostrum cha∣rissimum Gallorum regem residenti salutem. Cum in tractatu qui inter Legatos nostros ad praedictam Principem missos, ejusque serenissimi Regis Deputatos
intercedit de amicitia & pace renovanda & augenda, quae inter praedictum regem & nos nostraque regna dominia & subditos existit certi articuli de mercatorum no∣strorum hinc inde comerciis & negotiatione propositi fuerint, de quibus prope∣modum quidem inter utrumque convenit nisi quod ante praefatam rei consum∣mationem necessarium sit quosdam tàm à nostro, quàm à praedicti regis parte constitui, qui cum mercatorum prudentium consilio deliberent, sintne illi articu∣li satìs ad rem aptè & amplè compositi, an vero alios quosdam immitores adjici ex∣pediat, quibus commercii & negotiorum, ratio commodius regi & exerceri possit. Nos igitur de homine ad hanc rem idoneo cogitantes, deque tua prudentia virtu∣te, industria, & in res nostras fide confidentes, & mandatorum procuratorum seu deputatum, nostrū creamus & constituimus per praesentes, ut cum consilio princi∣palium nostrorum, si qui in illis partibus fuerit, & cum Regis praedict. de∣putatis agas, tractes, unaque cum illis ea consideres & statuas quae ad cotinuen∣dam & augendam commercii & intercessus necessitudinium necessaria vidbuntur. Itemque de mertium, vectigalibus, tributis, porteriis, impositionibus, iisque con∣ditionibus quae ad mercatorum & comertii libertatem, & securitatem pertinebunt rationes ineas. Deque iis omnibus nos certiores facias, ut re prope inspecta & considerata quod é re fuerit decernamus & concludamus quod ipsum simile à dict 'regis Legato hic fiet, qui simile vicissim ab ipso rege mandatum habiturus est. Et generaliter ut ea omnia tractes & facias quae ad hanc rem necessaria erunt, in tam amplis modo & forma, ac si in singulis magis speciale Mandatum haberes. In cujus rei testimonium has litteras patentes ieri & sigilli nostri impressione communi missimus. Dat. in Regia nostra sancti Jacobi die mensis Maii, Anno Dom. 1572. Regni vero nostri 14. Instructions given to the Earl of Lincoln, Lord Admiral of England, and one of the Lords of her Majesties privy Councel, appointed by her Majestie to re∣pair to the French King in Ambassage, and at his arrival at Paris, or else∣where, to be assisted for the execution of the matter underwritten, with Sir Th Smith, Chancellor of the Order, and Fr. Walsingham Ambassador resident for her Majesty with the French King; at St. Iames, May 25. 1572. THe said L. Admiral shal have with him both Commission under the great Seal of England, authorizing him and S. Th. Smith, and Fr. Walsingham, and Let∣ters also to require the French K. to confirm the last treaty concluded at Blois by his oath, whereupon he shall proceed first after his access to the K. obtaining by the Ambass. resident for the demand of the said oath, as is meet for the honor of the League of amity now concluded between their Maj. using therein all good speeches to assure him, that according to such express words as are contained in the same Treaty, for a mutual love and amity to be hereafter used and maintained between them, her Maj. is fully bent in her heart to maintain the same on her part, the rather because she doth assuredly hope that the K. wil do the like: whereof his Maj. by his Ambass. that he hath sent in the time of the late Treaty and negotia∣tion of the same, shewed many manifest arguments of his own special favourable directions of matters at sundry times resting in doubt between her Commissioners and his Maj. to more reasonable ends, as appeared, then otherwise would have ordered by his Ministers. And so the L. Admiral having in this manner assured the K. of her Maj. ful and resolute determination to imbrace and hold fast this mu∣tual amity; he shal say that his coming thither is to visit the K. on her Maj. behalf, and to attend upon his leasure and best oportunity to be present, and to receive the K. oath to be made for ratifying of the said Treaty, according to a clause in the said Treaty for that purpose. And when the K. shal have accorded thereunto, the
said L. Admiral shal before hand, percase by som privat conference had with some of the Secretaries of the State, how, and in what sort the ceremonies therof shallbe observed, so as the proceeding may be at the time at the solemnity thereof without any alteration. And for the better proceeding herein, the Lord Admiral shall have with him both Articles of the Treaties requiring the said oath, and the manner & form of like oath given by the said K. heretofore in like cases. And the instrument also to be demanded in writing, for testimony of the said oath, with such other things as are thereto requisite, so as the like manner may be used as near as may be agreeable to former usages; and that there be with him present to assist him, S. Th. Smith, and the Ambass. resident, if they may be there to help. And as for the place where the said oath should be given, the said L. Admiral shal not refuse any that the K. shal appoint, foreseeing only that he be not by reason thereof compelled to be present at any Mass to be said for the purpose; but if it be in Church or Chap∣pel, he shal not refuse to require to take it in the same. Furthermore, although there is no other cause special of the sending of the L. Admiral at this time to the said K but to require his oath; yet for that there may be many occasions offered of speeches in the matters, where it shal be looked for that the said L. Admiral should answer the said K. to his satisfaction. Therfore he wil in these things follow∣ing, accommodate himself as hereafter is mentioned; wherein the said L. Admiral shal as occasion shall serve, take the help of Sir Th. Smith, who is also herein well acquainted. In the matter of Scotland, although the said L. Admiral be privy in what sort her Maj. hath hitherto proceeded, so as he may by consideration thereof, conjecture what is likely further to be her Maj. meaning: yet to make her case the more plain, he may wel hold opinion tht her Maj. meaneth not any thing more then that the Realm of Scotland may be brought to quietness, and remain free from any invasion of any stranger, wherby the liberty of that Crown and Na∣tion should be impaired. And he may wel remember of his own knowledge, how often times since the Scotch Q. coming into our Realm, we have bin wel disposed to have obtained an accord betwixt her and her Subjects; but always when we were most earnest to have done her pleasure therein, she was most ready to practice against us, as it seemeth, not satisfied with the recovery of her own Country, with∣out the practice, also she might have ours, as by most manifest proofs the said L▪ Admiral and Sir Th. Smith also can avow to be ready to be shewed, whereupon her Maj. hath been forced for her safety and weal of her Realm, to take another course. And therfore as for the government of that Crown and Nation, her Maj. finding it certain that the 3 Estates of the same did in ful Parlament accept the Q. of Scots division of her Crown to her son, and that thereby he was Crowned and invested according to the ancient Laws of that Realm, and that he is so acknow∣ledged by the said Estates and the whole people (a very few persons for their par∣ticular quarrels excepted) her Maj. finding in her such dangerous ingratitude, mea∣ning in her self not to direct any other orders in the said Realm, then she findeth by her own Law, having also so good and just occasion to detain the said Q. as she doth. Upon these considerations she hath indeed concluded, and meaneth hereaf∣ter to continue her favour towards that K (the nearest kinsman she hath, and in profession correspondent) to all such as have acknowledged his authority, and so shal therein continue; wherupon the said L Admiral who is wel acquainted with this cause, shal also say to the K. that if it please him to do the like for the K. he shal best thereby recover a common peace to that Land, and the attempt of such as seek to withdraw that Nation from the ancient amity that hath been, and yet continueth betwixt the Realm and the said K. Crown, shal thereby be made fru∣strate, and as occasion shal serve to this purpose, the L. Admiral may truly in∣form the King, how the Q. of Scots of late time, both by sundry her own Letters
to the D of Alva, and by her Ministers to the K. of Spain, laboured to intice the said K. of Spain to attempt the same, with plain assurance that she will not in any wise depend upon the French K. but hath wholly given her self, her son and Realm so far forth as she can, to the said K. of Spain; and to that end, hath done her utmost to move the said K. to send forces into England, to joyn with such as she promiseth shall be ayding thereunto surprize her son, and to carry him into Spain by sea; according thereunto the D. of Alva hath sent several men to peruse the ports in Scotland for that interprize. Of these and such like things the said L▪ Admiral can and shal of his own knowledg, inform the said K. and thereby move him not to be abused by any her other offers to him to the contrary thereof; and shall plainly let him to understand, except he shall take this plain way to restore that Realm to a common peace, the said Q. will do her utmost to make it a prey to others. As for the person of the said Q. of Scots, he may declare, how well she is treated for her diet and other things meet for her health, howsoever the contrary may be reported; so she may at her pleasure take the air on horseback, so she doth in com∣pany of the E. of Shrewsbury; & for her diet, it is such, as her own Ministers do and will prepare, without respect of charge; only it is prohibited, that no strangers shall have liberty to come to her, to practise with them, as she hath long time used; and yet it is found daily, that she doth not cease by letters and messages to solicite all manner for things for her purpose, as by the interception now and then by her letters and messages is to be seen, amongst which are found these her continual labours to procure her son to be stollen & taken away into Spain, besides the con∣tinuance of her former dangerous practises attempted against the Q. Maj. and her Realm. And howsoever the Q. Maj. hath used a notable clemency and remisness towards her, in not using such revenge hereof as she well might, and she thinketh no other Prince would in like case forbear; yet the said L. Admiral shal shew to the K. with great earnestness her Estates now assembled in Parliament, have and do so∣licite her Maj. both in respect of her Maj. and the whole Realm, to proceed against the Scotish Q. by order of justice, for her attempts against her Maj. person, & the state of the Realm, wherein her Maj. is so perplexed with the incessant clamor and request of her people in this behalf, as indeed she is marvelously therewith trou∣bled; for as of her own nature her Maj. hath bin always found even in her own most private causes, and where her person hath been in danger, not given to shew any vehemency, or to pursue avenge, so to refuse the universal motion, the general ad∣vice & exhortation of her States, she thinketh it no smal hazard of their love which they bear towards her; & what may happen hereof, the L. Adm. may say, is doubtful. And to the intent the L. Admiral may in this cause of the Q. of Scots, particu∣larly shew how contrary to all deserts of gratitude and favor meant towards the said Q. by the Q. Maj. she hath been by her not onely ungratefully, but also most dangerously dealt withal; and thereby, as it were by extremity of her malice intend∣ed against the Q. Maj. she hath been forced to change her course, and regard her own safety. The said L. Admiral may cal both to his remembrance and conference Sir Tho: Smith of these things and their circumstances; that is, first of her secret seeking of the marriage with the D. of Norfolk, without her Maj. knowledg, at that time that her Maj. was travelling to compound her causes with her subjects; and af∣ter that her Maj. had imprisoned the said D. for that attempt & that her practises in the same were discovered, and therewith not unknown to her Maj. what comfort she had given to her Maj. subjects to enter into rebellion as they did; & being sub∣dued and forced to fly, were openly maintained in Scotland, by the Scotish Q. means. It is yet notorious, how her Majestie by sundry solicitations, partly of her self, and partly of the French King and his Ministers, was content, as it were, to bury the former notable injuries, and did newly eter most earnestly to
treat with her subjects for restitution, & left no good means unassayed, neither by request nor threatnings to move them to accept her Maj. earnestness; then which the Nobilitie of Scotland professing obedience to the King her Son, that her Ma∣jestie plainly charged them, that if they would not condescend to her moti∣ons for her, she would utterly abandon them, and rather be a party against them: Whereupon they were entred into such hard terms, as they answered, that they would so persist in their obedience to their King, as they would ven∣ture their lives in the quarrel. And yet finally, by some perswasions, they were induced to accord with her Majestie, that a Parliament should be holden with such speed as it might be, and there these her Majesties motions were pro∣pounded, and certain persons should have authority to treat hereof with her Majesties Councellours: Whereupon her Majestie did look for some good suc∣cess, and before it could be granted thereunto to proceed, her Majestie disco∣vered daily most dangerous attempts of Treason, both against her Person and Realm, wholly and onely set forth by the said Queen of Scots. And her Ma∣jestie found these new Treasons intended, and almost brought to their mischievous perfection, by not onely renewing of the former marriage with the Duke of Norfolk, and by giving order for a Rebellion and Invasion of this Realm. All which was by her devised, set forth and delivered to be executed even in the very same time that her Majestie did deal so earnestly for her with her Subjects, and was in hope to have obtained some reasonable end for her: So also did she now discover the truth of her former practises in stirring of the first Rebellion, onely to have by force obtained the marriage, and with the same force sought the Crown. All the which attempts the said Lord Admiral and Sir Tho: Smith can orderly declare, and so they shall do. And they may well say, That her Maje∣stie cannot think any person to mean well towards her safetie, that would after these things thus notified, move her Majestie to hold her former course in favour of the said Scotish Queen: And this hath been the cause why her Majestie hath not (since this last discovery of these dangers) in such sort answered both to the King and his Ministers upon their motions made in her favour. And the Lord Admiral shall conclude, that seeing the case is thus, that to shew such favour to the Scotish Queen as is desired, is most dangerous to her Majesties Crown, and her Majestie cannot like of any motion to hazard her own Estate: And besides, the things intended by the Scotish Queen against her Majestie, it is apparent she doth wholly give her self to the Duke of Alva, and to the King of Spain; which as it is many waies fully to be proved, so may the Lord Admiral say, That he can make it manifest by her own hand writing; for which end he shall shew to the King a Letter of hers in Cypher to the Duke of Alva: All which the Lord Admiral shall shew to the King, to this end, that both he may see the just causes her Maje∣stie hath to hold the course she doth, and that he also wil not molest her Maj. with any motions tending for favour of the Scotish Q. so greatly to her Maj. danger. And to the matter of le Crocques stay here for a time, before his departure in∣to Scotland, if any mention be thereof made by the King, the said L. Admiral can tel the occasion thereof to have grown of the letters which le Crocque brought from the King to her Majestie in favour of the Scotish Queen, for her liberty and return into France, notwithstanding the king had been duly informed by her Majesties Ambassador, that her Majestie could not with her surety suffer the same. And threfore at that time she could not think that le Crocques negotiation coming with such letters, could tend to pacifie the Realm of Scotland for her Majesties surety, when before his nlay he was found to have charge from the Q. of Scots. If any motion be made to the L. Admiral of a matter lately devised to offer to her Maj. Marriage with the Duke of Alanson, the L. Admiral may well say, that he hath no charge to speak thereof at this time; but he may say, that he is willed, if
occasion be so given to him to report what he heard her Majestie say, that he was not so well used in the Treaty for the other brother the Duke of Anjou as was meet, in the time of motion made for Amity, both by that marriage and other∣wise; for that Monsieur de Foix being in England, and dealing therein, her Ma∣jestie did proceed honourably and plainly with him, and with the French Ambas∣sador, that she would not assent to marry with him, or with any other, that would not consent with her in Religion, contrary to the order of the Realm; or at the least, that would use any other Religion in any sort, then might stand with the Church of God; whereupon her Majestie was by them pressed but to consent to a sufferance of some secret usage of his Religion without offence of the Realm, until he might be otherwise induced and perswaded in conscience. It may be remembred, that when her Majesties Ambassador made a report at de Foix return of her Majesties answer, the King seemed not willing to receive that answer, but that he desired that some might be sent to commune thereof with him, who should find that the matter should be made clearer of these diffi∣culties; whereunto when her Majestie did not fully consent, it was afterward by the Ambassador Resident oftentimes pressed, that her Majestie would send some special person of trust for her self to the French King, promising her Majestie, that this matter should be facillitated, and made easie to her contentation. Accord∣ing whereunto, her Majestie, upon many solicitations, specially by the said Am∣bassador in the King his Masters name, did send Sir Tho: Smith, to understand the Kings meaning herein, who can best tell, how at the first entry he was answered with a direct contrary course to her Majesties expectation, and otherwise then was mentioned by any Ambassador that ever treated therein with her Majestie, or that ever Monsieur de Foix did ever speak or require; which was, that Mon∣sieur de Anjou would in any wise have the exercise of his Religion here in Eng∣land, in like sort as he had in France: A matter strange to be heard at that time, when her Majestie was provoked to send one, with hope that in the case of Re∣ligion she should receive such an answer as should content her Majestie. Of this matter the L. Admiral shall inform himself more largely of Sir Tho: Smith, to the end that if the same be communed of, he may both with the King and the Queen Mother so deal, as it may be seen to them that her Majestie had cause to think very strangely thereof: And were it not that she is entred into a streight Amity with the King, she might justly challenge lack of friendship herein, but so as the King be not ignorant, but that her Majestie hath cause to think her self not well dealt withal, she is content to pass it over, without keeping the same in memory to nourish any unkindness. And so the L. Admiral shall use his speech, that the King may not think his speech to move any new offence. Furthermore, the said L. Admiral shall in all his speech with the King, and also with the Queen Mother, let it appear how much her Majestie esteemeth sundry offers made to her by the Kings Letters to his Ambassador here, of daily increase of this Amity now newly established between them. And though her Majestie doth not percase so often answer these his kindnesses in words or writing, yet he shall be assured, that whensoever occasion shall be given to shew the like affection in deeds, she will not be behind him. Besides the letters to the King and Q. Mother, he shall have also her Majesties letters to the Q. of Navarre, whom he shall visit, and most heartily salute in her Majesties name; and let her understand, how glad he Majestie is, and doth thank God for the benefit of the Peace, which he hath given to her, and to all others, that now of a long time have for defence of their consci∣ences suffered great calamities with her, wherein surely her sincerity and constan∣cy hath won to her no small honour in the world; but most of all, the blessing of God to indure with her and her posterity. And next to this, her Majestie doth rejoyce that she hath so wisely and honourably considered of the marriage of the
Prince her Son with the daughter of Fance, whereby both the good love of the French King to her Estate shall probably have continuance, and her self shall live by Gods grace, to see the good success of her son in her own time, to her comfort. The said Lord Admiral shall also give the Admiral of France, and others of the Nobility joyned with him, to understand how glad her Majestie is of the con∣tinuance of the Pacification of their troubles, and doth hope, that they will let their sincerity and their good meaning appear so to the King, as he may comforta∣bly continue his favours towards them, and that their adversaries, who have here∣tofore slandered their actions, as though they had not been founded upon consci∣ence, may be ashamed to have abused themselves; and so shall the honour of God indeed, by their manifest and good conversations increase, to the confusion of them, that by untruths have maliciously sought to keep the same under, and to oppress it. And for the House of Guise, the L. Admiral shall not forbear to sa∣lute them of his own part, according to their degrees, if he shall see that they give countenance to him as to accept it. And if any of them shall motion matters to him, as of the Q. of Scots, he may say, if she had been counselled by her friends to have been grateful to her Majestie, or to have forborn the seeking to offend her Majestie, she might thereby have done her self good, and been the cause of quietness to the Countrey; but she hath so manifestly taken other courses, as sure∣ly either her friends that evil counselled her, or her self, must be accounted the principal cause of her trouble. And so he shall use his speech of her. These instructions the L. Admiral shall communicate with Sir Tho: Smith and the Resident Ambassador, and upon the sight of them Sir Tho: Smith shall un∣derstand it to be her Majesties pleasure, that he shall accompany and be assistant to the L. Admiral in the time of the Kings giving of his Oath. And when the L. Admiral shall have done his Commission, and delivered the rest of his charge con∣tained in these Instructions, the said Sir Tho: Smith shall no longer abide in France, but shall return at his most commodity. Postscript. In the matter concerning the offer of the marriage of Monsieur Alanson, if there∣of any speech be used by the K. notwithstanding the former Instruction in the ar∣ticles above expressed, how to answer to the K. upon some consideration thereof. The L. Admiral shal at the first say, that although he hath no chargeto treat there∣of, yet he is willed by her Majestie to give them thanks for the desire it seemeth he hath to have alliance with her Majestie by marriage, as not onely shewing her own disposition towards her Majestie, at which time his youth seemed to be im∣pediment; and now secondly for his brother Monsieur d' Anjou, wherein also the inequality of years did at the first stay her Majestie, wherein also she did over∣come her judgement by perswasion, and rested in the end upon the matter of Re∣ligion, which of all other things, is the greatest stay that can be; and now the motion of the yongest brother cannot in her opinion, by reason of the inequality of years, but make a full stay in her Majestie, as she thinketh the same ought al∣so to work the like in the judgement of the King, and of the Queen his Mother. And having said this, then may the said L. Admiral proceed to say somewhat, as is above prescribed, of her Majesties misliking for the dealing in the cause of Monsieur de Anjou, using the same nevertheless, as it breed no offence in the King. W. Burleigh.
To my very Friend Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador for the Queens Majestie in France. SIr, I heartily thank you for your Letters of the nine and twentieth of the last, and specially for that which you write to her Majestie. As to the matters of the King of Spains Low-Countreys, we have great cause to bear a jealous coun∣tenance thereto; for as being in the Spaniards hands, we lacked Traffique with surety; so if the Maritine part come to those where you are, not onely the Traffique into those parts, for our Merchants will be regulated by them, but our soveraignty upon the narrow Seas will be abridged with danger and dishonour. And notwithstanding this, I see lack of disposition to provide the remedy where it should chiefly be, and I trust with importunity, we that see into the perils, shall obtain somewhat; if not, our consciences shall be quiet, though our minds shall not. As to your Letters to her Majestie, forasmuch as the Duke of Norfolk had suffered upon Munday, and your Letters came on Tuesday, I thought it not amiss to tell the Queens Majestie that I had Letters from you to her, which I thought were onely to shew her the opinion of wisemen, and her Majesties well∣wishers in France, both for the Queen of Scots and the Duke of Norfolk; where∣upon she bad me open the letters, and so I did in her presence; and she being somewhat sad for the Duke of Norfolks death, I took occasion to cut off the reading thereof, and so entred into speech of the Queen of Scots, which she did not mislike, and commended your care and diligence. As for the party your dear friend, I did not speak with him, nor he never accompanied me, nor once ever spake one word to me of the matter, as he was wont to do in other matters, I disallow not his private affection to the party, but his judgement I do dissallow in preferring private to publike. I do return to you the Commission amended in your name, which was the errour of the writer; you may proceed thereto as you see time. The French Ambassador hath no Commission to require the like, looking for it, as he saith, when Montmorency shall come, whose delay proves an unreasonable charge to great numbers to the Queens Majestie, having her offi∣ces of Houshold at Dover, and her provisions thereby lost. The Earl of Pembroke, Lord Windsor, and the Lord Buckhurst be at Dover with great and mighty trains: Besides, hither are come such leavies of Ladies to attend, as husbands curse the delay. The Queens Majestie is in health. The Scotish Queen shall be touched with an Act of Parliament, but it will not draw her to any more fear to offend then words will do. From S. Iames the sixth of Iune, 1572. Your assured loving Friend, William Burleigh. To my very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Esq her Majestes Am∣bassador Resident in France. MR. Walsingham, forasmuch as my Nephew Philip Sidney is licensed to tra∣vel, and doth presently repair unto those parts with my Lord Admiral, I have thought good to commend him by these my Letters friendly unto you, as unto one I am well assured will have a special care of him during his abode there. He is young and raw, and no doubt shall find those Countreys and the demeanors of the people somewhat strange unto him; and therefore your
good advice and counsel shall greatly behove him for his better direction, which I do most heartily pray you to vouchsafe him with any friendly assistance you shall think needful for him. His father and I do intend his further travel if the world be quiet, and you shall think it convenient for him, otherwise we pray you we may be advertised thereof, to the end the same his travels may be there∣upon directed accordingly. As for the boy Clark, since I cannot obtain him as I desire, I must content me. I wish I had one of my Lord Cardinals Monks, to see how devoutly he should be kept here. But I pray you let it appear that it is great unkindness for one Nobleman to use unto another. The boy hath sought sundry ways to return unto me, as well by Letters to his Friends, as by supplications to my self, but I mind not to have him so. The cause that I did so earnestly seek him, was to punish him in example of others, which if it will not be, I will leave it for a time, and hope to give you knowledge where he is short∣ly, trusting you will give order that he may be suddenly apprehended. And thus being forced to trouble you with a tritle amongst so many great causes in these days, with my commendations, I bid you most heartily farewel. From the Court the six and twentieth of May, 1572. Your very Friend, Ro. Leicester. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT hath pleased my Lord of Lincoln to promise me, upon his experience had of the intollerable charges here, through the daily increase of death, to confer with your Lordship, in what sort he may best deal with her Maje∣stie for increase of my diet, considering otherwise that I shall not be able to hold out, my monethly charges drawing now to two hundred pounds the moneth, notwithstanding my diet is thin, my family reduced to as small a proportion as may be, and my horse being onely twelve. These things might seem unto your Lordship altogether incredible, were there not so many Noblemen and Gentlemen to witness the same by their experience lately had of the extreme dearth here. I have made my Lord acquainted how much I am bound to your Lordship, and of the fatherly care it pleaseth you to have of me; and that therefore I have besought him, in moving or not moving her Majestie, to yield to such directions, as by conference, it shall seem good unto you to give him, for that I would be loth to procure any thing to be done, that may not fall out to your Lordship contentation. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave, From Paris the two and twentieth of Iune, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham.
To my very loving friend Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador for the Queens Majestie in France. SIr, I cannot let any your servants pass hence without some word. I have look∣ed for some knowledge of my L. Admirals arrival at Paris, and thereupon stayed to send away this bearer until now that I hear by the French Ambassadors Letters, hovv my Lord and you have been feasted and entertained, which they here do give out with large speeches, but how indeed the same is warranted I know not; sure I am, that they have been so feasted and entreated, as none in my memory hath been greater. The Queens Majestie before she gave her oath, made a protestation, that she was not in mind to break any jot of the Treaty, and though the Castle of Hume, and Fast Castle were not delivered, yet the fault was not in her; for she had propounded to the Lord Hume, and to the Regent al∣so, her disposition to deliver it; but the Lord Hume, required that her Majestie vvould keep it still, rather then deliver it, so as it bred not an increase of their hateful dissention. And hereupon her Majestie hath propounded to the Regent to be content that the Lord Hume may have it, if he will be content to acknovv∣ledge the King; vvhich the Lord Hume offereth in vvords, but the Regent saith that the Lord Hume hath promised to offer his obedience to the King, to re∣cover his houses, and then he will ayd them of the Castle, and this is indeed discovered to be true. Besides this, Fast Castle was in my Lord Humes hands but as a Tutor to an infant, who is come to full age, and followeth the Kings part. Truly you may thus report to the King, and assure him, that her Majestie meaneth not to keep the one, or the other, although she might pretend matters against the Lord Hume, for the damage that he did to England, in keeping the Rebels in those Houses, and invading the Realm. From Westminster, in haste, the twentieth of Iune, 1572. Yours assuredly William Burleigh. The form of the Communication with the D. Montmorency, de Foix, and de la Mot, which they had to finish matters expressed in the Treaty, Iune 1571. pre∣sent the Lord Keeper, the Earls of Suffex and Leicester, the Lord Chamberlain and Burleigh, Mr. Comptroler, Sir Ralph Sadler and Sir Walter Mildmay. THe French by de Foix required, That the Scotish Queen might have some favour, upon the conclusion of this Treaty betwixt the Queens Majestie and the French King, and that such favour might be shewed, as might be granted with the surety and honour of the Queens Majestie. That a surcease of Arms might be made in Scotland, and thereupon a Parliament in Scotland, and concord to be made for the State and Realm. And if a Parliament could not be conveniently had, that then there might be sent hither from both parties, some persons to treat here a London with Deputies of the Queens Majesties and the French Kings. That some order might be made concerning the establishing of a Traffique for Merchants in France, wherein the French shewed themselves ready to assent
to assent to all reasonable requests; and for that purpose they produced and de∣livered a Commission under the Great Seal of France. Answers to these Points. This case was not pursuant upon the Treaty. The Scotish Queen had more favour then she deserved, or then did well stand with the surety of the Queens Majestie. Her evil parts against the Queens Maje∣stie had been amply declared to the French, and to the D. Montmorency and de Foix in France by our Ambassador. The Nobility also and People now as∣sembled in this Parliament, had considered that the Queens Majesties surety could not be preserved, without some severe proceeding against the Queen of Scots, whereunto her Majestie had not yielded in such extremity. And so the Scotish Queen had more favour indeed then either she deserved, or then was thought meet by the whole Realm. The second, for surcease of Arms; her Majestie had done therein as much as possibly she could by her Minister Sir Will: Drury, which she hath sent with le Crocque; whereunto the Ambassador did assent with very good words of Sir Will: Drury. To the third, it was thought, that no Parliament should be holden whilest they were on both sides in arms, and therefore the procuring of persons to come was not misliked. To the fourth, the Merchants should be spoken withal, who had but small liking to any trade of Merchandize with France, by reason they had by experi∣ence some evil usage of them in France, specially at Roa. Replies of the French, with some new matters. As to the Scotish Queen, de Foix confessed, that he had no warrant to speak for her, by force of the Treaty, but by a special commandment apart. And as to specifie the requests that be made for favour to her; they said, they meant no favour to be shewed to her, against the Queens Majesties surety; and therefore they desired only these things following, That she might have brought to her all things necessary for her apparel, and money also for the purpose. That she might have a convenient number of Servants about her. That her state might not be impaired. That the Duke and the rest might be licensed to send to her certain letters from the French King and Queen Mother, so as the same might be done with the privity of the Earl of Srewsbry. As to the Commerce, they agreed, that it might be treated upon by the Am∣bassador Resident. New Additions. That according to the second article in the Treaty, they might have the Queens Majesties Letter answerable to the Kings Letters. That the third Article, concerning the manner of redress of wrongs done by Scots men upon England, that the same might be altered according to a writing which was devised by them to insert in the place of the said Article.
Answers to the new Requests. They should have the Queens Majesties Letters. The Article, as it is, ought to continue, and is reasonable, having respect to Scotland, when private men do great injuries and spoils, which if the King of that Realm cannot or will not amend, of necessity the Kings of England must revenge upon the offenders. To the Right Hononrable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. YOur Lordships of the twentieth of Iune, sent by my servant Williams, I have received, touching her Majesties protestation before the giving of her oath. For the not delivery of Hume and Fast Castle in Scotland, according to the Treaty, I will not fail to inform their Majesties, when fit occasion shall be offered of the cause thereof. The Ambassador of Scotland, with the Lord Graunges brother, since the Earl of Lincolns departure, hath been often at the Court, and are very importunate to have somewhat done for their Mistris: As also, in perswading their Majesties here, to consent to the establishment of their Government of their said Mistris; what their importunacy hath won, I know not as yet, but surely I fear, as long as the woman liveth, there will never grow good accord in Scotland, nor continuance of repose in England, nor perfect and sound amity between her Majestie and this Crown. What is resolved here touching the enterprise of Flanders, this bearer is through∣ly instructed, who is to impart the same unto your Lordship. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the eight and twentieth of Iune, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. THis bearer cometh so throughly instructed touching the state of the Coun∣trey, and the Flanders proceedings, as I forbear to trouble your Lordship to make recital of that by writing, which he shall tell you by mouth. After your Lordship hath throughly debated with him, I hope it shall manifestly appear un∣to you, that upon the good success or evil success of this common cause of Re∣ligion. And besides, the same not well proceeding, her Majestie cannot promise to her self any great safety, having so dangerous a neighbour, whose greatness shall receive no small increase, if he overcome this brunt. I pray God therefore that her Majestie may incline to do that which may be for her safety. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, referring you wholly to this bear∣er, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the eight and twentieth of May, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. MAy it please your Lordship to understand, that upon advertisement come hi∣ther from Flushing, of the discords there for want of good Governor, they have made choice of Monsieur Iunius, to go thither out of hand, with Commission to establish some policy there, until the arrival of the Prince of Orange his brother. He shall also have Commission for the sale of such goods as were lately taken. For his better assistance in this behalf, desireth your Lord∣ships letter unto Captain Morgan, there to assist him what lieth in him, in the execution of the said Commission; and that further, it would please your Lord∣ship to admonish him to retain his Souldiers in such order, as may answer to the defence of a good cause. For that he desireth very much to confer with Mr. Kille∣grew, to make him fully acquainted with the state of their cause, he meaneth to repair to Dover, and there to imbarque, where he hopeth to meet with him. I perceive by him, that if there be no assistance given underhand by her Maje∣stie, they shall be driven to yield to such inconveniences as shall be laid upon them by this Nation. And further, that they shall be forced to consent to have Strozi in Zealand, unless they may have some supplies elsewhere: For this cause chiefly the Gentleman, who wisely respecteth the liberty of his Coun∣trey, and foreseeth the mischief that may follow, if the necessity be not relieved, disereth much to confer with Mr. Killegrew, a thing most necessary, and would himself repair to London, but the discords raigning presently in Flushing, cannot abide a long delay of redress. And thus having nothing else whereof to adver∣tise your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the second of July, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Fra: Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. I Hope your Lordship, upon report made unto you by Mr. Beal, of the present state of things here, how matters fall out in Germany, and how necessary a thing it is that the Enterprize of Flanders should not be slacked, both in respect of the common cause of Religion, as also of her Majesties safety, will not suf∣fer that the same shall lack any ayd of assistance that your Lordship can yield. Upon report come hither of the disorder at Flushing for lack of a good head, there is choice made of Monsieur Iunius, whom your Lordship knoweth is servant to the Count Palatine, to repair thither to reduce the loose and disor∣dered Government there to some better form of Policy; as also, to take order for the sale of the goods lately taken, that the same may be imployed in the maintenance of the cause, and not converted to private spoil. And because he may receive assistance in this behalf of such of our Nation as are there, he de∣sireth me to procure your Lordships letters to Cap. Morgan to that effect; as also, to advise him to keep his charge in such warlike Discipline, as may appertain to the furtherance of so good a cause, which beside the reputation will grow un∣to him thereby, his travel and hazard shall not be unconsidered by the Prince of Orange.
Mr. Iunius meaneth to imbarque at Dover for Flushing, where he desireth to confer with Mr. Killegrew before his imbarquing, whom he will make acquaint∣ed in what state things presently are. As he himself is one of the Low-Coun∣treys, so doth he wisely desire the liberty of the same, in such sort, as by re∣moving of one evil, they may not draw on themselves another no less pre∣judicial; surely, unless some assistance be given underhand, necessity will in∣force them to yield to some great inconvenience. And so thinking this suf∣ficient in this behalf, I most humbly take my leave, leaving further to trou∣ble your Honour. From Paris the second of Iuly, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To my very Friend Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador for the Queens Majestie in France. SIr, now that D. Montmorency is gone, I thought good briefly to write some∣what to you by this bearer the French Ambassadors servant, because none of yours are here that I can learn of, nor any other so ready as this bearer is. The Duke with all his train, to the number of forty, have been entertained here for their meat and drink each in their degrees, as it is to be affirmed, that the like hath not been seen in any mans memory. The honour also done to him hath been such, as surely her Majestie could do no more; I mean, in her courteous usage of him, in appointing sundry sorts of the Nobility of the high∣est sort to attend on him, onely the difference from my Lord Admirals inter∣tertainment was, that no other Lord but my Lord of Leicester did feast him, as in France was done; saving I did upon Midsummer even feast him and all his Gentlemen with a Collation of all things that I could procure, being not flesh, to observe their manner. As for his reward, though it be not so great as I wish it had been, yet this it was, the D. had a Cupbord of Plate gilt, of — a great Cup of gold, of a hundred and eleven onces, and Monsieur de Foix had a Cupbord of Plate of — This for their rewards. Now Sir, afore there going hence, they had done what they could in the mat∣ter of the D. D'alanson, whereunto they had neither yea nor nay, but a de∣lay onely for one moneth, which they interpreted diversly. They mentioned certain things, which I do send you here in a Paper inclosed, with that which was answered. I also send you in another writing other things at their depar∣ture, whereunto as we gave them answers, so shall you also receive note thereof. I am willed to require you, to use all good means possibly to understand what you can of the Duke D' Alanson of his age in certainty, of his stature, of his conditions, his inclination to Religion, his devotion this way, the devotion of his followers and servitors, hereof her Majestie seeketh speedily to be adver∣tised, that she may resolve before the moneth. And surely I cannot see in her any lack towards this, but in opinion for his age, which defect, if it might be supplyed with some recompences it were meet to be thought of. I could wish we might have Callis to the issue of their bodies, and he to be Governor thereof during his life, so as we might have security for our Staple there. I wish also, that secretly the Queens Majestie might be assured, that (although there be no contract, therefore) that he would here no Mass after his marriage.
If somewhat be not advised to recompence the opinion that her Majestie con∣ceiveth, as that she should be misliked to make choice of so young a Prince, I doubt the end. Now for our Parliament, I cannot write patiently; all that we laboured for, and had with full consent brought to fashion, I mean, a Law to make the Scotish Queen unable and unworthy of succession of the Crown, was by her Majeste neither assented to nor rejected, but deferred until the Feast of all Saints; but what all other wise and good men may think thereof, you may gess. Some here have, as it seemeth, abused their favour about her Majestie, to make her self her most enemy. God amend them. I will not write to you who are suspected. I am sorry for them, and so would you also, if you thought the suspicion to be true. Your assured loving Friend, William Burleigh. To my very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Esq her Majesties Am∣bassador Resident in France. MY Lord Ambassador, This day my Lord Admiral came to the Queens speech, and reporteth well of his entertainment there. I am sorry that the opinion groweth here of the French Kings recoil from the Flanders enter∣prize, it breedeth coldness here. Some that are come home bear us in hand, that 3 reneweth the in o A. D. F. 4 whereby the last matter B 9 is hindred; I marvel much therefore indeed  is more given to Millane 4 then to 5 And I am commanded to write to you hereof, and to require some answer of your opinion, which I pray you do with all good haste that you can. I see no means, by worldly means, but Florence in 3 God send it some way. I have done my best, as by others, you shall perceive an end for you, with your Mr. Worseley, whom I found wisely and wilful, but I provided convenient medicines for him, and so his humors were altered. Fare you well. From Westminster the fifth of Iuly, 1572. Yours assuredly William Burleigh. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. YOur Lordships of the second and fifth of Iuly, sent by the Ambassadors ser∣vant, I received the tenth of this moneth, by the which I was glad to hear the particularities of the royal entertainment of the Marshal Montmorency, who ar∣rived the self same day I received your Lordships Letters. He omitted no occa∣sion to set out the great honor he received at her Maj. hands, and withal so good, as never able to yield the like. The like speech passes from the rest of his train, who all returned very well satisfied, and cannot speak too much good of her Majeste. The day following after his arrival, Queen Mother sent for me, and shewed me how the King her son, who was gone to S. Germains, desired her to send for me, and to request me on his behalf, to render unto her Maj. most hearty thanks for the great honor and good entertainment given unto the Marshal, which he could not but interpret as a manifest argument of her Majesties unfained affection and
good will she beareth him, the which he desireth to will me to assure her Majestie that she should find him ready to serve and honour her during his life. Further∣more, she willed me to shew her Majestie, both on his behalf, and hers also, that they pray God to direct her heart to yield to that resolution in the marriage late∣ly propounded, as might be to the increase and establishment of perfect Amity between the Crowns, which thing they saw so necessary for both, as they could not but wish and desire most earnestly. And yet notwithstanding they protest∣ed, that if they did not think the issue thereof would fall out to her good satis∣faction and contentment, they would in no case wish nor desire the same. Touch∣ing the particularities that her Majestie desired to understand, of the age, stature, conditions, religion, affection towards her Majestie, and devotion of his followers and servants; your Lordship shall understand, that first touching his age, as I was informed, he was born the five and twentieth of April, 1555. his stature and proportion of body, the Lord Admiral, Sir Tho: Smith, Mr. Killegrew, and other of the Gentlemen that are here, can better express by word of mouth, then I can set down by paper. Touching his conditions, since the matter hath been in motion, I have used what care and curiosity I might, to be informed of them; I find generally this opinion conceived of him, that he is of as good and tracta∣ble a disposition as any other, either Prince or Gentleman in France; and with∣al, is both wise and stout, and subject to the French lightness, insomuch as they do apply to him the French Proverb, Qu'il a de plume en son cervean, besides, the general opinion I find the same confirmed by the Admiral, Count Rochfoucouls, Tilligny, Bacquenaunt, and divers others of the best judgement of the Religi∣on, with such earnest protestations, as for mine own part, I cannot but credit the same, knowing what testimonies they have given to the world of ther zeal and Religion. And as for the Admiral debating with him in this matter, he hath protested sundry times to me, calling God to witness, that if he did not think the match proceeding would prove both honourable, profitable and comfortable, and for her safety, in respect of the doubtful terms he standeth in, he would not ad∣vise her unto it for any worldly respect. And as for his Religion, they have great hope, grounded upon good conjectures, that he is easie to be reduced to the knowledge of the truth; and for mine own part, I have many great reasons to induce me to think, that if there be no other impediment then the use of his mass, that he will be easily induced to the same. Touching the affection towards her Majestie. I am credibly informed, that where it hath been objected unto him, that he would be glad to have the title of a King; he protested, that if he were not moved with the great and honourable report of her Maj. rare vertues, more then at any desire he had to a Kingdom, he would never have desired the King nor the Queen his Mother to have made any motion thereof. Many ways am I given credibly to understand, that his affection is unfained and great. Touching the devotion of his followers and servants to the propunded match. I am also credibly informed, that they do also earnestly desire the same, especially those whose advice he chiefly useth; who though they be not of the Religion, yet are they not enemies to the same, and rather incline that way then otherwise, of the which a dozen of them were discharged of his brothers service in respect thereof. This is that in sum which truly and sincerely I can learn in that behalf. Touching Callis, the Admiral made some overture at my request, as a moti∣on that proceeded from my self. He findeth in their Majesties no disposition to yield thereunto. I used some speech thereof also with de Foix, and shewed him, how that nothing would yield so much furtherance as the same. We did at large debate that matter Pro &. contra; in the end, he protested most earnestly, that he thought he knew it impossible to be brought to pass; notwithstanding,
he could be content to devise any other thing that might breed satisfaction to her Majesties opinion conceived of some misliking that would grow by her choice of so young a Prince. In this behalf, saith he, I have said lately so much to her Majestie, grounded upon good reason, that I see no cause but she should rest there∣with satisfied. In debate of this matter, he asked me, whether her Majestie would not be con∣tent (as I thought) having already foot in Flushing, and the match proceeding, to have the King pass in the Contract and Article, to bind him and his Successors to assist her, aswel for the conquering of the rest of the Island, which would be more profitable to your Countrey then ten Calis's. Of this thing (saith he) I have no Commission to make any overture, as that thing that hath not yet fallen into consideration, but onely I propounded it by way of communication, in re∣spect of desire I have to devise some remedy for the recompence of her Majesties opinion. Notwithstanding, saith he, I have some reasons to lead me to think her Majesties yielding content to her match, that the King will be easily induced thereto. I shewed him, that as I had no Commission to make any overture, so had I no Commission to answer the same, as a thing propounded unlooked for, not∣withstanding, I agreed with him in opinion, that Flushing would be more benefi∣cial to us then Calis. To come to your Letter of the fifth of this moneth, I find the conjectures touching the 3 reneweth the in o A D F 4 altogether false and vain, whereof I am assured of the contrary many ways, and do much marvel what reason should move them that so bear her Majestie in hand, and so to think, having no other ground thereof but such vain conjectures. Thus having made answer to such things, as by you were propounded on her Majesties behalf, I most humble take my leave. At Paris the thirteenth of Iuly, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. YOur Lordship by this inclosed Letter sent from Ennius the Count Palatines chief Counsellour, unto Dr. Innius, which I had Commission to open; as also another sent unto him from the Count himself, may perceive how the Prince of Orange proceedeth in his doings; as also, that the Forces of the Duke of Alva, so much talked of, are not in so much readiness as was spoken of. I do much marvel that the Duke of Holst, being her Majesties Pensioner, and knowing in what doubtful terms her Majestie stood with the King of Spain, will in any way yield to serve the Duke of Alva. I hope your Lordship will deal earnestly with her Majestie for redress thereof, the rather, for that it is con∣ceived that the said Duke will have some occasion to deny the same. The sight of the said inclosed Letter which I send unto your Lordship to com∣municate with her Majestie, hath given them here no small incouragement to proceed in yielding assistance as they made underhand. The stay of their linger∣ing in that behalf proceeded, for that they wished Don Iohnd' Austria on his way towards Morsa, before they made any great demonstration to be any deal∣ers in the said enterprize: For the help and better disguising of this matter, there was proclamation made, for revoking such of the Kings Subjects as were already at Montz; as also, inhibition for any other to repair thither, upon forfeiture of
life, lands and goods; and another Edict also was published, to prohibite the Kings subjects not to buy such goods as lately were taken by them of Flushing. The King is so far forward in this matter, that no disguising will serve, neither her Majestie in policy, considering underhand those that are gone to Flushing may suffer the cause to be abandoned, especially for that her Majestie lately, to the grief of as many as love her both at home and abroad, hath forborn the ne∣cessary use of the remedy offered to bridle the Queen of Scots practises, which received there from Spain 13 in talk with me about this matter, shewed me, that he hath declared his opinion since his return, that it behoveth both his Honour and the Queen my Mistris, to consult joyntly in the maintenance of the Prince of Oranges enterprize; for that otherwise he saw many reasons to induce him to think, that it would be dangerous to them both, specially for her Mejestie, considering the practises that raign in her Countrey. And so ceasing to trouble your Lordship any further at this present, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the thirteenth of Iuly, 1572. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. SInce I last wrote unto your Lordship, there arrived here a Gentleman, sent hither from the Prince of Orange; who brought word, that the eight of this present the said Prince passed the River of Rhine with seven thousand horse, and fifty Ensigns of footmen, and that about the fifteenth or sixteenth of the same, he was to pass the River of Mose, at a Town called Ruremond, which Town, together with another called Venlo, is at his devotion. It is thought that he will march toward Holland, there to receive money for the payment of Rey∣sters, as also to plant Garisons in such Towns as are revolted unto him. There arrived of late here a Gentleman that is come from Constantinople, from the Kings Ambassador there, who reporteth, that the preparations that the Turk maketh for the next year by sea are very great; that he promiseth this King of money, if he will break with Spain; that he is content that the King shall be a mean to accord the difference betwixt him and the Venetians. Other particula∣rities he brings, but these be those of most importance. The Venetians, as I hear, do find themselves agrieved with the King of Spains dealing towards them, therefore it is thought, that they will grow to accord with the Turk, espe∣cially upon the evil success that lately they have had at the siege of Caselnuovo. They write from Antwerp, that Chiapina Vitelli should be hurt with a Harque∣bush in winning of Moniz, and that he is in peril of his life. For Italian news, I refer your Honor to these inclosed Occurrents. And so I leave further to trouble you, most humbly taking my leave. At Paris the eighteenth of Iuly, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to understand, that the eighth of this moneth the Prince of Orange passed the River of Rhine, at a place beneath Cullen, cal∣led Asburgh, and that about the fifteenth or sixteenth he determined to pass the River of Mose, at a place called Ruremond, which Town, with another cal∣led Venlo. scituate upon the said River, is at his devotion. This news is brought to this Court by a Gentleman sent hither by the Prince himself: His Army consisteth of seven thousand horse, and fifty Ensigns of footmen. It is thought they will march towards Holland, with intention to plant Garisons in such Towns as are revolted to him; as also to receive money there towards the payment of his Army. It is thought here for certain, that Ianlis hath either fought, or is ar∣rived in safety at Montz. Upon advertisement come lately out of Italy, that Don Iohn d' Austria is not yet departed, they make fair weather with the Ambassador of Spain, who in outward shew doth bear them in hand he believeth all they say. There is great suspicion that Florence 4 is underhand enemy to these wars, but dare not shew for fear of A. who doth very much affect it, otherwise all had quail∣ed long sithence. Rome 3 is not free from suspicion. There is lately arrived a Gentleman sent hither from the King Ambassador at Constantinople, who giveth to his very friends these particularities: First, that the Turk maketh great preparations by Sea for the next year, greater then any of his Predeces∣sors ever made. That he offereth the King here great sums of money to break with Spain. That he remitteth unto the Kings hands the according of the difference be∣tween him and the Venetians. Other particularities he giveth out, but these are of greatest weight. As I learn, the Venetians are so weary of Spains promises, as they will not be loth to agree upon any hard conditions. From Antwerp they write, that Chiapini Vitelli in viewing Montz, hath received an Harquebush shot, and is in danger of his life. The Ambassador of Florence doth what he can to excuse the loan of Wm unto the Duke of Alva. It is thought for the help of this matter, that his Majestie can be content to lend asmuch to the con∣trary party. And so for forreign news referring your Honour to the Italian Oc∣currents, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the eighteenth of Iuly, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to understand, that the King dispatched one Monsieur de la Mole servant to Monsieur le Duc d' Alanson, with Letters from their Majesties here unto the Q. Majestie, to render unto her thanks for the rare entertainment and great honour done unto the Marshal; as also, to give her no∣tice of the marriage to be solemnized between the King of Navarre and the Lady Margaret, I think also, he hath Letters from his Master to her Majestie, as also some charge to say somewhat to her on his behalf.
He gave me but Scarborough warning, and therefore your Lordship must bear with these scribled lines. The Gentleman is a Provintial, and so of a very good House, and a very well qualified Courtier, as I hear. Yesterday I wrote at large unto your Lordship by Hollingshead, who is returned by way of Diepe: And therefore I defer to trouble you with many lines at this present, I most hum∣bly take my leave. At Paris the one and twentieth of Iuly. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leceister. BY a Gentleman called Monsieur de la Mole, servant unto Monsieur le Duc D' Alanson, sent by the King to her Majestie with Letters, I had very short warning given me, and therefore am driven to afford your Lordship the fewer lines. The pretence of his coming, is with letters of thanks for the ho∣nour done unto the Marshal; as also, to make her Majestie acquainted with the appointed time for the solemnization of the King of Navarres marriage. But I take it, the chief end of his coming is to present his Masters letters unto her Majestie; as also, to say somewhat unto her on his behalf. The Gentleman is a Provintial, and of a good house, and one, as I learn, very well qualified. Touching Flanders matters, I wrote unto your Lordship at large by Holling-shead, who departed yesterday homewards by way of Diepe. And so leaving to impart unto your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the one and twentieth of Iuly. Yours Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to understand, that a certain Scottishman called George Torris, who appertaineth, as he saith, to the Q. of Scots, hath of late robbed here in Paris one Emanuel d' Ambugo a Portugal, who heretofore about ten years past, hath been imployed in message between the King of Portugal and her Majestie, as by his passport may appear. Now for that he is given to un∣derstand, that he is retired into England, he hath desired divers Gentlemen of this Court to request me to write unto your Lordship, that by your good means such as he shall appoint to pursue the party, may have authority so far forth, as may stand with the Laws of the Realm, to arrest him, and such goods and Jewels as shall be found to appertain to the said Portugal. To this effect and purpose, he hath likewise procured the Kings Letters here. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour in this behalf. I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the 22 of Iuly, 1572. Yours Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable, his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer. TOuching the particulars of Ianlys overthrow, I refer your Lordship to such incertainties as I have set down in the inclosed occurents. Such of the Religion as before slept in security, begin now to awake and to see their danger, and do therefore conclude, that unless this enterprise in the Low Coun∣tries have good success, their cause groweth desperate. They have therefore of late sent to the King who is absent from home, to shew him, than if the Prince of Orange quail, it shal not lie in him to maintain him in his protection by vertue of his Edict: they desire him therefore out of hand to resolve upon something that may be of his assistance, offering themselves to imploy therein their lives, lands and goods. They see by the assistance given on the other side, as by the Pope, Florence, Triers, Baviers and Clleyn, who are not otherwise interessed in the Low Countrey, or in this Cause, but in respect of Religion, who proceed roundly and resolutely in the matter, that unlesse her Majesty and the Princes of Germany in like sort joyn with this Crown, there is great doubt what shall be the even of this enterprise: They have therefore requested me to desire your Lordship, as you tender Gods glory and her Majesties safety, to see if you can induce her up∣on overture first to be made by the King in this behalf, to joyn with him in yeild∣ing assistance. They think to make the—so that they might be in some assu∣rance that her Majesty would give ear thereto. They have also dispatched one of late to such Princes of Germany as favour the Cause, to provoke them to proceed more resolutely and roundly in this matter, laying before them the evident dan∣gers that otherwise will ensue. By one lately come from thence they understand that the said Princes begin to see the danger, and are well bent to do any thing that may tend to remedy. The parties above written desire to know with some speed how her Majesty will incline to the said overture, for that thereafter they are to direct their affairs. As I was writing I received the copie of a letter sent from Mounts, which I send to your Lordship here inclosed, by the which you may both perceive the state of the Countrey, as also how many are retired thi∣ther of Ianlys company. And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, beseeching God to bless you in your late honorable Calling, with as good success as ever any that occupied that place, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the 26 of July, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. YOur Lordship by these inclosed occurrents may perceive that Ianlys is over∣thrown, whose—it never could but breed danger to the cause, so could it never breed more danger then presently upon the presently upon the Prince of Orangs first entry into the Country, a mean to discourage him and to encourage the ene∣my. How much his well doing or evill doing importeth us, I need not say any thing to your Lordship, the thing being so apparant: how dangerous it were to suffer him to quail, it is no less evident, how little hope there is he shall receive re∣lief from us, especially from the news of this overthrow, it grieves me not a little to think of it, considering what dependeth thereon, and I hope God will make my fear vain. To suffer him to miscarry, knowing our own danger, were to lack both policy and magnanimity. We cannot deny, but upon that that lately hath been
discovered, that if God had not raised up the Prince of Orange to have entertain'd Spain, a dangerous fire ere this time had bin kindled in our own home. To assist him therefore, is to assist our selves, for that we are to run one fortune with him, the difference is, that by miscarrying, the mischief shal first touch him, and then conse∣quently as many of us as profess one Religion with him, for the supply that is gi∣ven by the Pope, Florence, and divers Catholique Princes in Germany, sheweth that the quarrel is mixt, and consisteth as well of Religion as o state. They fail not to make demonstration thereof, and therin they shew their courage and eal, con∣traiwise, we do things underhand, and thereby do discover both lack of zeal and courage. No Councellors enterprise accompanied with fear had ever good success, for there can be no greater enemy to sound councel then fear. The Gentlemen of the Religion here, since the late overthrow of Ianlis, weighing what dependeth upon the Pr: of Orange overthrow, have made demonstration to the King, that his enterprise lacking good success, it shal not then he in his power to maintain his Edict. They therefore desire him to weigh whether it were better to have forein war with advantage, or inward war to the ruine of himself and his Estate: The King being not here, his answer is not yet received. They hope to receive some such resolution as the danger of the cause requireth; in the mean time the M. desired me to move your Lordship to deal with her Majesty to know whether she upon overture to be made to the King, cannot be content to joyn with him in assistance of this poor Prince, seeing that as well in Estate as Religion, it doth so neerly touch her. Surely though it import the King very much to look to it, yet it importeth more her Majestie, who is to look for nothing else (Spain over∣coming this brunt) then the extremity of such mischiefs as he can work her. (My good Lord, therefore as you never lack'd to further such causes as concern Gods glory and her Majesties safety; so I do not doubt but that you will with that care and courage which this weighty cause requireth, yield what aid and assistance you possibly may. And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris the 26 of July, 1572. Your Honours to command, F. Walsingham. By the QUEEN. To our right trusty and well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esq our Ambassador Resident with our good brother the French King. ELIZABETH R. TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well. Where at the being here with us of the D. of Montmorency, he & du Foix, after their other ordinary mat∣ter of ratification of the Treaty passed over, did many times very earnestly deal with us, and in like manner with sundry of our Councel, to move us to incline to an offer of marriage; which the French K. and Q. other willed them to make to us for the D. of Alanzon, and that we found the matter somewhat strange, con∣sidering some things past not in good order, as you know in the matter of like of∣fer for Mr. de Anjon, wherein the said Mont. and his Colleague laboured much to satisfie us, but especially considering the youngness of the years of the Duke of Alanson being compared to ours; so for those respects, although we could give them no answer of comfort to content them, yet such was their importunacy in reciting of many reasons and arguments to move us not to mislike thereof, in respect as well of the strength of the friendship which this amity should give to the continuance of this last League and Confederation, as also of the wor∣thiness
of the said D. of Alanzon for his excellent vertues and good conditions which they alleadge to be in him, with sundry other arguments tending to re∣move the difficulties, and to gain our contentation and liking of the said Duke. And in them, after their many conferences had both with us and with our Coun∣cel, when we perceived them very much perplexed to see our strangeness from assenting to their desires, and how loath they were to have any flat denial; we were advised to forbear from making of a plain refusal, and to expect the return of the Lord Admiral, by whom, and by others of his company, we might understand what might be further conceived of the personage and conditions of the said Duke. And so our answer to them at their departure was this, That we found such difficulties in this matter, specially for the difference of his age, as presently we could not digest the same; but such was the importunacy of our own subjects of all estates to have us to marry, as we would forbear to give any such resolute answer as might miscontent the said Ambassador; and as we knew would much grieve our people at this time, and so we would take some further time to be ad∣vertised of the matter. And after one months space we would make a direct an∣swer to the French King, which also we would first communicate to the said D. of Montmorency, to be by him, if he so would, delivered over to the said King. And so with this answer they departed; whereupon after the return of our Admiral, we have considered with him, and with some others that were there, by whom we find that indeed the conditions and the qualities of the said D. as farr forth as they could by their observation gather, or by report of others understand, were nothing inferior to M. de Anjou, but rather better to be liked; but as to his visage and favour, every body doth declare the same to be far inferior, and that specially for the blemishes that the small pox hath wrought therein, so as his young years considered, the doubtfulness of the liking of his favour joyned therewith, wherin no body that hath seen him can otherwise report, although otherwise to all pur∣poses he is commended before his brother; we cannot indeed bring our mind to like of this offer, specially finding no other great commodity offered to us with him, whereby the absurdity that in the general opinion of the world might grow, to commend this our choice after so many refusal of others of great worthiness, might be counterprised, or in some manner recompenced. Wherefore according to our answer made to the said Ambassador, we have determined that you shall in our answer made to the said Ambassador, we have determined that you shall in our name say as followeth to Montmorency. Or if he shall desire that you your self (considering the answer is not plausible) shall make it to the King, then you shal so do, requiring him to be present, and to move the King and his mother to interpret the same to the best, as indeed we mean it plainly and friendly; and then you shal say that we have considered of the matter of the Kings offer unto us of M. de Alanzon in marriage. And for the same we do most earnestly thank the King and the Q. Mother, knowing manifestly that the same proceedeth of ve∣ry manifest good will, knowing perfect continuance of the amity lately contra∣cted between us by this last Treaty. And considering we have great desire to have the same amity continued and strengthned, we are very sorry to find so great difficulties in this matter that should be a principal band thereof, as we cannot di∣gest the inconveniences of the same, by reason of the difference of our ages to assent thereunto, praying the K. and his Mother to assure themselves that there is no lack of desire in us to continue, yea if it might be to increase this amity that maketh us think of the difficulties of this offer, otherwise then we think all others do consider thereof, and most conceive, which proceedeth almost onely of the difference of the age of Monsieur de Alanzon, and ours a mat∣ter that cannot be remedied, either by the King his brother that de∣sireth the match, or by us, so as the lack of not perfecting this band of amity
after this manner, cannot be imputed to either of us, nor to the party himself, of whose conditions and vertues, truely you may say we hear so well, as we cannot but esteem him very much, and think him very well worthy to have as good fortune by marriage as he, or any other might have by us. And you may say, if you so see cause, that although we might have known thus much as con∣cerning his age when the Ambassadors were here, and therefore might at that time have given them that answer, and not thus to have deferred it untill this time, yet to satisfie the King therein, you shall say, True it is, that although we our selves were of this mind from the beginning, to think the match incon∣venient for his age; yet at the being here of the Ambassador, we were conti∣nually laboured by our Councel, and also by our Estates then assembled in Par∣lament, in laying open before us the necessity of our marriage, both for our own comfort, and also for the weal of the Realm; and some of them alleadg∣ing unto us that there would be no such difficulty in this matter of his years, but the evil opinion that might be conceived thereof in the world to our lack, might percase be recompenced with some other matter of advantage to us in our Realm, in the sight also of the world, as being overcome with the importuna∣cy of their reasons, we did yield to take some further consideration of the matter; and to prove whether in som time we could work our mind to som other purpose, or whether any such further matter might be offered with this match, as might counterpoise in the judgement of the world, the inconvenience of the difference of the age: But so it is, that in all this time, we neither can find our mind altered, nor yet hear of any other thing that might countervail the inconveni∣ence; but so for observing of our promise, and especially because we mean to deal plainly with our good Brother and the Queen his Mother, we do make them this Answer, That surely we cannot find our self void of doubt and misliking to accept this offer, which is principally for the difference of his years, allowing nevertheless of his worthiness for his vertuous and honourable condi∣tions, as much as we can require in any Prince to be our husband. And so we pray the King and his Mother, that the Duke himself may understand our judge∣ment to be of his worthiness. And for the great good will we understand that he hath born to us, we do assure him that we shall for the same, esteem him at all times hereafter, as well as any other Prince of his Estate, reserving only the band of love that ought to accompany marriage. Given under our signet at Theobalds, the 23 of July, 1572. the 14 year of our Reigne. By the QUEEN. To our trusty and well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esq, our Ambassador Resi∣dent with our good brother the French King. ELIZABETH R. RIght trusty and well-beloved, We greet you well. After we finished our other Letters, and determined to have sent them away in such sort as you might have had them in convenient time, to have delivered our answer ac∣cording to our promise made to the Duke of Montmorency. The French Ambassador here gave knowledge that he had received Letters from thence, whereupon he required to have audience before we should send to you, which we did accord; and thereby our former Letters were staid contrary to our de∣terminations, and so we would it should be known when you shall find it requi∣site
for answering to their expectation for the time limited for our Answer; and therefore at the delivery of our former Letters of credit, both to the King, and to Montmory, You  say, that you are to shew them our Answer as we did conceive it to be given when those Letters were written. And upon the Ambassadors access after that time, and delivery of Letters from the King, Queen Mother, and from Mr. De , all full of purposes to further the matter of marriage, besides the private earnest  with us also of the French Ambassador: to the same end, we were occasioned thereby to do some further matter to our former Answer, not being any waies so different as it doth alter our said Answer; but in respect of our  of the desire we see to be in the King and the Queen Mother, and specially in the Duke of A∣lanson himself, not only by their Letters to our selves, but by the Dukes Let∣ters to the French Ambassador, we have thought convenient to inlarge our answer in some part to lay open before the King our conceit in the matter, which you shall say we do of very sincerity of good will to be answerable with their earnest dealing with us to be nevertheless considered and ordered by them as they shall think best. After you have used this kind of speech to them, you shall say, That when we think of this matter, we find no other principal impediment, but in the dif∣ference of the ages, and the case of Religion. And as to this which is the dif∣ficulty about Religion, we do not think that such, but the form and substance of our Religion being well made known to the Duke, there is no such cause to doubt, but by Gods goodness the same may be removed to the satisfaction of us both. But as to the other which concerneth the person of the Duke, of his age, and otherwise, for as much as the difficulties thereof may seem to consist rather in opinion then in matter, indeed we do thereto thus yield to think that in mar∣riage, when the persons are to think one of the other, nothing doth so much rule both parties, as to have their own opinions satisfied; and seeing that in re∣spect thereof nothing can make so full a satisfaction to us for our opinion, nor percase in him of us, in respect of the opinion he may conceive of the excess of our years above his, as that either of us might by some convenient means with our own eyes, satisfie our own conceits: A matter we know somewhat difficult, but yet such as in like cases hath been yielded to us, though by other impediments not perfected. And nevertheless, how this may be granted or allowed by the King and the Queen Mother to be done without offence, we do leave it to them in whom we perceive by our Ambassadors speech their stay con∣sisted, when the Duke himself both by his Letters to the Ambassador, as o∣therwise hath shewed himself thereto disposed, that is, to come hither in per∣son, for the which we cannot but greatly esteem his love and affection that he beareth to us. This you may say, is as much as we can conceive of the matter; and if it were not for the desire we have to deal plainly in this matter, being so much pro∣voked by the great good will we find in them there, we would not in that sort propound such a matter, neither do we otherwise propound it, but that it may be friendly interpreted; and not to conceive that thereby we mean any abuse to the disgrace of the Duke, whom we have great cause to love and esteem, but that surely in this sort our opinion by sight may be satisfied, which other∣wise we perceive cannot be by report of any others, for that none of our own dare adventure to deliver their advice for our own liking of him as the case is, we plainly affirm, that so as the difficulty of the matter of Religion be pro∣vided for, and that all other points concerning the marriage, may be performed as was communed upon in the person of Monsieur de Anjou, we find o cause
of doubt, but that the King and Queen Mother shall obtain their desire. And after you have declared thus much; and because it is likely that they will object, that either this purpose of his coming over to us cannot be granted, in respect of the honour of the King, for that heretofore no like usage hath been in the Marriages of the children of France with any strange Prince, or that they shall doubt that this is by us in such sort propounded, as thereby to increase our own reputation without any intent to marry him, though his person might not mislike us. To such objections you may answer thus. To the first you may say as of your self, that you are not so acquainted with their own stories, and with the marriage of the children of France; yet you dare affirm that you know there can be no example shewed of the like of this; that is, that either elder Son of France, or any younger was at any time to be matched in Marriage with such a Prince, having such Kingdoms as we have, by whom such an advancement might have grown as may by Marriage with us, both to the Duke himself, and to the King and Crown of France; and there∣fore this special cause can have no former example answerable to rule this; but this ought to be followed with all manner of means, and all respects set aside. And as to the second part that may be objected, you shall affirm certainly in our name, that we have no meaning hereby to gain any particular estimation to our self, but do plainly and simply seek hereby to procure the satisfaction of our own mind in this difficulty, as touching his person, wherein no other of our own dare deal with us, nor we can otherwise be satisfied. And for the pre∣servation of the Dukes estimation and honour, we shall be as carefull as his own brother the King shall be. And therefore you shall conclude, that howsoever we have thus propounded our own conception in the matter, we desire not that the King or the Queen Mother should do or consent to any thing that might any wise seem for them dishonourable to the Duke. Finally, if you shall perceive that they shall stick only upon the reputation of his honour, that is, to come, and not be allowed for his person, you may, as of your self, propound it as you see cause, that the matter of Religion may be outwardly so left in dispence, as the breaking off, if any so should follow, either on his part, or on ours, may to the world be thereto imputed. And be∣sides, that his coming may be secretly and privatly, without any outward pomp or shew, whereof we leave the consideration to themselves. Given under our Signet at Gorambury the 25 of July, 1572. in the fourteenth year of our Reigne. To the right honorable and my very good friend, Francis Walsingham Esq, her Majesties Ambassador in France. SIr, I am privately so occupied, as I cannot write much, and if I had, I could not write much more then the Queens Majestie hath done in her Letters; by the first you may perceive what was intended, and by the second what she would to be amended. Surely she findeth the Marriage to be necessary for her; and yet the opinion of others misliking of the party for his person, doth more hinder her purpose then her own conceit. I see such extremities on both sides, as I can make no choice for no Marriage, all evils must be looked for; and by Marriage without liking, no good can be hoped; therefore to God I leave it. I
see your Negotiation shall be full of , God direct you. The Queen is very irresolute to these. As to country matters, I can write no more; and now I am out of the Office of the Secretary, and yet I cannot be discharged of my ordinary cares. From , the 27 of July, 1572. Your assured Friend, W. Burleigh. To the ight Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq her Majesties Ambassador Resident in France. SIth my last writing to you, there hath been no news worth the writing, all mens eyes and ears are now occupied in expectation of the events of Flanders and the Low-Countrie: We say here that they of  be very strong, and have sent over Sir Humsrey Gilbert with his Band of Englishmen, and some Frenchmen, who hath taken certain Towns of Sluse, and assieged the Castle. That Bruges did consult whether they should receive the Protestants and Sir Humsrey, or no; and doth incline rather to receive them then the Garrison of the Duke of Alva. The Queens Majesty hath begun her Progress; and from Havering, instead of Enfield, lay at Theobakls, my Lord Treasurers House three daies; now is merry at my Lord Keepers House, called Gorambury, beside St. Albans; and to morrow goeth to Dunstable, and the next day to Woborn, and endeth her Progress at Windsor the 24 of September. What Count Lodovck doth a∣bout onsieur in Henuaul, we have not so often news as in the Maritine parts which are next us; if you have any certainties, you shall do well from time to time to signifie unto us, and we will concord with you for the requital. Fare you well. From St. Albons, July 27. 1572. The Scots begin now somewhat to incline to an abstinence of War among themselves, and to remit the matter to both the Princes of England and France. Sth the writing of this Letter Mr Holingshead came to the Court even at the closing thereof, and brought me a Letter from you of the 18 of July, and cer∣tain Edicts, for the which I thank you. Your Lordships alwaies assured, Th. Smith. To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principal Secretary. IT may please you to advertise her Majestie, that according to the direction of her Letters of the 23 of July, I imparted unto M. Montmorency, her Ma∣jesties resolution touching the offer propounded by him and du Foix; I made him also acquainted with the Contents of her Majesties Letters of the 27. touching the interview, for the better satisfying of the opinions of either party. To the first he said he was sorry that the resolution fell out to be such, con∣sidering how necessary it was, the state of the time considered, to have some
sound amity, and perfect intelligence between the two Crowns, which could no way have so well come to pass, as by the acceptation of the alliance offered; and as, saith he, I am generally sorry for it, so particularly in respect of the good will I bear towards her Majestie, whom I see in great peril without this help. To the second he said, That though Monsieur le Duc was well inclined there∣to, yet in respect of the danger that commonly ensueth by enterviews, he could in no respect give his consent and advice, unless he were assured that there might grow a liking. Hereupon I desired him that he would so deal with the King and his Mother; and that this her Majesties resolution might be by their Majesties accepted in good part; wherein he promised to do his endeavour. After conference had with him, I procured audience the next day, thinking it expedient to let him have a daies respit to deal with their Majesties to frame their minds to the well interpreting of her Majesties resolution. The next day repairing to the Court, and finding the King occupied at the appointed hour of my access; I began with the Queen Mother, and first shew∣ed her according to the Contents of the first Letter, what was her Majesties resolution concerning the offer propounded by the M. Mount and the du de Foix on their behalf. To the which she answered, That she could not but be sorry for the same, for that she saw it the only means to establish a perfect ami∣ty between the two Crowns. Notwithstanding (saith she) that the same will not take place, the King my Son is determined in any case to continue good amity with the Queen your Mistress. Then I proceeded to the Contents of the second Letter, and shewed her that her Majestie upon the receit of certain Letters from the King, her self, and Duc de Anjou: Seeing their great and earnest desire of the proceeding of this match, had enlarged her answer, moved thereto by an earnest and sincere good will to shew her self answerable to their earnest dealing. And there∣fore willed me to tell their Majesties, that in her opinion the principal impe∣diments consisted in the difference of their ages, and the cause of Religion; for the latter her Majestie hoped that the same might be so accorded, as might be to the satisfaction of both parties. For the first: For as much as the difficulty might seem rather to consist in opinion, then substance; her Majestie desireth them to consider in Marriages, a satisfaction of the opinions of the parties that were to match, was most necessary and requisite; and that therefore seeing that there could grow no satisfaction that way, but by an enterview, her Majestie could yield thereto, if they should so like of it. To this she answered, That if she were assured that upon the enterview there might grow a liking, she would most willingly give her consent; but for as much as experience taught, that of the meeting of Princes there followeth rather miscontentment then good liking, she should not in respect of the danger therof, yield her consent, for that she would be loath, and the King her Sonne; and she desiring nothing more then good amity with her, that there should fall out any occasion of miscontentment. In the end, after long speech had of great desire she had of this match, and of the great good will and love the Duke beareth to her Majestie, she con∣cludeth, that she hoped in time, considering how necessary it was for her to marry, as well for her own safety, as for the benefit of her Subjects, that God would so dispose her heart, as she should prefer publique before private Affairs. This in effect is the sum of that which passed from her at that time: and so
departing from her to the King, I used the like speech unto him, as before unto her: at whose hands I received like answer; which I suppose proceed∣ed upon conference with the M. before hand, and therefore they accor∣ding in speech, I forbare to make double repetition. Touching their proceedings herein Flanders matters, it may please you to advertise her Majestie, That pon advertisement from thence, that her Majestie meant to revoke such of her Subjects as presently are in Flanders. The King here, through the perswasion of his Mother, advised thereto by such as incline to Spain, is disswaded from overt dealing in that cause, who before was very resolute in the matter. But now for as much as it is here conceived, that without her Majesties assistance he shall not be able to bear the brunt of so puissant an enemy. The matter remaineth in suspence as yet, what will be done: Commonly it is given out the King will not meddle. Such as do wish well unto her Majesty, and are of the best judgment, to see how much it importeth her repose, the good or ill successe of that poor Prince, do hope that the advertisement of the revocation is false, her Majesty having so lately discovered the King of Spains malice towards her, and therefore do think her inclined in policie rather to assist then discourage. They say that no∣thing can more hinder the poor Princes enterprise, then the said Revocation up∣on his first entry into the Country, for that the people who were otherwise well inclined towards him, and are fearfull of nature, will thereby grow more fearfull, and so forbear to do that that may further the enterprise: because I know not her Majesties intention in this case, I forbear to affirm or deny any thing in this behalf. For my own private opinion having been acquainted with the malice of the Spaniards, I cannot, as duty bindeth me, but wish him further removed in neighbourhood from her Majesty. I pray God therefore to direct her Majesties heart, that may be for her Majesties safety. And so leaving to trouble your Honor any further at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the tenth of August, 1572. Your Honours to command, Fr. Walsingham. Sir, I beseech you to signifie unto her Majesty, that the Count Montgomery doth shew himself by sundry demonstrations, worthy of the favour and honor he hath received at her Majesties hands. I beseech your Honor therefore to put her Majesty in mind to use some such speeches towards his daughter at the Court, as he may perceive that I do not forget to advertise her Majesty of the good will he beareth towards her.
To the right honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principall Secretary. SIR, in this my private Letter I thought good to tell you, that how coldly soever you are affected towards marriage, we mean not here to give you over, but do think that time may work somewhat to the satisfying of our desire. They think in the end, necessity must make you yield thereto in respect of your safety, which is the best ground of the hope they have, they know well enough the coldness of your affection, and therefore they hope that force will bring that to pass which love cannot. This Sir, for marriage matter, I have earnestly writ∣ten both to the Lord Treasurer, and the Earl of Leicester, to procure a stay of the revocation of those that are imployed in Flanders, without the which the whole enterprise is in hazard, in respect of the discouragement that will grow thereby. And surely if the same take not good success, it is evident what will be our danger to as many as will list to see; I need not use towards you any per∣swasions, to put to your helping hand, which is forward enough in this case, as one that foreseeth the mischief that otherwise will follow. Whereas you write now that the Scots began somwhat to incline to an absti∣nence; it seemeth very strange, considering the issue of our Parliament, and the late inlargement of the Queen of Scots liberty, unless the Scots mean there∣upon to establish the Government in their Queen: if her Majesty had ac∣cepted the provision of her safety by her subjects in Parliament, and not so soon have yielded to any enlargement, those Scotch matters had been ere this ac∣corded; but we use to build with one hand, and overthrow with another: I can rather lament it then hope after any remedy. And therefore to God I com∣mit it. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the 10. of August, 1572. Your Honours to command. Fr. Walsingham. To the right Honourable his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer. I Refer your Honour to Sir Th. Smiths Letters touching that which hath past concerning the delivery of her Majesties resolution unto their Majesties there∣of, the offer propounded by the M. Montmorency and M. de Foix. They ea∣sily could be induced to hazard an enterview, if they thought there were any earnest intention in her Majesty to marry; but the doubt thereof maketh them stay to condiscend in that behalf; notwithstanding they mean not to give over the matter utterly, but do hope that necessity in time may induce her Majesty in respect of her safety, and the gratifying of her subjects to yield her consent, seeing that the difficulty consisteth in opinion chiefly; I do what I can to nou∣rish this opinion in them, considering the broken state of Europe, and how tickle her Majesty standeth: if by an enterview there might grow any good, I think I could easily bring it to pass; but the experience I have had how this case of marriage is subject to many things, maketh me to proceed warily,
according as I shall receive direction at your Lordships hands, who shall guide my doings in this behalf. Touching Flanders matters, the King had proceeded to an open dealing, had he not received advertisement out of England, that her Majestie meant to revoke such of her subjects as are presently in Flanders; whereupon such of his Councel here as incline to Spain, have put the Queen Mother in such a fear, that the enterprise cannot but miscarry without the assistance of England, as she with tears had disswaded the King for the time, who otherwise was very resolute. Thus your Lordship seeth how the bruit of your fear there, hath bred fear here; whereof I fear there will follow fearfull effects, unless God put to his helping hand. The Admiral in this brunt, whose mind is invincible, and foreseeth what is like to insue, doth not now give over, but layeth before the King his pe∣ril if the Prince of Orange quail, or at the least if the matter by composition may not be induced to that good pass, as the Spaniards may be removed further off, and the Country restored to its liberty, and yet remain under the Govern∣ment of Spain. And though he cannot obtain what were requisite and necessa∣ry for the advancement of the Cause, yet doth he obtain somewhat in confe∣rence with him: He desired me to tell your Lordship, that there is nothing in re∣spect of himself, that he desireth more after long troubles, unless he saw the dan∣ger great and evident to as many as profess the Gospel, as also particularly to the King his Master, and to the Q. Majestie my Mistress, whom he is bound to ho∣nour and serve during his life; and if these Low-Country matters be not reduced to some good issue, he would not now expose himself to new perils. But the case now standing as it doth, and foreseeing the mischief that will follow, he saith he should be a Traitor to God and to his Country, and unthankful to her Maj. if he should forbear to do what lieth in him to prevent the same; and for that he knoweth your Lordship doth concur with him in the like desire, he doth most earnestly desire you to be a mean to stay her Maj. revocation of those that be in Flanders, which thing will breed no less incouragement to the enemies, then dis∣couragement to those that seek to further this cause, the welldoing whereof (saith he) if I do not mistake, doth as much import her Maj. as any one thing that hap∣ned unto her since her coming to the Crown, and therefore requireth rather assistance then hinderance. Other particularities he willed me to impart unto your Lordship, which for that I would be loath to trouble your Lordship with Cypher, I have desired Mr. Killegrew, to make you understand the same. And so leaving to impart to your Honour any thing further at this time, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris, August 10. 1572. Your Honours to command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. IT may please your Lordship to understand, that upon advertisement com from the parties, that her Maj. meant to revoke such as are imployed in the Low-Countries of her subjects, the King here through the perswasions of such as are inclined to Spain, is grown cold, who before was very forward, in so much as Com∣missions were granted ready to have been sealed, for the leavying of men in sun∣dry Provinces; but herein nothing prevailed so much as the tears of his mother, who without the Army of England cannot consent to grow to any open dealing.
And because they are, as I suppose, assured by their Ambassadors that her Majesty will not intermeddle, they cannot be induced to make any overture. Thus your L. sees that fear & mistrust, unles God sets to his helping hand, is like to overthrow all. To think that Spain will suffer us to overcome this brunt, to live long in peace, hath no reason for ground. To seek now reconcilement with him in this his ne∣cessiy, there is likelihood he will yield thereto, for no man can speak fairer then a Spaniard when he is underfoot: but to think when the necessity is gone, that he will forget what is past, surely he knows not the Spanish nature that is of that opinion. For the greatness of France, I see no such ambition here why we should have cause much to fear it; Pleasure and youth will not suffer us to take profit of advantages, and those who rule under us are fearfull and irresolute. How per∣plexed the Admiral is, who foreseeth the mischief that is like to follow, if assist∣ance come not from above, your Lordship may easily guess. And surely to say truth, he never shewed greater magnanimity, nor never was better followed nor more honoured of those of the Religion then now he is, which doth not a little appale the enemies. In this storm he doth not give over the helm; he layeth be∣fore the King and his Councel the peril and danger of his estate, and though he cannot obtain what he would, yet doth he obtain somewhat from him. I am re∣quested to desire your Lordship to hold him excused in that he writeth not, for that at this time he is overwhelmed with affairs. Furthermore he desired me from him, that if her Majesty proceeded in revocation of those her subjects in Flanders, it will breed such discouragement in those of the Country that are well affected to the cause, as it will to all likelihood hazard the whole enterprise. He therefore desireth your Lordship, as you wish well to the cause and to the safety of her Majesty, whose repose (whatsoever is said to the contrary) dependeth upon the good success of this enterprise, to procure a stay to be made of the said revocation. Touching Flushing, he tels me that the matter shall be ended as there shall grow no just cause of jealousie, which shall shortly appear by some offer that shall be made unto her Majesty of the same by those that are now pos∣sessors of it. Other particularities he willed me to impart unto your Lordship, which I requested Mr. Killigrew to make your Lordship acquainted withall, for the avoiding of the tediousness of Cypher. Touching the acceptation here of the answer unto the offer propounded by M. Montmo. I refer your Lordship to Sir Tho. Smith's letters: As far as I perceive, they mean not to be discouraged with one Nay. And so leaving fur∣ther to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the 10. of August, 1572. Your Honours to command, Francis Walsingh. I have cause to render unto your Lordship my most hearty thanks for your late earnest dealing with her Majesty for my revocation. I am also presently to request your Lordship to renew the same, for that my charges here do grow daily more intolerable, so that I am no more able to endure the weight of this burden.
To our trusty and welbeloved Francis Walsingham Esq our Ambassador resident with our good Brother the French King. TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well. Here hath been with us Monrieur de la M with special letters from the King, Q. mother, and the D. of Alanson, who with the Ambassador resident hath here most earnestly  to us touching the marrying with the D. of Alanson; and upon the report of your speech to the King upon the two Letters we lately sent unto you, there appeareth some mis∣taking either by you or by the King. For in the Kings letter to the French Am∣bassador it is conceived that you should say, that we did will you by our first letter to declare that the difference of the age of the Duke from ours was such, as it was not possible for us to accord thereto; and yet you should upon our se∣cond letter propound a motion of an enterview. Which two declarations can∣not but contain some absurdity, as we think yourself can conceive. And there∣fore we have answered, that either you mistook our mind, or our first letters, and so misreported them, as we cannot think you did, or else the King mistook your words; and that where you were by us commanded to say, that the cause was very difficile (which we think you did) for so do our letters plainly direct you, it is likely that the King understood it, as was thought you had said, impossible. And so the Ambassador resident will not have us in any wise think but that the King or Q. mother mistook it. Upon their further dealing in these matters at sundry times, who never omitted any opportunity to advance the same, it was at length by them propounded to us, that we should be content to accord that the Duke might come hither, and that all other Articles which were treated upon of the Duke d'Anjou might remain good for the Duke d'Alanson, saving that the difficulty in Religion might rest in suspence, and be determined upon his coming hither as we two should agree; whereby they seemed to provide, that the in∣convenience which might ensue of the enterview, if the principal matter took no place, might be rejected to the article of Religion; and so the honour of the Duke, &c. Hereunto we were loth to make any direct answer, but remember it unto them what words both the D. of Montmorencie and the Q. mother used to you con∣cerning the great misliking of an enterview, as it seemed by their discourse of the inconvenience what hath followed of those enterviews: but what those be, and whether they know of any like, our persons and other circumstances considered, we cannot tell; and therefore we seem very loth that there should any motion come from us of any enterview, let the principal matter should not take place, and therefore we can make no certainty. There might indeed such inconvenience follow as hath been by them remembred; and yet being still pressed by the Am∣bassador and , that if indeed we  a disposition to marry, as we had been content to affirm for necessity of our Realm, though not for any particular moti∣on for our own person, then we would be content with this by them propounded for an enterview; and therefore we did at good length make the answer in the of our Councel, so well to shew them truly that we did continue in the same mind to marry for the benefit of our realm with any meet person of Prince∣ly estate that should be offered unto us, with  conditions as we might like also, To  this matter of enterview to the consideration and wisdom of the King and Q. mother to be so ordered, as whatsoever might hereof succeed, no incon∣venience
should ensue; and so with some large speech to that end, we did con∣clude, that we durst not desire the enterview for the same reason. After which answer made, and as it seemed by them very well allowed, they required some brief note of the points of the matters might be given them in writing, which we did cause to be conceived and delivered agreeable to the Copy that herewith we send you. And howsoever they shall make report of our answer, we would that you should not omit to persist directly in this; but loth we would be that the Duke her son should come hither, if the matter should not take place, lest more offence might thereof follow then we thought meet concerning the per∣fection of the amity that is between us. And yet our meaning is not hereby, that they should think that we are not so disposed to marry, or that we are determined to mislike of the matter aforehand, or not disposed at all to allow of him; but that only we are fearful, that if there should happen at his coming some cause of mis∣liking or forbearing to accept him, which surely to us is uncertain, and without sight cannot be made certain, then some great unkindness should follow by their misconceiving of our dealing, where now there is no cause of kindness and friend∣ship whereof we do not earnestly desire to have continuance, without interrupti∣on in that behalf. As you shall find this matter likely to proceed, so we would have you not only to advertise us, but to have good regard that if you find any scruple thereof, that great unkindness shall arise of his coming if the matter shall not take place, that before any preparation be there made of his coming, you do advertise us with speed, for otherwise the unkindness may happen to be great∣er in respect of the charges. Given at Killingworth the 22 of August, 1572. T. Smith. To the right worshipful Mr. Francis Walsingham, Ambassador Resident in France. SIr, I am sorry that so good a matter should upon so nice a point be deferred. We may say that the Lover will do little, if he will not take the pains once to see his Love, but she must first say yea before he see her, or she him. Twenty ways might be devised why he might come over and be welcome, and possibly do more in an hour then he may in two years. Cupido ille qui vincit omnia, in oculos insidet, & ex oculis ejaculatur, & in oculos utriusque vidend nonsolum ut ait poeta, foemina virum, sed vir foeminam. What force I pray you can hear∣say, and I think, and I trust, do in comparison of that, Cum prasens praesentem tuetur & alloquitur, & furore forsitan amoris ductus amplectitur; and saith to him∣self, and openly, that she may hear, Teneo ne te mea, an etiamnum somno volunt fa∣mina videri cogi ad id quod maximum cupiunt. If we be cold, it is our part, be∣sides the person, the sex requireth it. Why are you cold? Is it not a young mans part to be bold, couragious, and to adventure? If he should have, he should have but honorificam repulsam. The worst that can be said of him is but a Phaeton, quam si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ansis. So far as I can conceive, Hac est sola nostra anchora, hac jacenda est in nobis alea. In our instability unum mo∣mentum est uno momento perfectum factum, as dictum stabilitatem facere posest; or else nothing is to be looked for but still and continual dalliance and doubt∣fulness, so far as I can see. Indeed as yet there is no revocation neither done nor meant of our men at Flujhing or in Flanders, howsoever the brute is made there with you. Truth it
is, that certain more that would have gone over from hence were stayed, for fear of too much disorder for lack of some good head, and wise and expert Cap∣tain; but they that be there be neither yet revoked nor discouraged, although the Duke of Alva by letters this last week required that they should be revoked, but he is gently answered with a dilatory and doubtful answer. If you there do tergiversari and work tam timide and underhand with open and outward Edicts, besides excuses at Rome and at Venice by your Ambassadors, you I say which have Regem expertem otii laboris amantem, cujus gens bellicosa jampridem assueta est cadibus tam exterioris quam vestri sanguinis, quid faciems gens otiosa & paci assueta, quibus imperat Regina, & ipsa pacis atque quietis amantissima? And I pray you who hath removed from thence with any authority a society or preparation in such a matter, either to her Highness, or to her Councel. And this for that matter. How far the Scots have gone, you may perceive by this inclosed; both the parties have subscribed and sealed to it, and both the parties have written letters of thanks to her Majesty for the pains taken by the Marshal of Barwick, and have promised to stand to that order, which is very honorable both to the King there, and to our Queen here; and not dishonorable to the Scotish King, that in his in∣fancie such a noble personage should accord to make quietness in his Realm. Thus I bid you most heartily farewell. From Killingworth, Aug. 22. 1572. Your assured friend, Tho. Smith. To the right worshipful Francis Walsingham Esq her Majesties Ambassador resident in France. SIr, I know how faithfully you shall be both by her Majesties letters and Mr. Secretaries certified of her Majesties pleasure. This Gent. la Mot hath well behaved himself here to the great contentation of her Majesty and her Court, and I think also he well deserved. Surely the choice of him was good, and as it seemeth the Queens Majesty is come neerer to the matter then I hoped. If there may now any amendment grow to this usage, and that he would come, I assure you I see no cause to doubt, for in that matter consisteth the only apparent stay. ur men in Zealand are evil used by the French there; and howsoever the Ad∣miral hath lately born you in hand, I doubt our intention shall be disappointed, or at worst as it is justly doubted that the Princes Captain at Flushing is corrupt∣ed and become Spanish in secret sort, whereof I pray you advertise the Ad∣miral. In Scotland the abstinence is not well kept by the Kings party as reason would: The Town of Edenburgh is wholly at the direction of the Regent, and contrary to the covenant he keeps his men of war there, whereof they of the Castle complain. I think the Earl of Northumberland suffered death this day at York; for it was ordered that he was brought thither under the conduct of Sir Foster as yesterday for that purpose. In Ireland the stirs of Munster are well overcome; the chief Rebels fled, and
the rest conquered. In Connaught some stir hath been by the Earl of Clai∣cards son, for the which his father was imprisoned, but now delivered, and pro∣miseth to appease the troubles. This day the Earl of Ormond came hither out of Ireland, who hath there done great service. Now I end at Killingworth the 22 of August, 1572. Yours assuredly, William Burleigh. To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majestiess principall Secretary. IT may please your Honor to advertise her Majesty that yesterday I sent my Secretary unto Q. Mother, willing her in my name, first to render unto her and to the Kings Majesty most humble thanks for the great care it pleased them to have of my safety, and the preservation of the English Nation in this last tu∣mult, whereof I assured them I would not fail to make honorable report unto the Queens Majesty my Mistres. And furthermore, forasmuch as there were divers reports made of the late execution here, and that I would be very loath to credit reports, that it would please their Majesties to send me the very truth thereof, to the end I might accordingly advertise the Queens Majesty my Mistress. To the first she said, that the King her son and she gave especiall com∣mandement, that good regard were had of me and all English men, as that thing which tended to the preservation of the good amity between the King her Sonne, and the Queens Majesty my Mistress. And that if I could devise any better means for the better safeguard, that I would but give them under∣standing thereof. To the second she said, that she doubted not but that Monsieur la Mott had long since advertised the Queens Majestie of the late accident here. Ne∣vertheless to gratifie me, that she would cause Secretary Pinnart to send me an abstract of that, which before the King her son had sent to his Ambassador there resident, the which also I send you here inclosed. This being in effect that which passed between her and my Secretary. And having at this present no other thing to write of, I leave to trouble your Honor any further, and most humbly take my leave. At Paris the 27 of August, 1572. Your Honours to command Fr: Walsingham. The Duke of Nevers hath shewed himself much addicted to our Nation, having not spared to come and visit men in his own person, with offer of all kind of courtesie, not only to me, but also to divers of our English Gentlemen. Be∣sides that, he did very honourably entertain three English Gentlemen, who o∣therwise had been in great jeopardy of their lives.
To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principal Secretary. MAy it please your Honour to advertise her Maj. that the first of this month I was sent for by the King; and to the end I might pass with the more safety, he sent to conduct me Count Lasacque and Manefes, accompanied with a dozen other Gentlemen. At my access unto his Maj. he shewed me, that he sent for me to make me understand, that whereas men might judge diversly of the late execu∣tion, who were not advertised of the ground of his proceedings in that behalf; he had therefore for the satisfying of the world, caused the process to be made of the Admiral, and the rest of his Conspirators, which so soon as the same should be fi∣nished, he would not fail to send unto her Maj. his good sister, whom he did assure himself, would interpret in good part his doings, he being constrained, to his great grief, to do that which he did for his safety sake; which if he had not done, both he himself, his Mother and Brethren had been in danger of their lives. Furthermore he shewed me, that he desired nothing more then to continue, or rather to increase amity with her Majestie, and therefore hoped that she would not take occasion upon this late proceeding, to suspect the contrary; for (saith he) on my honour, and in the word of a Prince, I have no other meaning. To this I answered, that her Majestie could not but accept in very good part the sending of the process, as one that would be glad to understand the ground of the matter: And if by the said process it should appear that they were guilty, none should be more glad of the punishment of them then her Maj. who preferred his safety before any particular subject of what estate or Religion soever they were. For the other part I shewed him, that I hoped his Maj. who had made a straiter league with England then any of his Progenitors, would not now be drawn easily to make light account there∣of, considering the profit that might grow to both the Crowns by the same. Then I made him understand, that three of our Nation were slain, and that di∣vers were spoiled; for the which he shewed himself to be very sorry, and said, that if the parties offendors could be produced, there should exemplary justice be used. I shewed his Majestie it would be hard to produce them, the disorder being so ge∣neral, the sword being committed to the common people. In the end, after thanks given for the care he had of my safety, I departed from him, and was conducted to Q. Mother, who used like speech, saving that she shewed me that the K. meaning was, the heads of the Conspirators being now taken away, to continue his Edicts, and that every man should live in repose and liberty of his Conscience. For that it was suspected that le Mote was staied in England, I shewed their Maj. that it was the 20 of the last before he departed, and that I hoped upon his return, they should rest very well satisfied with such answer as he receiveth at her Majesties hands. And so leaving further to trouble you at this present, I most humbly take leave. At Paris the second of September, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principal Secretary. SIr, it may please you to advertise her Maj. That albeit it was shewed me, as I wrote in my last, that the heads being taken away, the meaner sort should en∣joy by vertue of the Edict both lives and goods, and liberty of their consciences; which thing also assured by print, as by the inclosed may appear, yet notwithstand∣ing, nothing thereof is performed, but all extremity used, which maner of proceed∣ing
is by the Catholiques themselves utterly condemned, who desire to depart hence out of this Country, to quit themselves of this strang kind of Government, for that they see here none can assure themselves of either goods or life. At Lyons, Burdeaux and Orleans, great and most barbarous cruelty hath been executed. At Orleans divers of the Almains have been slain and spoiled, the most part of them put to the ransom; for that justice taketh not place here, they forbear to require redress, but depart hence with great desire of revenge. They prepare Bastile for some persons of quality. It is thought that is for the Prince of Conde and his brethren. The Marshal Montmorency is commanded, as it is said, to keep his house, and to forbear to make any Assembly: He is now at Chantilly. The King is advertised that the Prince of Orange hath taken Mechelin, and that he now marcheth towards Montz, and that the Duke d' Alva shall be constrained to hazard the battel, or to lose his Ordnance. It is said, that the King here meaneth to send to his support under the conduct of the Duke of Guise, 4000 shot and 2000 horse. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the thirteenth of September. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principal Secretary. SIr, it may please you to advertise her Majestie, that after I had closed up my present dispatch, Monsieur Mansiere was sent to me from Q. Mother to re∣quest me to continue my good devotion towards this Crown, & to do such good offices as might breed continuance, and especially to further the marriage. To this I answered, that I saw things fall out here in such sort, as I had small cause to incourage me thereunto. And as for the marriage, I had some cause to doubt whe∣ther the matter was truly meant or no, for divers reasons. To that he answered, that it were good the same scruples were taken away; and therefore asked me, if I would be content to let the Queen Mother understand the reasons that made me so to think. To the which I answered, I could be very well content, if it shall please her Majestie to send for me, that I might communicate them unto her. Thereupon she sent for me, and at my access she told me, that she understood by Mannesiere, that there rested in me some scruple touching the Kings and her sincere meaning concerning the late marriage propounded, for the which she was sorry; for that in respect of the place I held, I might yield no small hinderance to the same: She therefore desired me, to know the reasons that moved me there∣to, to which she doubted not but to yield such answer as should breed satisfacti∣on in me. Thereupon I shewed her, that true it was, that as it becometh a good servant, the jealousie of my Mistris's honour and surety, made me to use some such speech towards her, whereof when she should understand the reasons, I hoped she would interpret the same in good part: Then I shewed her, that this late strange accident had bred in men dangerous discourses, opinions and mistrusts amongst the which I was not free from my doubts and suspicions. And as touching this scruple of the Kings and her sincere meaning touching this marriage, I had three reasons that moved me thereto: The first, the violating of the late Edict, and pre∣sent severity used against those of the Religion. The second, the strange dealing in the first match propounded.
The third, certain Discourses given out of the Conquest of England and Ireland. Touching the first, I shewed her, that the chiefest causes that moved the Queen my Mistris to make account of the Amity of this Crown, was, that the King suffered certain of his Subjects to enjoy, by the vertue of this Edict, exercise of the same Religion her Majestie professed, which was the chiefest ground of the League, which being taken away, the Amity could not but grow doubtful. And this matter of an enterview, suspected to be but to serve for an entertain∣ment. Touching the second, I shewed her, that this late accident giveth vehement suspicion, that the first match propounded, was also but a kind of entertainment to abuse those of the Religion. Touching the Discourses, though they did proceed from mean personages, and that I hoped their Maj. were free from any such intentions, yet the strangeness of the late accident could not altogether rest free from suspicion. To this she generally replyed, That she hoped, that the late League was made, not with the Admiral, and those of the Religion, but with the King; and therefore she trusted, that though her son for his surety sake, had justly executed the heads of the Religion, yet the said league should continue in his perfect strength, for performation whereof, there should never be found lack in the King. You know (saith she) that there was good amity between King Francis and King Henry the eighth, and yet they favoured not the Pope alike. You know also (saith she) that notwithstanding the difference of Religion between my late husband and King Edward, yet the same did not impeach the conclusion of a marriage between the same King and my daughter. And as for the Edict (saith she) the King my sons meaning is not otherwise, but that the same shall stand in force. To this I replyed, that true it was, that the League was made with the King, and not with the Admiral. Notwithstanding that the liberty of conscience was not particularly granted unto him, but generally to those of the Religion, as to the Amity between the said Princes, notwithstanding they were of contrary Re∣ligion. I told her, that the time was now altered, for that then there was no general league made at Trent, or at Bayonne generally against those of the Re∣ligion, and surely Madam (said I) I fear, that this late severity executed here, will make all Princes of the Religion, to repute the same a general denunciati∣on of War against them, which I fear will prove as bloody as ever war that hap∣ned, whereof the benefit would chiefly grow to the Turk. Thereupon she took occasion to inveigh vehemently against the Admiral, saying, that the mat∣ter of Bayonne was a device of his to provoke such Princes as were allies and friends to this Crown, to become enemies to the same. For (saith she) the As∣sembly of Bayonne tended to other end but to make good chear; and to the end you may see how little your Mistris was beholding to him; you may see (saith she) a discourse found, with his testament, made at such time as he was sick at Rochel, wherein, amongst other advices that he gave to the King my son, this is one that he willed him in any case, to keep the Queen your Mistris and the King of Spain, as low as he could, as a thing that tended much to the safety and maintenance of this Crown. To that I answered, that in this point, how∣soever he was affected towards the Queen my Mistris, he shewed himself a most true and faithful Subject to the Crown of France, and the Queens Majestie my Mistris made the more account of him, for that she knew him faithfully affected to the same: The said discourse was all written with his own hand. To the other two reasons she answered nothing, but desired me that I would not be
carried away with reports of some seditious instruments, that desired nothing else but to set Princes at discord. In the end, after long debating to and fro of the matter, she desired me to protest unto the Queen my Mistris, that she and her son desired nothing more then good amity; and because the same might grow to more perfection, they desired the finishing of this marriage propound∣ed, whereof she hoped there would grow safety and quiet to both Realms. I then desired her to satisfie me in two points: The one, of the difficulty of Reli∣gion, considering their late severity may be compounded, if the enterview should go forward. The other, in what sort they mean to continue in observation of the said Edict. To the first she told me, that for the difficulty in Religion, if there be no other let (saith she) I doubt not but it shall be so compounded, as that it shall be to the contentment of your Mistris. As for the second, the Kings meaning is, that they shall enjoy the liberty of their conscience. What Madam (said I) and the exercise of their Religion to? No (said she) my son will have exercise but of one Religion in his Realm. Then (said I) how can it agree, that the observation of the Edict, whereof you wil∣led me to advertise the Queen my Mistris that the same should continue in his former strength? To that she said, that they had discovered certain matters of late, that they saw it necessary to abolish all exercise of the same. Why Madam (said I) will you have them live without exercise of Religion. Even (saith she) as your Mistris suffereth the Catholiques of England. My Mistris did never pro∣mise them any thing by Edict, if she had, she would not fail to have perform∣ed it. To that she said, that the Queen my Mistris was to direct the Govern∣ment of her own Countrey, and the King his. To that I answered, that I did not move those questions of any curiosity, but to render account to the Queen my Mistris of the proceedings, who I knew desired that all things might pass in such sort as might be to their honour. A third doubt I propounded, how considering their late severity, they could perform their promise with the Queen my Mistris, if she should be assailed for the cause of Religion, in yielding assistance. To this she answered, that if any; yea (saith she) if the King of Spain, I will not stick to move him, shall enter∣prize any thing against her for the cause of Religion, she shall not lack for any assistance that this Crown can give her. Our desire is onely to reduce this Crown to a quiet state. This speech I thought good to impart unto her Majestie, referring unto her the consideration of the same. Of late, though I received ill usage of the people, yet at their Majesties hands I find more favour then accustomed, whereof I promised to advertise her Majestie. La Roche, who two years past was imployed in the enterprize at Ireland, was lately here at the Court, and from hence dispatched to Rochel, which maketh men to suspect some enterprize that way. And so leaving fur∣ther to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the fourteenth of September, 1672. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham.
To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principal Secretary. SIr, it may please you to advertise her Majestie, that the tenth of this moneth the King and Queen Mother sent for me to the Louvre; where first I spake to Queen Mother, who shewed me, that la Mot hath received such honour and good entertainment at her Majesties hands, as that she, and her Son the King, could do no less then send for me, and desire me to render unto her Majestie most hearty thanks for the same; and further, to shew unto her Majestie, that forasmuch as they desire nothing more then some straiter amity with her, which they think can by no means come to pass so well as by marriage; and therefore the Kings meaning was, that she and her son Duke d' Alanson should repair to Bulloin or Callis, so that her Majestie will be content to repair to Dover, to the end the enterview that hath been propounded, might take some effect, by some good advice that may be found out for the surety of both their Majesties, which thing shall be best considered of, how the same may come to pass. Fur∣ther, she willed me to tell her Majestie, that besides the great hope she had that the same enterview will breed a hope of straiter amity between the two Crowns, she desired the same no less, for the great good particular affection she had to see her Majestie, whereof she would receive as great content, as of any one thing that hath hapned unto her in her days. To this I answered, that I would not fail to advertise her Majestie thereof. And thereupon, according to the contents of her Majesties Letters of the two and twentieth of August, I took occasion to protest unto her, in her Majesties behalf, that forasmuch as I had before advertised of her and the Kings misliking of an enterview, in re∣spect of the inconveniences that hath followed thereof, her Majestie could not desire the same, but rather refer it to the Kings and her consideration, lest if the principal should not take place, there might follow that inconvenience that by them was feared. To this she answered, that she would take the burthen and blame upon her; and that whether the matter took effect or not, the Kings meaning was to continue good amity with her Majestie. I replyed, that to see one in marriage, is a thing in it self considered honest and allowable, and that if the parties desire who sought the same took no place, there could grow to him no reproach thereof, but in opinion, which had no reason of ground, for that marriages have their beginning from above. Upon that I concluded, that for the Duke d' Alanson to see a Princess of her Majesties quality and calling, was a thing honourable; and that therefore whatsoever success the matter took, see∣ing that marriages came from heaven, there could in truth and reason grow to him no dishonour; and that therefore unless he could put on that opinion, con∣sidering the issue to be doubtful, it were better not to proceed any further, lest it might be an occasion of unkindness, which might be unprofitable to both the Crowns. To this she answered, that she knew it to be ttue, and that there∣fore they would refer the issue to God, with intention to continue good friend∣ship, whatsoever grew of the matter. So having ended with her, I repaired to the King, who onely willed me to give her Majestie thanks for the good enter∣tainment given to la Motte; as also to assure her, that his intention and desire was no other, but to continue, or rather to increase amity with her: And fur∣ther to shew her, that he would shortly send the Admirals process unto his Ambassador, to shew unto her Majestie. Duke d' Alanson, who was there pre∣sent, desired me to present unto her Majestie his most humble and affectionate commendations, and to shew her, that so great was the honour that she did
unto his servant la Mote, as he desired nothing more then to have occasion to shew himself thankful by doing her service; and that therefore it would please her to make account of him as of one that is wholly hers. In this time of trouble; he hath often sent unto me, and offered me some of his guard for my surety. La Motte shewed himself most thankful for the honour he hath received, and every man maketh most honourable report of her Majestie; where∣fore she may think the good usage of him very well imployed on him. The Lord Levingston, and divers other Scotish Gentlemen, who see here no way to enjoy the liberty of their conscience, do desire passport, wherein I mean to use less difficulty then heretofore I have done; for that they seem upon the last accident, to desire most perfect Amity between the two Crowns of England and Scotland, in respect of the common cause of Religion. I suppose, passing by that way, and receiving good entertainment at her Maje∣sties hands, they will rather do good then harm at home, by making them in the Countrey understand what had passed here, and the danger that is like to follow, without perfect union between the said Crowns. Some of the wisest sort of them here, that before were enemies, and now are become friends, do wish that her Majestie sought to make some recon∣ciliation between the Earl Morton and the Lord Lidington, and that her Majestie by some pension did make both him and others assured to her. They think that her Majestie by so doing, in disbursing of two or three thousand pounds a year, may save the disbursing of many thousands, besides the avoiding of many dangerous practises that are like to grow that way. This device might seem to savour of the particular benefit, were not the circumstances of the present time reasonable for the same. The Ambassador of Scotland telleth such of his Nation as are here, that the Kings meaning is to make as great account of them as ever he did. That those of the guard, for their better entertainment, shall have a Cap∣tain of their own Nation; and further, that the Kings meaning is to erect again certain men of Arms, under the conduct of some Nobleman of that Nation. I leave to her Majestie to consider what this courtesie to that Nation meaneth. Sir, I beseech you to move her Majestie, that for the time that I shall remain here, which I hope shall not be long, I may hear often from her, whereby I may the better know how to direct my course. This inclosed Letter of Montmorency, was sent me from Secretary Pynart, whereby it may appear, that he was procured to write to their Majesties. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this Present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the fourteenth of September. Your Honours to command, F. Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principal Secretary. SIr, it may please you to advertise her Majestie, That of late the King here was advertised from his Ambassador Resident in Flanders, how that the ninth of this moneth the Prince of Orange approaching near unto Montz, and being fully resolved to fight with his enemy, commanded forth of his Army four hundred footmeen, and five hundred light horsemen, the Prince himself and the rest of his Army following them somewhat afar off, in very good or∣der. On the righr hand of his Battaile there stood a mill, where he planted six pieces of Artillery, as well to defend himself, as to offend his enemy with more advantage. The Duke of Alva likewise sent out against the Prince five hun∣dred Spaniards Harquebushiers, and six hundred light horsemen, with Har∣quebushiers a Crock, on the right hand of them he set two thousand Rutters, and on the left wing as many. In this sort they came at length to hand strokes, the fight dured a long time, to wit, from twelve of the clock at noon, to six of the clock at night; but in the end, by means of the Prince of Oranges Artil∣lery, the Duke of Alva's horsemen were put in so great disorder, as they were constrained to retire themselves into their Tents, not without great loss. The number of them that were slain is not yet certainly known, although it is re∣ported, that the Duke hath lost above three thousand men. This victory is thought to proceed of 250 horsemen, who issued forth of Montz during the Conflict, and set upon the tail of the Duke Alva's Army, who also afterwards joyned with the Prince of Orang. Thus much I thought good to write, to the end her Majestie may understand how things pass in Flanders. Touching the state of this Countrey, there is nothing meant but extremity towards those of the Religion. On Sunday last, which was the fourteenth of this moneth, the young Princess of Conde was constrained to go to Mass, be∣ing threatned otherwise to go to prison, and so consequently to be made away. The Prince of Conde hath also yielded to hear Mass upon Sunday next, being otherwise threatned to go to the Bastile, where he is not like long to serve. The Friday before Queen Mother told me, that no bodies conscience—for (saith she) here is the King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, and divers others in this Court, that live with liberty of conscience, and so shall continue; not∣withstanding (saith she) that the King could be content, and could wish that they were all converted and become Catholiques. And I do perceive that  and therefore I hope her Majestie will stand upon her guard, and strengthen her self with the Amity of the Protestant Princes of Germany, who (as I hear) are awake, and marvellously stomach this late cruelty, and do think that the danger thereof will reach to themselves, if they do not seek to prevent it. I hope also her Majestie will establish things in such  and wil not suffer her to be abused with her fair speech, having had so late experience of her faithless dealing, when the King is once possessed of Rochel, which he hopeth to have shortly. Strozzees voyage is then directly to Scotland. All the Hu∣gonote lands, which will amount to many millions, shall be sold and imployed in the Conquest of Countreys, which I hope in God will prove an account without the host, if God do not blinde the eyes of the Princes of the Religi∣gion, who joyning together, shall be able to make their parts good against any
of those that shall have will to do them harm. One Roulart a Catholique and Canon of Nostre Dame, and also a Counsellour in the Parliament, uttering cer∣tain speeches in misliking this lawless kind of proceeding without justice, was ap∣prehended and committed to prison, and in prison murthered as disorderly as any of the rest, wherewith divers of the Catholiques themselves were offend∣ed. This manner of proceeding breedeth general mistrust in them of the No∣bility, and every man feareth Gods vengeance. And so leaving to trouble your Honour any further at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the sixteenth of September, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To our very loving Friend Francis Walsingham Esq her Majestes Am∣bassador Resident in France. YOu shall understand, that after the receit of your Letters mentioning the hurt of the Admiral, which was the two and twentieth of the last, her Majestie was greatly perplexed therewith, and within a very short time after, by means of certain that fled hither from Diepe, that the said Admiral, with a great multitude of the Religion, were suddenly murthered the four and twen∣tieth at Paris, in a most cruel sort, there was no small cause of the increase of her Majesties grief, and that so much the more, as she could hear no manner certainly thereof from you, of whose person also, in such a horrible time, her Majestie was very careful; and notwithstanding that the French Ambassador did at London, to some of your friends affirm, that you were in safety; yet until your own servant came, who stayed long at Bulloin for lack of good wind, with your letters, and some knowledge of the fact, her Majestie was not quiet in mind for your self: And likewise her Majestie understood, that they would have to be conceived by a writing, which was by the Queen Mothers com∣mandment sent you, expressing the summaty of this fact, which seemeth to be described in a disguised manner, to cover the execrable manner thereof: So that the Kings Ambassador here, yesterday imparted first to her Majestie, and afterwards to her Councel, the process of this murther, according to the same writing, with some enlargement of the circumstances, is so foul a fact as could suffer to make the King to appear void of all intention of evil: And yet not being able to make the fact allowable in any order, he held this course here, that though he could not in any wise approve the manner of the cruelty in such a general execution as there was; yet to excuse the King, he set forth the Kings great grief conceived, first, of the hurt of the Admiral, with his determina∣tion to have done justice upon the Authors thereof, with other arguments of his resort to visit and comfort the Admiral, being hurt. In which mind the King continued until Saterday late in the night; at which time he saith, that advertisement was given to him that the Admirall and his Friends were deter∣mined not to expect the order of the King for the punishment of the Fact, but would avenge themselves, and that they would certainly seize the person of the King, Q. Mother, and his Brethren; and so his person and theirs should be in danger, and a new War should thereby be begun: and to confirm this to be true, in the Kings sight it was also informed, that some such as were of this Con∣federacy with the Admiral, had for conscience sake disclosed the same; and that it was made the more probable to the King by reason of certain bold
speeches used by Tilligney to the King, as in the writing is contained. Where∣upon (as the Ambassador saith) the King was so daunted with the present fear of his own person, and his Mother and his Brethren, and with the imminent danger of the now civil war, as being thus  with this extreamity, and having no time long to deliberate thereupon, carce the space of an hour, he was in this manner forced to yield to another extremity; which was to suffer the parties that were enemies to the Admiral, to proceed to the execution of him; although as the Ambassador saith, not with such a general fury as was used, for that he cannot deny, but he thinketh a great number of innocents to be slain. And after he had thus imparted the matter, he requested her Majestie to shew her compassion of the King, rather then condemn him, making great assurance of the Kings innocency herein, for intention of his own part, but onely for his defence and safety against the perils that were propounded to him by the Infor∣mationer, with like assurance of his resolute determinations to continue perfect amity with her Majestie, and not to suffer the Edict of the Pacification to be broken; and therefore he most earnestly besought her Majestie, that by her answer to be made, the King might find comfort of her in condoling with him for this so miserable and lamentable an accident; and thereby the King his Master might be the rather encouraged to search the truth of the mat∣ter, whether he was herein abused by untrue reports, and so consequently both to punish the malefators and deceivours of him, and to continue the observation of the Edict, and of the good amity with her Majestie, which surely if her Majestie should not in some ways comfort the King by her answer, might give occasion to make him to lean more to the counsels of the persons that were Authors and Executioners of this Murther, then were expedient for him∣self, or for her Majestie here. In this sort, at great length, the Ambassador proceeded, shewing also outwardly, a marvellous inward grief of mind for this shameful fact, professing himself ashamed to be counted a Frenchman. But here much of this may be counted suddenly uttered by him, time must try that hereafter; for this present time cannot uffer any thing uttered by him or any of them, that were known enemies to the Admirals Religion, to be free from suspicion of abuse or of danger. Nevertheless, her Majestie did very wisely and Princely answer him in such sort, as he made thereof to her Councel very good report, and most earnestly desired that the King his Master might under∣stand by her Majesties own Letters, or by her Ambassador. The sum of her Majesties answer was, That although upon the first report of the general murther, so many being all under his protection in his principal City, was very hard to conceive well of the King, yet it had been her Majesties former opinion of his singular integrity of his actions, and namely of his many outward favours that he had since the time of the Admirals coming to his presence, shewed towards him and his friends, that howsoever this fact of it self, with the circumstances of so many and horrible murthers, did outwardly charge the King with all man∣ner of dishonor that might touch a Prince, yet her Majestie, partly for reve∣rence of his Princely estate, for her love she did bear him, and finally, for that she had not yet received due information from him, did determine with her self, not to pronounce any evil judgement of the King, nor yet to conceive that which the most part of all others did of him; but now she hath heard by the Ambassador, in what sort the King hath willed him to declare the process there∣of, she doth much desire the consideration of the Kings honour, the continuance of the Amity with him, she most heartily wisheth, that he might so use the matter in time, as the world might find him excusable in one of these two sorts; that is, that either it might be made manifest to indifferent persons, that is, to such as are
not known to have born deadly malice to the Admiral and his party now mur∣thered. That if the confirmations that were given to the King, of the Admirals evil intention and conspiracy against him were grounded upon truth, and not up∣on malice or pretext; and if  informations might bee verified, then might the King be excused in some part both towards God and the world, in permit∣ting the Admirals enemies by force to prevent his enterprizes, although in∣deed the same informations had been true, yet the manner of the cruelty used cannot be allowed in any Kingdom or Government; and least, in that place where the King might by order of justice have done due execution both to the Admiral and all others that should have proved offenders: for it cannot be denyed, that the same forces that murthered so many, might have more easily attached them all, or the principals, and brought them to answer to justice when the King would; and of all others the Admiral, being on his bed lamed, both on the right hand and left arm, lying in danger under the cure of Chyrurgions, being also guard∣ed about his private house, with a number of the Kings guard, might have been by a word of the Kings mouth brought to any place to have answered, when and how the King should have thought meet. But the fault thereof, as to the disorder in proceeding, howsoever the information had been true, her Majestie forbeareth to impute to the King, and leaveth the same to the burthen of others about him, whose age and knowledge ought in such a case to have foreseen how offenders ought to be justified with the sword of the Prince, and not with the bloody swords of murtherers, being also the mortal enemies of the party mur∣thered. The information whereof, for the recovery of the Kings honour, which is by the facts of others herein greatly touched, her Majestie leaveth to the King to be considered, and wisheth him commodity to do what shall be to Gods honour and to his praise. But on the other side, if such informations were so suddenly given to the King against the Admiral, shall not be duly and manifestly, without subornation, proved true, as therein surely the manner of the circumstances do lead all indif∣rent persons to think the same not onely falsly forged of the private deadly ma∣lice to the Admiral and his parties, but also perillously devised to weaken the K. Estate, and to deprive him of the great honor and surety that daily was grow∣ing unto him, by counsels or services of the Admiral and his friends now mur∣thered, that her Majestie findeth the case of so great importance to be pitied, wishing him grace to have power, by faithful Counsellours and Servants, to make an example to the world of the same manner of punishment of such detesta∣and trayterous attempts, whereby not onely his honour, which is now much blemished, may be saved, but principally himself, and his person and surety, being in good time provided for; and if it shall please him herein to require the use of her Majesties advice, and of her assistance, she shall not fail, but to shew her self in this time a perfect friend to him by all goods means that is in her power. And after many good speeches used to the Ambassador; she conclu∣ded, That as the Ambassador required of her, she could rather condole with the King this miserable accident, then to condemn him, until she should see more caus by the manner of his proceeding, which he should use hereafter for the reco∣very of his honour. And as to the Admiral she confesseth, That she was ve∣ry sorry for his death, as for one whom she thought a good Minister to con∣tinue amity betwixt their two Majesties, and she had cause to bewail the rest of the Noblemen for the like cause; but otherwise the Ambassador could well tell, that in former times she did never allow the taking of arms, contrary to the Kings Commandment; but now perceiving upon the Kings receiving them to grace, and taking them to his protection, and that it was by consequence of things
maifest, that the taking of arms was not against the Kings Estate or Person, but to defend themselves in the profession of their Religion, according to the Kings own Edicts and Grants, her Majestie did greatly lament their death, and doth surely perswade her self, that if the King shall not use his power, to make some amends for so much blood so horribly shed, God, who seeth the hearts of all, as well Princes as others, will shew his justice in time and place, when his honour shall therein be glorified, as the Author of all Juice, and the Re∣venger of all blood sheding of the innocts. In this maner, at the least, to this purpose, with some large discourse to the Ambassadors contentation, hath her Majestie uttered her meaning; and according thereunto willth, hat you her Ambassador shall take convenient time to declare what she hath thought meet; and yet you shall well consider aforehand, how and in what sort you may communicate all this. So as both he may well uderstand i, and reserve so much thereof to himself, as shall seem meet to be kept from others, that have been Procures or Consenters to this murther; For such, how near soever they be to the King in place of service, or in degree of blood, may not be privy thereto. And therefore you must also first consider, and seek to understand, whether indeed the King was no otherwise induced to this, then as the Ambassador here reporteth; o whether the report be not devised to cover the Kings honour to us-ward. For if he were privy to the intention of the murther indeed, as God forbid that ever he was, then this manner of deal∣ing with him in many parts is to be forborn, as your self can well judge, which is to be left to your discretion, using then but such part thereof as may declare her Majesties grief for the accident; and so to use good words toward him of her Majesties disposition to continue the amity. But if ye shall truly perceive that the King is grieved with the accident, and that he hath a disposition to revenge it upon the Authors and Executors, and that you find a good will to receive her Majesties opinion, and to use such advice as you shall give him ecretly, th shall you deal inwardly with him, with assurance of her Majesties friendship to the utmost of her power; and require him, that he will utter his mind plainly unto you, or otherwise by some such of his own as he may well trust to impart it to us▪ and it is to be left to your own consideration, how you shall deal with the Queen Mother and others there; for it is not certain how far she and others have entred into the matter, not with what honor they are carried. But according as you shall see meet, you may impart unto her how greatly h Majestie is perplexed herein, what to think, and what assurance to make of the things intended in this late ami∣ty. And you may also say unto her, that the Queens Majestie cannot enough ma∣vel, that she being of such wisdom as she is, and having such experience as she had of the extreme hatred of the factions there against the Admiral, did not a he first take order that the informations should be examined, and the Admiral and others of his party suspected, charged, tryed, and so by order of justice proeeded, which had been honorable to the King, and good in the sight of God, and so either the guilty had duly suffered, r the innocent blood hd been saved. You shall also procure some good assurance from them, such as may e had, for the safety of the English Merchants now repairing to the Vintage; ad therefore procure that some order may be given from the K. both to the town of Burdeaux, & to the Govern∣or there; and to Strzzi, and to the Conductors of his Army. And for your self, it is her Majesties desire, that you were here from tht place, and so her meaning is, to devise for your revocation; but presently it cannot, without some note of the breach of amity be done. Nevertheless, you may do well, not only to keep your home as you are desirous, but to carry you both to the K. & Q. Mother by way of complaint, shew your unwillingness to arry, and your  to be voked thence for your surety.
Where we understand, that the English Gentlemen that were in Paris at the time of the execution of the murther, were forced to retire to your house, where they did wisely; for your care of them, we and their friends are beholding to you, and now we think good that they be advised to return home; and namely, we desire you to procure for the Lord Wharton and Mr. Philip Sidney, the Kings license and safe conduct to come thence, and so we do require you to give them true knowledge of our minds herein. And if her Majestie could think that the French King would be content that you might come home, with pretence to be absent from thence, whilst this Real were in more quietness; and so to leave a Secretary there, and to return again to your charge, she is well content you shall so do. And therein you may do will to assay the Kings minde, and to advertise hither. Fare you heartily well. From Woodstock the ninth of September. Your loving Friends, William Burleigh. Ro: Lecester. F. Knowles. T. Smith. Iames Croft. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq her Majestes Am∣bassador Resident in France. SIr, I see the Devil is suffered by the Almighty God for our sins, to be strong in following the persecution of Christs members; and therefore we are not onely vigilant of our own defence against such trayterous attempts as lately have been put in ure there in France, but also to call our selves to repentance. Of the Queens Majesties answer to this Ambassador, I have at good length comprized the same in writing, which cometh now unto you signed by the Councel, which you are to use, according as the time shall teach you. For although the Ambas∣sador hath seemed to gain so much credit with her Majestie, as she thinketh that the King is not guilty of the murthers otherwise then he reporteth. And fur∣ther, that although the Ambassador saith, that the King willed him to assure her Majestie, that the Navy prepared by Strozzi, should not any ways endamage her Majestie, we have great cause in these times, to doubt all fair speeches; and therefore we do presently put all the Sea-coasts in defence, and mean to send the Queens Majesties Navy to the Seas with speed, and so to continue, until we see further whereunto to trust. I pray you do your best to discover the in∣tention of that Navy, and let us now frequently hear from you as you may; and if I could have had my mind, you had been presently revoked, and onely a Se∣cretary lef there. I desire to have knowledge o as many of the Principals as were slain, and what Protestants did escape. We are much perplexed with va∣rity of reports, and your Letters or Messengers with credit may much please us here. Pynassy hath been here, and is not yet departed; we had desire rather to hasten my brother Killegrew, who departed hence towards Scotland on Sunday last, to supply Drewries room with le Crocque, because my Lord of Hunsdon is here, and therefore M. Drewry cannot be spared from Berwick. The whole Councel shalbe here by to morrow, but beforehand we that are here wil not be idle. I cannot speak for my self to give order to the Realm. God keep you, and comfort his afflicted
Church. We know not but the Prince of Orange is much stronger then the two Dukes, and that Macklin by him hath been taken the 29 of the last; and great likelihood is that Antwerp shall yield. Our men in Flushing agree not well with the French, but now we think upon this misery, their French will not e so lordly. From Woodstock the ninetenth of September, 1572. Your assured loving Friend, William Burleigh. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassadr for the Queens Majestie in France. SIr, yesternight, after your servant was departed, Faunt and my Cousin came hither; and although I had before moved her Majestie that she would require you to return, yet I could not then obtain it as I did this morning. And so now I have obtained a Letter from her Majestie to the French King, which Master Secretary sendeth you, as by his Letter you may perceive. From Woodstock the twelfth of September, 1572. Yours assuredly William Burleigh. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassadr Resident for her Majestie in France. THe lamentable Tragedy that hath been there used of late, doth make all Christians look for a just revenge again at Gods hands, as it hath pleased him to fear us, and so pinch us in the mean time with the scourge of correction, by the sufferance of his people thus to be murthered, but our sins deserve this and more▪ but I trnst he will hold his holy hand over us, not to reward us altogether as we deserve, but somewhat in his correction comfort us, that we may see as well the fall of his and our enemies, as the blood of his Saints to be so innocently spilt, even for his mercies, let him turn it ten fold upon their heads, that they triumph not over much, to the utter hearts grief of his poor flock. If that King be Author and doer of this Act, shame and confusion light upon him, be he never so strong in the sight of men, the Lord hath not his power for nought; if he be not the Author, but upon the sudden fear and practise brought suddenly to us, as his Ambassador would have us think, although the yielding unto it be horrible, yet if frailty and fear hath constrained it, and that his heart with due repentance seek the right satisfaction first of God, and then of the world, by prosecuting the enemies of God and his Realm that so entised them to it, then may I hope that it was not his own consent or liking. Otherwaies, if he continue in con∣firming the fact, and allowing the persons that did it, then must he be a Prince detested of all honest men, what Religion soever they have; for as his fact was ugly, so was it inhumane, for whom should a man trust, if not his Princes word; and these men whom he hth put to slaughter, not onely had his word, but his writing, and not publique, but private, with open Proclamations, and all other manner of Declarations that could be devised for the safety, which now being violated and broken, who can believe or trust him. But Sir, the Am∣bassador hath inwardly dealt of late with me, and  me believe that we shall shortly see that this matter is not the Kings, and that he doth
as he will make revenge of it. God grant it be so, but you may easily understand it; and surely you shall do well inwardly, as her Majestie hath written unto you (but warily) to discover it, even with himself; and if it may appear he stands in any fear of his person, or doubts his force to assist him, I know her Majestie will venter twenty thousand of her best subjects for him and with him in so good a quarrel: For it is almost incredible, that one so young, and hitherto so plain, so sin∣cere, and of so good disposition, as you your self could not say too much of him, could thus be transformed so suddenly, so dishonourable, from so good to ill. Well, you may shortly see it, and I pray you let us hear from you as often as you may. And so praying God to send you your health and safety, I bid you fare∣wel, trusting you will be a mean for my Nephew Sidney, that he may repair home, considering the present state there. In haste the 11 of Sept. Your very Friend, Ro. Leicester. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador Resident for her Majestie in France. SIr, this accident in France seemeth to us so strange, and beyond all expecta∣tion, that we cannot tell what to say to it, and the excuse tam that we wot not what to think of it. The matter appeareth all manner of ways so lamentable, the King so suddenly and in one day to have dispoiled himself and his Realm of so many notable Captains, so many brave Souldiers, so wise and so valiant men, as if they were unguilty of that which is laid unto them, it is most pitiful; if they were guilty, Cur mandati causa damnati sunt ac casi, in such sudden and extreme deal∣ings, Cito sed sera penitentia solet sequi. If it were sudden, and not of long time pre∣meditated before; and if so, the worse and more infamous. Thus you see what pri∣vately any man may think of the fact; I am glad yet, that in those tumults and bloody proscriptions you did escape, and the yong Gentlemen that be there with you, and that the K. had so great care and pity of our Nation so lately with strait amity confederate with him; yet we hear say, that he that was sent by my Lord Chamberlain to be Schoolmaster to yong Wharton, being come the day before, was then slain. Alas, he was acquainted with no body, nor could be partaker of any evil dealing. How fearful and careful the mothers and parents be here of such yong Gentlemen as be there, you may easily guess by my Lady Lane, who prayeth ve∣ry earnestly that her son may be sent home with asmuch speed as may be. And if my Lady your wife, with you daughter, and the rest, with such as may be spared, were sent away home, until this rage and tempest were somewhat appeased, you shall be the quieter, and disburthened of much of your care. You would not think how mu we are desirous to hear what end these troubles will have, whether it rangeth further into all France, or dy, or will cease here at Paris. Our Merchants be afraid to go now into France, and who can blame them; who would, where such liberty is given to Souldiers, and where nec pietas, nec justitia doth refrain and keep back the unruly malice and sword of the raging po∣pular. Monsieur la Mote is somewhat spoken to in this matter, and now the vin∣tage (as you know) is at hand, and our traffique into Roan, and other places in France is almost layed down with this new feat. It grieveth no man in England so much as me, and indeed I have in some respect the greatest cause. Fare you well. From woodstock the twelfth of September, 1572. Yours alwayes assured, Tho: Smith.
My Lady Lane hath sent by your man thirty pound in gold, to pay her sons debts there, and charges in coming home. I most heartily thank you for the book of the past troubles in France: But alas, who shall now write worthily of the treasons and cruelties more barbarous then ever the Scythians used. Both my Lord Treasurer and I have been more then once or twice Sutors to her Majestie for your coming home; and sometimes we had it granted and streight revoked, the letters written, and immediately called back; you must I see endure for a time, but I trust it will not be long. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador for the Queens Majestie in France. SIr, although, as may appear in my former Letters, that you were fain to be left without hope of returning so soon as you would wish, yet yesterday Fawnte, Argold and South coming out of France to the Court, did so amplifie the cruel disorders there, and thereupon your dangers in every mans ears, where∣of your friends made relation to her Highness, that finally her Majestie was con∣tent to write this letter for your return hither, to the French King, whereof I send you herewith a copy: And so she hath somewhat provided for you; so shall you understand that her Highness hath been so awakened, that care and provision also is taken for the defence of her Realm, if this fire in France should attempt to come neerer hither. Fare you well. Woodstock the twelfth of Septem∣ber, 1572. Your assured Friend, Th. Smith. To the Right Honourable his very good Lords, the Lords of her Majesties most honourable privy Councel. IT may please your Honours to understand, that your letters of the ninth of this moneth, I received the seventeenth of the same; and having well perused and considered of the contents thereof, and seeing a choice left unto you of me touching the speech that from her Majestie was to be used both towards the King and his Mother, as might express her Maj. grief for the inconvenience hapned; as also, to assure him of her Majesties disposition to continue the amity upon such certain informations as I could gather here of the manner of the Kings proceed∣ings in this late accident, and finding him to avow aswel by speech as by the con∣tinuance of most extreme severity towards those of the Religion, that the said ac∣cident proceeded of himself, though her Majestie is otherwise informed by the Ambassador; I thought therefore good both towards him and his mother, accord∣ing to the direction of your Honours letters, to use such speeches as the time of my repair to the Court, which was the one and twentieth of this moneth would permit; I was first brought unto Q. Mother, to whom I shewed that her Maj. wil∣led me to say, That she was not a little stonished and perplexed upon the hearing of the late miserable and most lamentable accident in such sort as she knew neither what to say or judge of the matter, seeing those murthered without pity and compassion, without regard had either of age or sex, without ordinary form of justice, who upon the assurance of the Kings word, laying all suspicion aside, did misdoubt nothing less then that which hapned unto them, who thought their lives then in most safety, when by proof it appeared they were in most danger. How these things may pass, and the King receive
no touch and blemish in honour, is a thing which the Queen my Mistris saith she chiefly feareth; besides, she hath willed me to say unto you, That she doth not a little marvel, that you being a Prince of that judgement you are, and so well experimented in matters of Government, knowing the passions and factions that reign in your State, could be induced so easily to yield to an exe∣cution not to be allowed in all mens judgement in any sort or Commonwealth, as the parties to be executed before due examination had of such informations, as in reason it appeareth were given against them; for as easily might the said persons hav been arrested as slain: And so being arrested, afterwards have been produced before the ordinry justice, to have received (being found guil∣ty) punishment according to their demerits; otherwise, being found inno∣cent, to have been restored both to honour and liberty; which kind of pro∣ceeding might have saved the blood of many an innocent, which now through the fury and rage of the people was shed, and the King had remained justified in honour. She desireth your Majestie to interpret this her plain speech in good part, as proceeding from one that wisheth well both to the King and you, and cannot therefore but condole and bewail this accidet, whereon dependeth both your honour, and the repose of your Estate; notwithstand∣ing, she hopeth that the King will yield justification of this fact, as he shall remain justified of God and the world. To this she answered, That she no∣thing marvelled, that the Queen my Mistris was astonished with the acci∣dent, for that the execution was performed with a great deal more cruelty then was intended by the King; who (saith she) is no Tyrant, nor was easie to be induced to do that which he did, had he not been provoked thereto by the apparent danger which he saw growing both to himself, and to me his Mother, and his Brethren, if present execution had not been done; which shall well appear by the process which my son meaneth to send unto the Queen your Mistris. And whereas the Queen your Mistris doth seem to mar∣vel, that I should be easily induced to yield to any execution, a kind of speech that somewhat toucheth me, to be done before due examination had of the informations, I being (as she saith) so well acquainted with factions reigning in this State: You may tell her, that present mischief cannot abide delayed reme∣dies; for (saith she) we were informed, by persons not to be suspected as drawn by passion or faction, being rather tied to the Admiral both by Religion and Amity, yet moved in conscience to prefer their Prince before any private person, for that those of the Religion, had they not been prevented at the time that they were, had seized within two hours after one of the gates of our Pallace of the Louvre, and so consequently our persons; which enterprize to have been executed, was agreed the same afternoon that the Admiral was hurt: And that they had some such meaning, it may be gathered, for that the Count of Mont∣gomery the same morning that this enterprize should have been executed, with a Troop of Horse stayed a good while at Pre de Clerces, to attend what the other should do within. Hereupon I took occasion to say unto her, That although I had no Commission to reply, yet I hoped her Majestie would give me leave to say somewhat in the justifying of the said Count of Mongomery, for that heretofore it pleased her to bear with the liberty of my speech. And so I shewed her, that Fri∣day at night, after the Admiral was hurt, between nine and ten of the clock, the said Count came unto my lodging, and amongst other communication he said, That as he and those of the Religion had just occasion to be right sorry for the Admirals hurt, so▪ had they no less cause to rejoyce to see the King so careful, as well for the curing of the Admiral, as also for the search∣ing out of the party that hurt him. No small argument (saith he) of the
Kings sincerity, which kind of speech seemed to be void of all conspiracy and miscontentment. And touching his being au Pre de Clerces, I told her that an English Gentleman who was lodged not far from the said Count, went unto him that morning that the execution was done, in my name, desiring him to send me word what stirr there was in the Town. His answer was, That true it was, some stirr was in the Town, and the King had taken so good order therein, as all was appeased, and that he had placed such guards about the Admirals house, as he was in safety. This an∣swer, Madam (said I) shewed, that his intention in staying A pre de Clerces, was void of any evil meaning. And as for his Troop, as I learn, it was under forty horse, of the which all was unarmed, and of them, four only had Pistols, which sheweth plainly that he was very slenderly appointed for the execution of any Enterprise. To this her only answer was, That she thought not the Count so guilty as the rest: And further, she shewed me, that sithence his departure he had written to the King her son, as well Letters for his justification, as also of submission. In the end she willed me to desire her Majestie to content her self with such re∣lation as should be made with their Ambassador there, touching their procee∣dings here, as the King her son and she did rest satisfied with such relations as were made of her proceedings in like cases there, by her Ministers here. And so making great protestation of the Kings and her earnest desire for to continue, or rather to increase the amity, she ended. From her I was conducted to the King; at my access I shewed unto him, that I was willed from her Majestie to say unto him, That though she was much a∣stonished at the first report made of the great slaughter and horrible murder, without regard either had to sex or age of those of the Religion, who laying a∣side all distrust, and reposing themselves upon his words, did most confidently throw themselves into the arms of his protection; notwithstanding, such was the opinion she had of his sincerity, such the reverence she bare towards his Princely state, and such the particular affection she bare towards his person, as she resolved not to pronounce any thing in prejudice of his honour, untill she might be fully informed of the manner of the proceeding in that behalf. I fur∣ther shewed him, that after by his Ambassador, her Majestie was informed of the progress and success of the matter: She then, as one that wished the con∣servation of his honour, and of the continuance of the good amity between them, could not but wish also, that with all expedition he would make it man∣fest to the world, that the information which was given unto him of the Admi∣rals evil intention and conspiracy were grounded upon truth, and not upon mal∣lice or pretext; and if the information might be so verified, then should his Majestie in some part be excused, both towards God and the world, in permit∣ting the Admirals enemies by force to prevent his enterprises. Upon this he brake off my speech, and shewed me, that he had cause many waies to think himself most bound unto her Majestie his good sister; but at this present, chiefly for that she staid from condemning him before she was in∣formed of the manner of his proceedings; also for the good advice she giveth him to seek to justifie himself towards the world, which councel (saith he) I mean to follow, as shall appear unto her by the process I mean to send unto her, and also to the other Princes, that I had most cause to do as I did. And as for the cruelty (saith he) exercised both here in my Town of Paris, and elsewhere, it is a thing that hath hapned against my will to my great grief. Of late (saith he) the like disorder hath been committed at Roan, for the which I am very sorry; and therefore for the redress thereof, I have all this morning been devising
with my Councel for exemplary Justice to be done upon those which shall be found to be offenders. Besides (saith he) my meaning is to dispatch my Gover∣nors into their several charges, to see such Ordinances observed as to me shall seem fit to be set forth. He forbare to mention the Edict already made, and now wholly violated, tending to the repose and tranquillity of the Realm. I shewed him that I had more to say unto him from her Majesty; and so I proceeded and declared unto him, that her Majesty as one that wisheth well unto him, could have wished that although the said information had been found true, that he had proceeded otherways, for that the manner of the cruelty used cannot be al∣lowable in any kingdom or government, and least of all in that place where his Majesty might by order of justice have done due execution both of the Admi∣ral and others that should be proved offenders; for it cannot be (said I) denied, but that the same forces that murthered so many might more easily have attach∣ed them all, or the principals, and brought them to answer to Justice, where his Majesty would. And of all other the Admiral being in his bed, lamed both on the right hand and left arm, and lying in danger under the cure of Surgeons, be∣ing also guarded about his private house with a number of his Majesties guard, might have been by a word of his Majesties mouth brought to any place to have answered when and how his Majesty should have thought meet: but the fault hereof as to the disorder in proceeding, howsoever the information had been true, her Majesty forbeareth to impute to his Majesty, and leaveth the same to the burthen of others about him, whose age and knowledg ought in such a case to have foreseen how offenders ought to have been chastifed with the sword of the Prince, and not with the bloody sword of murtherers, being also the mortal sworn enemies of the parties murthered. The information whereof for the re∣covery of his Majesties honour, which is by the faults of others herein greatly touched, her Majesty leaveth to his Majesty to be considered, and wisheth him commodity to do that which might be to Gods honour and his praise. To that he answered me (seeming with that kind of speech to be somwhat moved) That the loss of life and kingdom goeth neer to a Prince. Thereupon I considered the manner of the proceedings here, being fully resolved to use all manner of rigor and extremity, and that therefore the advice that her Majesty gave were bootless and can do no good, I shortning my speech concluded with him, That her Majesty willed me to say to him, that she thought it her part presently rather to condole with him this miserable accident, then to condemn him, till se should see more cause by the manner of his proceedings which he should hereafter use for the recovery of his honour. To this he answered, that he thanked her Ma∣jesty; and so protested that he had no other meaning but to continue good amity with her; and that though he sought to reform his own Realm touching Religion, yet he hoped that the said amity lately concluded should continue firm between them without alteration; for that the King his father, and K. Edward my good sisters brother did not leave to be good friends, notwithstanding the contrariety of religion. To that I said, that I was well assured that her Majesty had no other meaning. I then moved him for some order to be given both to the Governor of the Town of Burdeaux, as also to Strozzi and the Conductors of his Army, that our Merchants that repair to the Vintage might pass to and fro safely without any way being outraged, and that also during the time of his abode at Burdeaux they might not be molested for religion. To this his answer was, that there might be such order taken as they should not at any way be mo∣lested by any of his subjects; and besides, that if there could be a place of traf∣fique agreed upon, they should enjoy the exercise of their religion according to the late Treaty.
Then I shewed him that I was to move his Majestie in a thing that particularly touched my self, and so declared unto him, that about three months past, I wrote very earnestly to divers of my friends to move her Majestie either for my revo∣cation, or else to repair home for a time; which thing as her Majestie did not then fully deny, so did she not yield thereto; but now the matter being renewed unto her Maj. they laying before her besides my private affairs, the great danger I live in here, through the disquietness of this State, and the great hatred borne to our Nation, her Maj. hath so far yielded thereto, as she hath for that purpose writ∣ten this Letter which I am now to present unto your Maj. So he took the Letter and read it; and after he had read it, he shewed me, that if he should consent to my departure, according to his good sisters request, he must then also revoke his Am∣bassador; which thing (saith he) cannot but make it appear to the world, that th amity lately concluded betwixt us were broken, or at the least not very sound, when we do leave the use of necessary Ministers that may communicate between us such things as may increase and continue amity. I shewed, that her Majesties meaning to call me home for a time, had no other respect but to my particular safety, without any intention to diminish amity, and that the example was not strange, for that Sir Nicholas Throgmorton had done the like. To that he reply'd, that touching danger, he should come in his own person to relieve me, rather then I should sustain any harm: and as for the example, he said, that at that time there was not that perfect amity that is now. In conclusion he desired me to press him no further in the matter, untill such time as he might hear from his Ambassador, for that he did mean to answer her Majesties Letter written in that behalf. And so for that time I took my leave. After my departure from him, Duke de Alanzon sent for me into his Cham∣ber to come and speak with him: At my access he shewed me that he was very sorry that both I and our Nation had in these troubles been so outraged as he understood we were. I know (saith he) you are wise, and can consider of the time. If hereafter either you your self, or any of your Nation shall stand in need of my friendship or assistance, you shall do me wrong to use the help of any other but of me, for the honour your Mistress did unto la Mott, doth bind me to be her servant during my life, and an advocate for your Nation. And so he licensed me to depart, desiring me to present unto her Majestie his most humble and affectionate commendations. Your Honour by the King and his Mothers answers, may see great pro∣testations of amity. I am sorry that I cannot yield that assurance thereof that heretofore I have done, wherein I may seem to have dealt over-confidently; but I know that your Honours do consider that my error in that behalf was common with a great ma∣ny wiser then my self, and therefore I hope you do hold me excused. Seeing now there is here neither regard had to either word, writing, or Edict, be it never so solemnly published, nor to any protestation made heretofore to forein Princes for the performance of the same. Seeing the King persecuteth that Religion with all extremity that her Maje∣stie professeth, and now is like to be an instrument to execute any thing by this people, offered unto him to the prejudice of her Majesty. Seeing that they that now possess his ear, are sworne enemies unto her Maje∣stie, and nourishers of the late amity, are separated from him: seeing that the Kings own conscience, so common a companion is fear with Tyranny, maketh him to repute all those of the Religion, as well at home as abroad, his enemies, and so consequently not to wish one of them alive, I leave to your Honours now to judge, what account you may make
of the amity with this Crown. If I may without presumption or offence say my opinion, considering how things presently stand, I think less peril to live with them as enemies, then as friends. The King, Queen Mother, and Monsieur, have their Councel apart; but first, before things are communicated with the King, they are debated between Queen Mother and Monsieur, the Duke of Nevers, and Tavannes. The Duke of Nevers hath well nigh daily conference with the Prince, Nuncio, the Ambassador of Spain, and the extraordinary Ambassador of Venice, Iohn Mi∣chal, and what they treat is kept most secret; and for mine own part, I am now divided from all means to discover any thing; so that I now stand her Ma∣jestie in no further stead here, but to present unto her ordinary Palace news. There daily remain great number of both horsemen and footmen towards S. Q. as it is said, to the relief of the D. of Almain. The Marshal de Cosse hath Commission sent him, as I am informed, to exe∣cute as many of the Religon within his charge, as have been known in these late Wars to have served the Princes, and born charges; if the Marshal Montmo∣rency had been in this Town at the day of execution, both he, with all his bre∣thren, the Duke de Bulloign, and Marshal had been slain, as I am credibly in∣formed. It is said that both Spain and Portugal make great preparation by Sea. It is thought that so long as Rochel holdeth out, Strozzi shall be entertained from executing any other enterprise; and yet there is no word come that Byron shall be received. It is thought that the late murder at Roan, will make them of Rochel more resolute. And so leaving to trouble your Honour any further at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the 24 of September, 1572. To the right honorable his very good Lords, the Lords of her Majesties most honorable privy Councel. IT may please your Honours to understand, that the King here is advertised sundry waies, as I learn, that the Prince of Orange and the Duke of Alva are like to grow to an accord, which thing is both feared and misliked; at the least they would have the world so to judge: their speech and meaning doth now so far disagree, as it is hard to grow to any grounded opinion touching their pro∣ceedings. It was held here for certain that Monts was rendred the 19 day of this month by composition, that Count Lodovick, and the heads that were in that Town, issued at such time as certain of the Duke of Alvas horsemen were distressed, which was the 9 of this month. The Articles of the Composition are not yet certainly known, but it is given out they departed with Ensignes displayed, and bagg and baggage. As I shall further understand, so shall I further adver∣tise touching Flanders matters. And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris Sept. 25 1572. Your Honours to command, Francis Walsingham.
By the QUEEN. To our trusty and well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esq, our Ambassador Resi∣dent with our good brother the French King. ELIZABETH R. TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well. De la Mott the French Ambas∣sador, on Munday the 22 of this Month, having asked Audience, came to our Court at Reading, and there had long communication with us, the which seemed to us at that time the more strange, being we had heard before of the daily murdering of those of the Religion there in France, not only at Paris and Orleans, but also at Lyons and Roan, and divers other places and Cities of that Realm, all the which was done by the Kings appointment and commandment; whereupon when we had heard what he could say unto us, he heard us so reply at that time, as we do think he found himself unable to satisfie us: And ne∣vertheless we told him, that we would be further advised for our answer, which he should have within three or four daies; whereupon communicating his Ne∣gotiation with our Councel upon their French tongue, An answer was made, as appeareth by this here inclosed, which is the copy of that we delivered to Ni∣casius to interpret in French to the said de la Mott, as our ful answer & resolution at that time; with the which, as Nicasius reporteth, de la Mott seemed very well content and satisfied. In the which yet you may perceive that divers things are left to be ascertained to us by you, wherefore you shall do well with conveni∣ent speed to demand audience of the King, and there to declare both to him and to the Queen mother, what hath passed betwixt his Ambassador and us, and upon the points we did at that time stand; and you may say, as touching any worthy punishment executed upon his own Subjects, we have not to deal there∣in; but if they have worthily suffered, we are sorry for their evil doings. But yet the King to destroy and utterly root out of his Realm all those of that Reli∣gion that we profess, and to desire us in marriage for his brother, must needs seem unto us at the first, a thing very repugnant in it self, especially having be∣fore confirmed that liberty to them of the Religion by an Edict of his, perpe∣tual and irrevocable. Of the which to whom that liberty was granted, if any were partakers of any evil conspiracies against him, specially women and chil∣dren, who we do understand are not yet spared. And therefore if that Religi∣on of it self be so odious unto him, that he thinks he must root out all the pro∣fessers of it, how should we think his brother a fit husband for us? or how should we think that the love may grow, continue and increase betwixt his bro∣ther and us, which ought to be betwixt the husband and the wife. You had in our former Letters unto you, things that we required you to de∣cypher by all means that you could, especially whether the King himself be in∣clined and bent to all these cruelties, and the rooting out of true Religion, or whether he be but overruled; to the which Article hitherto you have not an∣swered; and yet these things might give great light unto us how to direct our actions in the conferences and talks with his Ambassador; and we would have you to be earnest with him in that matter of Strozzi, praying him frankly and roundly, what he meaneth with that great Army of Ships and men of War, which hath been kept a long time close and undiscovered, to what intent, or to what place it should be bent: You may say we have the more desire to know his meaning and dealing herein, because that of lat they of Strozzies Compa∣ny there, have spoiled divers of our Merchants, some of their Artillery and
Victuals, other of their goods and Merchandizes, as was accustomed betwixt the two Realms in times past, the which kind of dealing is very much contra∣ry to the amity, and to such things as by his Ambassador is propounded unto us; wherefore as we do go roundly and plainly to work with him, to shew flat∣ly that which we do think or doubt hereupon, so we pray him with the same flat∣ness and roundness to deal with us, for that is the way to make continuance of amity, and also increase, and may induce us the sooner to come to a further re∣solution of such things as be required of us. The Vidam of Chartres, of whom we have great compassion, is come into this Realm, at whose humble and la∣mentable suit we have been content to write this Letter to my brother the French King in his favour, which you shall deliver with as good words as you may to the French King, and require his answer. If this our Letter do chance to come to you in Paris, or in the way coming from Paris towards England, after you have obtained licence of the King to come away by favour of our Letters which we wrote unto him; yet if you be not too far on the way, or very near the sea-coast, we would you should return in Poste, or otherwise, to the Court, to have a direct answer of these Letters, except that great and unfeigned danger of your self, do move you to keep on your journey. In which case you shall commit the doing of this message, and receiving of answer, to your Secretary, whom you shall leave behind, so that he be a man able to do this charge. Given at Reading the 28 of September, 1572. in the fourteenth year of our Reigne. T. Smith. The Ambassadors Message in three Points. THat the King was of necessity for safeguard of his own life forced to cause such execution to be done upon the Admiral and his complices, as was done; for that he and they had conspired the death of the King, of which matter the King was very well able to make a verification, and that her Majesty should shortly see by the process of the Admiral now in making, and that no∣thing was meant by the King against the cause of Religion. That the King was most earnestly disposed to keep the League. That he desired to have the marriage of his brother of Alanzon to proceed; and to that end the Queen mother was content to come into the Realm with her son, at such place, and with such numbers as her Majesty here should allow. Answers. To the first, That although the killing of the Admiral and the rest might pro∣bably move her Majestie to think ill thereof, and to be right sorry that the King should suffer such an act to be done without order of justice; yet her Majestie being advertised from the King that he was forced thereunto for safety of his own life, and that thereof her Majestie should see good proof, by such a process thereof to be sent to her Majestie, as should verifie the same; her Majestie is content to suspend her judgement against the King, untill by the process she may see the truth, and by the Kings further proceedings hereafter for continuance of his Edict for tolleration of Religion, she may perceive what to judge of his intention for the cause of Religion.
To the second, her Majestie thanketh the King for his so earnest an offer to continue the amity according to the late League made; and doth again assure the King of her mind to keep it for her part; so as howsoever the King shall by his deeds shew his affection therein, her Majestie will do the like to her power. To the third, her Majestie would that the King should nderstd, that she did in the motion of the marriage, before this lat accident of the Admirals death, plainly proceed with the Ambassador, and with la Mot, so she must plainly deal with the King, That this acident of murthering the Admiral, and of so general a slaughter of them of the Religion there, hath made such alteration in her Ma∣jestie, and hath moved such doubts in her minde how to interpret of the offers of this marriage, and of this enterview, by coming of the Queen Mother with her son, as her Majestie cannot but suspend her resolution therein, until she may un∣derstand some further answer to things which the Ambassador had in charge to deal with the King particularly, to understand his mind; of which her Majestie as yet had received no answer from her Ambassador, nor any signification that he hath as yet had speech with the King thereof. And besides that, as to his last offer, of the Queen Mother to come into any part of the Realm with Monsieur d'Alanson, her Majestie cannot but interpret the offer very thankfully, though she had not received from her Ambassador the Queen Mothers meaning to be such; for her words to him were not further, but that she would be content to com with her son to Bulloign, or to Callis, and that she desired that the Queens Majestie would come to Dver; and so then there might be an enterview and communication upon the Sea, betwixt Dover and Calais, or Bulloign, a matter that seemed surely very strange to her Majestie; and seeing that her Ambassador had no such offer made for her coming aland within the Realm, as the French Ambassador offereth, her Majestie meaneth therein to be better advertised by her own Ambassador, who shall have charge therein to understand her mind and the Kings. And upon knowledge thereof, her Majestie will grow to a further resolution, to the which it will be a great furtherance, if the proof were verified as is said, of the just causes given by the Admiral and his Complices, for the exe∣cution of them. And that his further proceedings with the observation of his E∣dicts for the cause of religion, might more clearly appear to her Highness, wherby her Majestie, shall have good cause to see what is meet for her to do in the further proceeding, both for the enterview, and for the marriage: In both which her Majestie shall be very glad to understand that she may have the same likelihood of the good to follow to her self and Contrey for continuance of the amity that was propounded unto her, when it was last renewed at la Mots, before the death of the Admiral. And her Majestie assureth the King, that on her part she mean∣eth to observe the Amity by all good means as shall be to her possible, and shall be very glad to find the like answeable on his part, and therewith doth present∣ly require the King to give her to understand, what his meaning may be in the keeping of so great a Navy and Army nar Burdeaux and Rochel under the rule of Strozzi, which is an occasion why her Subjects and Merchants, who were wont all the year, and specially about this time, to traffique that way for wines and other things, be now put in doubt and great fea, and dare not adventure ac∣cording to the assured amity betwixt the two Realms; and the rather, because now of late divers of her Merchants have been spoiled about Rochel and Burdeaux by those of Strozzies band, not onely of victual and munition, but also of mo∣ney and merchandizes, and some of them also of their lives.
To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq her Majesties Ambassador Resident in France. SIr, although I suppose you are now on your way hitherwards, for by Walter Williams I sent you her Majesties Letters for license of your return for a time, yet if my Lettrs can find you there, or by the way, I would not have you ig∣norant of that which I can shew you. I know by self how Ambassadors be to know what is done in their own Countrey. The cruel murthers at Roan is now long ago written unto us when we thought all had been done; and by the same letters was written unto us, that Diepe was kept close, and the same execution of the true Christians looked for there, but as then not executed; howbeit, Sigoigne did warrant all our Englishmen to be out of danger, and not to be afraid: But what warrant can the French make, now Seals and Words of Princes being traps to catch innocents, and bring them to the Butchery. If the Ad∣miral, and all those murthered on that bloody Bartholomew day were guilty, why were they not apprehended, imprisoned, interrogated and judged, but so much made of as might be, with-in two hours of the assumation; is that the manner to handle men either culpable or suspected? so is the Journeyer slain by the Robber, so is the Hen of the Fox, so the Hinde of the Lyon, so Abel of Cain, so the innocent of the wicked, so Abner of Ioab: but grant they were guilty, they dreamt treason that night in their sleep, what did the innocent men, women and children at Lyons? what did the sucking children and their mo∣thers at Roan deserve? at Cane? at Rochel? what is done yet we have not heard, but I think shortly we shall hear: Will God, think you, still sleep? Will not their blood ask vengeance, shall not the earth be accursed that hath sucked up the innocent blood poured out like water upon it: I am most sorry for the King, whom I love, whom I esteem the most worthy, the most faithful Prince of the world, the most sincere Monarch now living. I am glad you shall come home, and would wish you were at home out of that Countrey, so contaminate with innocent blood, that the Sun cannot look upon it, but to prognosticate the wrath and vengeance of God. The ruine and desolation of Ierusalem could not come till all the Christians were either killed there, or expelled from thence; but whether do I run, driven with just passions and heats? The Scots, both the par∣ties in words shew themselves desirous of accord, willing to come to reason, but indeed they seem not so, as both Monsieur de Crocque and Mr. Killegrew do fear, the old Enemies be so hard to compound, and the new possessions so hard to part from; but as yet we cannot despair, till they both have met to∣gether, and heard joyntly what both the parties can say; which so soon as it can be done, Mr. Killegrew hath promised to write to me what is done, and what he thinketh may be done. What Strozzies hovering cloud, which hath so long gone in a mist, will brew at the last; and what design so long cloaked, will break out upon, is no marvel, though they and we, and all the world doubt; and if it be to besiege Rochel, and to execute more slaughter upon men, women and children Christians, as is now suspected and certified; that thereabout it go∣eth, and▪ as some say, is Master of Rochel when that is done, what it will do, and whether it will go further or no; and if it do, to what place, I tell you truly many do doubt. Divers of our Merchants resorting that way, have found small courtesie at their hands, no more then if they had been men with Pyrats. This maketh our Merchants that they dare not yet adventure for Burdeaux, and to doubt whether they may go thither this year or no. And I would
mervellous fain know what manner of assurance you can make from thence. Fare you well. From Reading the six and twentieth of September, 1572. YOu may perceive by her Majesties answer, that she will not refuse the enter∣view nor marriage, but yet she cometh near to them tam timido & suspenso pede, that they may have good cause to doubt. The answer you see to de la Mot is addulced so much as may, for she would have it so. You have a busie piece of work to decypher, that which in words is designed to the extremity, in deeds is more then manifest, neither you shall open the one, nor they shall cloak the other. The best is, we stand (I thank God) upon our guard, nor, I trust, shall be taken and killed asleep, as the Admiral was; the greatest matter for her Majestie and our safety and defence, is earnestly of us attempted, nor yet atchieved, nor ut∣terly in despair, but rather in hope. The Queens Majestie is in marvellous doubt for you, she taketh as much care for you, as any Prince can do for her Subject, and she thinketh none can do what she would have done there as well as you. You are happy in the one, and her Majestie in the other: seeing you are advertised so well hitherto, God who hath hitherto delivered you, will not yet leave you; I doubt, and I trust I need not fear. I doth me good to see the Princely compassion that her Majestie doth take on the poor Vidame, who is escaped by good fortune into England; her Majestie hath written for him to the King; the Copy I send you, you shall do well to press the answer, and bring it with you. I dare say it will do you good if you can do it, ae est vicissitudo rerum humanarum, haec est communis casus hominum. All that be not bloody and Antichristian, must needs condole and lament the misery and inhumanity of this time. God make it short, and send his Kingdom amongst us. Fare you well once again, the seve and twentieth of September, which is re∣moving day to Windsore. Yours alwayes assured, Tho: Smith. The Copy of the Queens Majesties Letters to the French King, for the Vidam de Charres. TReshault, trespuissant, et tresexcellent Prince nostre trescher et tresaimè bon frere et cousin salut, Le Vidam de Chartres est retirè en nostre Royaulme et nous a donne a entendre par un sien escript supplicative la cause de sa venue a nous, et requirant de nous nostre favorable recommendation de son cas enuers. vous et pour ce que l'avons trove de cocur loyal et fidel envers. vous, desirant tousiours sur toutes choses le tenir en repose, et que par toutes occsions que se presentoient non cesse de louer vos royalles virtus comme vostre tres affectionne subject, dont en pouvons estre bons tesmoins. Nous n'avous voulu faire moins, aians compas∣sion de l'estat miserable anquel il se trove pour lè present, que recommander affectueusment a vous sa cause qui nous smble certes fort lamentable, et qui merite secours, aiant a celle fin envoyè a nostre Ambassadeur aupres de vous sa re∣queste, qui vous la declarera plus amplement, en quoy vous prions trescher & tresame bon frere et cousin luy donner bonne et favorable adience, et  bonne re∣sponse au fin que avec cela nous pussions comme en avons bon espoir consoler
le poure desole Vidam, & a nous y faire gran plaisir comme scait le createur aquel prions, tresh ault tresexcellent & trespuissant Prince nostre trescher & tresame bon frere & cousin vous avoir tousiours a tressainte garde. De nostre Chastea de Windsore le 28 de Septemb. 1672. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador Resident for her Majestie in France. SIr, the last Letters of yours by me received, were those which yong Mr. Hopton brought hither, since which time, we have understood by report from Roan, that on Thursday was sevennight there was a general slaughter made at Roan of all that could be imagined Protestants, so as the very channels of the street did run blood; we have heard diversly of Rochel, by some, that it is sack∣ed by Strozzi, by some, that it holdeth out, and that it is like so to do a long time. As to the Ambassadors negociation here with us, to seek to perswade us, that the King was forced for safety of his own life, to cause the execution to be done as it was, and that thereof we shall see the proofs by the Admirals process, you may imagine how hard a thing it is for us to be so perswaded against all our naturall senses, and how they will accord these two jars we know not. The Kings Letter first written after the Admirals death, doth declare it to be done by manner of sedition, and privately by the house of Guise, who feared the Admiral and his would pursue against them the avenge for his hurt, and the Kings own guard about the Admiral was forced, and the King himself driven to hold his guards about him in the Louvre for his own defence; and now yet it must needs be notified, that the King did for his own surety cause the execution to be done. By the dispatch that you shall receive from Master Secretary, you shall understand what answer is made to the French Ambassa∣dor, and upon what sort her Majestie hath forborn to resolve upon the en∣terview, whereof her Majestie hath no misliking, if it may appear that the King will forbear from persecuting the cause of Religion ACHE Rome A B Glasis, nevertheless, it will be very hard to perswade 3lca to like there∣of. I have imparted to her Majestie two things, whereof your wife had in charge to make me privy of. From Reading the five and twentieth of Sep∣tember, 1572. Yours assuredly William Burleigh. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador Resident for her Majestie in France. I will now (my Lord Ambassador) trouble you with some trifles of mine own, leaving other matters to other advertisements. I am very desirous to recover a Rider, if any worthy the entertainment may be had, whether there be any more at liberty that were appertaining to any of the late Lords that were mur∣thered, it may by some inquiry be known unto you, one of those I had leevest have, if he may be had; if not, you know one Morret an Italian, that served sometimes Mr. Denny, I am informed, that he is willing to come into this Countrey again, so as his pardon may be obtained; the fellow when he was here was thought honest, onely his fact being set apart, vvhich vvas not of pretended malice I knovv; and therefore I can vvith a better will
be a mean for him, if he will be content to serve me. And for his behaviour there, I trust you will understand of it ce his coming, whether he have well sed himself or no; and whether, as he is an Ialian, his hand be free from this last action or no; if he were, and that you may know no cause to the contrary, I will be very glad to entertain him, and will give thirty pod a year, meat and drik, and his horse found in my stable, which offer, if you shall think too lit∣tle, I will refer it to you, praying your Lordship to do me thus much plea∣sure, as to deal in this matter effectually for me, to procure either this fellow or some other that may be a sufficient man of that profession; and as he shall be, I doubt not, well contented and intreated, so shall I also think my self behold∣ing unto you, and the sooner I may hear from yo, touching the same the better. So with my right hearty commendatios, I bid you farewell. From Reading the two and twentieth of September, 1573. Your very Friend, Ro. Leicester. To the Right Honourable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principal Secretary. IT may please you to advertise her Majestie, that at the time of the receit of her Letters of the seven and twentieth of September, being through my late sickness in that state of strength, as I could not without danger go out of my lodging, I desired Monsieur Maesir, who at that instant was sent by Queen Mother to visit me, that I had by Letters lately received somewhat to communicate to her Majestie, which thing I could not do in person, without some peril; and therefore desired him to know of the King and Queen Mother, whether it were their pleasures that I should communicate it unto them by my Secretary; or whether it would please them otherwise to send some hither to my lodging, to receive that I had to say unto them; whereof when Monsieur Mannesire had made relation unto their Majesties, which was the fourth of this present, the next day they sent Brulart, one of the Secretaries of the Estate, and the said Mannesire, to receive that which I had to propound unto their Ma∣jesties here from her Majestie: So a their access, I communicated unto them, what was propounded by their Ambassador to her Majestie, and what was her Majesties answer unto the same. I also shewed them, how hard it was for her Majestie to think, considering the great severity intended towards those who professed one Religion with her, that the King should think his brother a fit husband for her, or that there could grow, continue and in∣crease that love that ought to be between the husband and the wife. I al∣so shewed them, that she desired to understand roundly and frankly what the King meant by the great Army of Ships, and Men of War, which have been so long time betwixt Rochel and Burdeaux, under the con∣duct of Strozzie; which she desired to know the rather, for that divers of her Merchants have been spoiled, some of their Goods and Merchan∣dizes, others of their Artillery, and some also slain; for that the same kind of dealing is very much contrary to the Amity professed lately. Lastly, I did recommend the Vidams case, according to such instructions as I received from him, delivering her Majesties Letters unto Brulart, to prese unto the King.
The seventh of the same, Brulart onely came unto me with the King and Queen Mothers answer: After some speech had that the King and Queen Mother were sorry for my sickness, he shewed me, that Monsieur la Mot and I did agree touching the relation of that which passed betwixt her Majestie and him. And as touching the first point, the King and Queen Mothers answer ws, the process of the Admiral was still in hand, which so soon as it shall be finished, shall be sent to her according to his promise; notwithstanding, he had well hoped that her Ma∣jestie, without any further suspence, would have given credit to his word, as he would have done in like case. Touching the second, his answer was, that he was glad, as well by la Mot as by me, to understand that her Majestie did accept in so good part his assurance touch∣ing his intention to continue good amity with her, and so she doth concur with him in like affection. Concerning the third, that as he desired the continuance of Amity, so did he desire the marriage propounded for the encrease of the same; and there∣fore wisheth, that the enterview might proceed, as a mean to accomplish the same; and that whereas la Mot declared, that the Queen Mothers inten∣tion was to come over, that they misliked the same; for that her meaning was rightly conceived by me in this sort, that if her Majestie would be content to come to Dover, she would then repair to Callis or Bulloign, and conclude be∣tween them some certain mean for the enterview. And as concerning that point, whereas her Majestie doth desire to understand the Kings intention touching Strozzies Army; his answer is, that he hath lately given order for the disposition of the same, whereof two thousand of them are drawn to other parts to furnish the Frontiers in Picardie, in respect of the two great Armies that are in the Low-Countreys; and that the King had never intention to imploy them any way to the disturbance of her Majestie, whose amity he meaneth earnestly to imbrace. And further, his answer was, That whereas violence had been used towards her Merchants, aswel in body as in goods, that he was most sorry for the same; and therefore he had expresly written to the Baron de la Guarde, as also to the Governors of the rest of the Ports, to see her Majesties Subjects well and friendly used, as appertained to good amity; and that the King of late had caused a ship of Acerbo Velutellis, one abiding in England to be released. Touching her Majesties request for the Vidam, his answer was, That as he would be glad any way to gratifie her Majestie, so could he not grant this her request, without touch of his honour, to suffer any of his Subjects to live in a Forreign Countrey, with a kind of defiance of his sincerity, and therefore he hoped that her Majestie would not desire the Vidams benefit with his prejudice; notwithstanding, for the gratefying of her Majestie, he can be content, that the Vidam shall return home, and enjoy his livings here with such surety, as he shall have no occasion to doubt his safety. This was the Answer that I received at Brlarts hands, of such things as I propounded unto him on her Majesties behalf, to be communicated unto the King, and to the Queen his Mother. Le Roches often repairing to the Court, maketh me to suspect some enterprize to be done in Ireland. The passages here be kept so strait, as by no means I can imploy any man in Brittain towards the sea-side, as well for the discovery of the said le Roches enterprize, as also for the observing of Strozzies doings; for though it be said, that the said Army is dispersed, yet know I not what. I think it were good to imploy some Western Barque that way, under the colour of merchandize, for the discovery of the doings.
The Duke of Guise of late, hath often conference with certain of the Scotish Guard, though sithence the late murther, he sheweth outwardly some miscon∣tentment. He was never in greater jollity then presently he is, especially since the news of the Prince of Orange' s retiring. They begin now to discourse here, that it would be a deed of charity for the Princes, Catholiques, not onely to set the Queen of Scots at liberty, but also to restore her to her right: Her Majestie is not ignorant what I have written touching the opinion of wise men, what is to be done in that behalf for her safety: If that sore be not saved, I fear we shall have a Bartholomew Breakfast, or a Florence Banqt: So they terme the late execution here. Monsieur Grandmont hath Commission from the King, to suppress all preach∣ing in the Countrey of Berry, and to plant there the Catholique Religion, which is a verification of the Kings intention touching the observation of his Edict irre∣coverable for the tolleration of Religion. For that I hear that all Scotish men are stayed at the Ports that come hence, I will make some stay to give them passports: if the stay proceeded in respect of carrying over of secret ters from hence, there will grow little help and reme∣dy thereof that way, for that the Scotish Ambassadors Letters do pass in the Kings Pacquets: methinks the return of the Scots might rather do good then harm, for that the most part of them detest their proceedings here; the report whereof will do no harm to the furtherance of the accord. I would be glad to understand her Majesties pleasure, especially for the Lord Levingston. I and mine, and divers of our Nation, never received the like pleasure at their hands, as lately we have done. I have stayed for her Majesties service here, Mr. Herbert, by whom I re∣ceive good assistance; I would therefore he might receive some good words from her Majestie to encourage him in the same, for he is one that hath very very good parts in him, and may hereafter grow a good and profitable ser∣vant. Touching my return home, I hope her Majestie will have just considerati∣on of me, who do now remain here without her benefit, for a colour of their Ministers there, to practise that thing there which is to her danger. And so leaving further to trouble your honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the eighth of October, 1572. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principal Secretary. SIr, I most humbly thank you for the care you have every way of me, and especially in that you would not suffer me to be ignorant hovv things do pass there vvith you, vvhich giveth me no small light to direct my course here; and yet vvhat direction can I receive, that may vvell guide me, vvhere I find neither faith nor constancy to build on; it should but minister unto you grief, for me to ampli∣fie this matter, and no great contentment to my self: It is our part novv rather to think on some remedies for the mischiefs that are like to come, then to rest a∣mazed vvith the passed miseries. I am sorry to hear that the accord in Scotland is not made; and yet so long as la Crocque remaineth in Scotland, vvhat
cause have we to hope after it, seeing that upon this alteration, the end of his stay∣ing there is rather to impeach then to further the same, if we think otherwise, we do but dream our selves. I am sorry to see the Ambassadors fair speech take such place as it doth; methinks the late & fresh experience we have had of that un∣sincerity, should teach us to take profit of others harms. Surely considering how things do proceed here, and weighing the great presumption there is, how that the tre Monarchies of Europe are bent, not onely to disquiet, but also to displace her Majestie, and to substitute some other, it were no more then necessary po∣licy to cut them off from so convenient a footing place as Scotland is, which thing might easily be brought to pass, if her Majestie would proceed roundly, weighing that the Scots are not a little alienated from this Nation, upon this late accident: If her Majestie would joyn pensios with perswasions, the thing in my opinion might easily be brought to pass, not only to unite them under the Go∣vernment of the King, but also divide them from such League and Allyance as they have with this Crown. There is, Sir, as you know, another remedie, which as it hath been long sithence needful to put in execution, so was it never more needful then presently. If her Majestie stick now to spend or put in execution all those things that tend to her safety, she must not long look to live in repose, nay, she must not long look to keep the Crown upon her head. The cause of her former quietness, proceeded of her neighbours unquietness; which being removed, she must now make ano∣ther account. The Admiral is now dead, and the Duke of Guise liveth; the Prince of Orange is retired out of Flanders, but the Duke of Alva remaineth there still: I need not to conclude, for that to mans judgement it is apparent what will follow. Is it time now, think you, Sir, to stir, or is it not time to omit any remedy that may tend to her Majesties safety? As far as I can learn, there is none yet sent to deal with the Princes of Germany, and yet there is here almost daily conference between the Popes Nuncio, the Ambassador of Spain, and them here, they omit nothing that may tend to our peril. I would we were as careful not to omit any thing that may tend to our safety. It may be said, that I fear too much. Surely, considering the state we stand in, I think it less danger to fear too much then to little. It may be said also, that the jealousie that Spain hath of the greatness of France, will not suffer him to indure to let France have any footing in England, and that like affection reigning in France, if Spain should attempt any thing. I confess it to be true, and yet I see no reason, but that they both may consent to advance a third person, who pretendeth right to the Crown, especially being provoked thereto by the Pope, which is my chief fear. It may also be alledged, that the offer of the marriage sheweth that they have no evil meaning towards her Majestie. First, it may be doubted, whether consider∣ing how now adays their speech and meaning disagreeth, they offer as they mean. Secondly, whether their intention of offering the said Match, tend to our be∣nefit or no. I was not heretofore so forward in believing all friendly offers to pro∣ceed of sincerity, as I am now ready to think the same to proceed of abuse, only to lull us asleep in security; for any thing that I can perceive, the best way not to be deceived by them, is not to trust them. The Gentleman himself who is offered, I think honourably of him; and if I could think so well of the rest, I would then believe that their outward speech did consent to their inward mean∣ing; but the case standing as it doth, I know not what to think. I cannot there∣fore in this doubtful case, but make her Majestie and my Lords of the Councel acquainted with these proceedings, and leave to them to gather what may be their meaning here, Methinks Queen Mothers calling back of her word touching her coming into England, doth shew that they but dally.
It is not likely that the Ambassador, without Commission, would otherwise have made the offer, besides the cold answer made to her Majesties request for the Vidame, doth shew how they are affected. To gratifie the King of Spain, those 800 that came from Montz, were put to the sword. Methinks if there were that good will that they profess, they should not have sticked with her Majestie, in granting her request for the Vidam, a thing both hononourable and profitable; all circumstances considered, I see rather mischief to be looked for, then friendship from hence, and therefore I cannot tell with what safety her Majestie may repair to Burdaux, and yet ad∣vise the contrary I would be loth, having no other ground but suspicion. I think the danger will be the less, so long as Rochel holdeth out. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the eighth of October, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. YOur Lorpships of September 25 I have received, beseeching you to pardon me, in that I presently in answering of the same, am driven to use the help and hand of another, being not yet, after my sickness, restored to that strength as I can indure well to write. I perceive that your Lordship, by the contrary here, is void of the Ambassadors speech, doth well enough discern, that the late cruelty here executed, is void of all manner of just defence; and therefore in Gods just judgement is like to receive just punishment; and if the same doth not happen so soon as we desire, our sins is the let. They here are so far imbrued in blood, as there is no end of their cruelty; for no Town escapeth, where any of the Religi∣on is found, without general murthering and sacking of them, and yet they pro∣test all this to be done against their will, though it be evidently known that it is done by their Commandment. This manner of proceeding seemeth to all men so strange, as no man can tell what to judge of it, openly no man dare but com∣mend it, privately few are found that do not utterly detest it. I have not heretofore been so ready to commend their sincerity, as I am now forced to set down their infidelity; surely I cannot see that all their fair speeches and friendly offers tend to any other end but to abuse, which would well appear, if they were seized of Rochel. In the mean while, I do not think the contrary, but that they will provoke the Duke of Alva now, that the Prince of Orange retireth into Germany, who of himself is enough bent, as your Lordship know∣eth, to execute somewhat long time practised in England, to the danger and disturbance of her Majestie. It is the opinion here of all men of judgemnt, that her Majestie is to look for any mischief that either Spain or this Crown can yield. And therefore if she shall not now seek to quiet her self, they do not see any reason for her long to hope to keep the Crown upon her head. The matter of it self is so apparent, as he is of mean discourse that doth not so think. The House of Guise, who since the late murther seem to have some miscon∣tentment, was never to the outward shew in greater favor, nor in greater jollity. He hath often conference with such Scotishmen as are here of the Kings ▪ and therefore I am sorry to understand, that they are not grown to any  in
Scotland, though her Maj. pay dear for it, as mony may do much with that nation. I would both the union were made amongst them, and they reduced under the Kings Government, and divided from such allyance as they have with this Na∣tion. If these great Monarchies may have Scotland for their footing, I fear the event will be over dangerous. The Popes Legate, who is at Avinion, hath sent hither in post his Secretary, to know the Kings pleasure, what his resolution is touching his access; as I hear, the King will not yield thereto; for the same will make it apparent to the world, what the King of Spain and his intention is. They think they may deal more covertly, bringing the matters better to pass, then by such open kind of dealing. I cannot decypher any thing, whether they proceed sincerely touching the pretended match; for my opinion, I think of it, as of the rest of their friendly offers, that these tend to nothing but to abuse. Of late, since the news of the Prince of Oranges retiring out of Flanders, they seem not to be desirous thereof as before. I judge, if they were once seized of Rochel, they will begin to renew their suit for the Queen of Scots, or ra∣ther attempt somewhat for her delivery. Their silence they use, maketh me to suspect the more, seeing the Queen of Scots friends bear such sway in the Court. I shall not need to recommend unto your Lordship my revocation, for that I know your Lordship is careful of your self for the same. And so leaving fur∣ther to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the eighth of October, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. IMmediately upon the receit of your Lordships Letters of the two and twen∣tieth of September, I requested Captain Lassetty, whom your Lordship knoweth, and is most willing to do your Lordship any service, as one whom he most honoureth, and thinketh himself most bound unto, to make enquiry whether there were any of his Nation excellent in riding unplaced, and had any desire to go into England. After search made by him, he found some unplaced, and in that profession very excellent; but the entertainment they require is so unreasonable, and so far exceedeth your Lordships offer, as I dare not deal with them. They ask 300 Crowns a year, besides meat and drink, and the finding of their horse, and the least they can be reduced unto is 200 Crowns. True it is, that such of the Noblemen as entertain them, do give them no less wages: He useth towards them what perswasions he may, to in∣duce them to think that 150 Crowns in England will go further then 300 here; but as yet, no perswasions will serve to make them so to think: I say therefore, to conclude any thing with them I mind not, until I hear further from your Lordship. Of late, doubting that there is no good meant towards you from hence, and having some cause to suspect some Irish practises, and knowing that Capt. Lassetty doth understand the state and weakness of that Countrey. I have entertained him with some hope to be entertained of her Majestie; his imperfections I know
well enough, notwithstanding his service may be profitable; and if it be to no other end, yet were the entertainment of him necessary in respect of the harm he may do. At all times when any danger did seem to grow towards her Maje∣sty, he hath requested me to present to her his service: though that Nation be very much inclined to treason, yet surely I think him in that point to stand much upon his honor Because I would be loath long in vain to entertain him with that hope, I beseech your Lordship that I may by the next hear what your opinion is in this behalf. Captain Massino del Beni, whom your Lordship knoweth, who is now retired into Germany, requested me to desire your Lordship to offer his service unto her Majesty, who in respect of Religion, and the zeal and honor he beareth towards her Majesty, would be glad to sacrifice his life in her defence. If your Lordship think the same might be received, then would he repair thither: if otherwise, he would be glad to know it, because he meaneth to take some other course to direct himself. I am the willinger at this point to offer the ser∣vice of Souldiers, for that I fear her Maiesty shall have iust cause to use them, considering how slenderly we are furnished at home, for now that the Prince of Orange is retired, her Majesty may not long look to live in repose; I am sorry that the union of Scotland is not already made, which I fear will be cause of both their and our ruine. If that footing-place were taken away from our foraign enemies, our danger would be the lesse. Money will do any thing with that Na∣tion, as your Lordship knoweth, which if her Majesty stick to disburse, she shall find neither profit nor surety in it. The tempest that hangeth over our head is to mans judgment apparent so great, as if she overslip any remedy that may be used, she must not long look to keep the State that she now enjoyeth. If the great strength and power of her enemies be weighed with her weakness, the dan∣ger cannot but seem the greater, if any thing be omitted to be done, that may end to her safety. If England and Scotland be united, and such unsound mem∣bers cut off as have been the cause of inward corruption, both her enemies shall have less will to attempt any thing against her safety, and she remain in less pe∣rill of such mischiefs as otherwise are like to fall upon her. Violent diseases must have violent remedies: if her Majesty do not not now think her State to stand in extremity things at home well considered, both she and the same are in more danger. I beseech your Lordship to pardon my passion in this behalf; the suspi∣tion I have of the evill meaning here towards her Majesty, maketh me to be thus carried away as I am. And so leaving further to trouble your Lordship at this present, I must humbly take my leave. At Paris the 8 of October 1572. Your Honours to command, Francis Walsingham. Answers to the French Ambassador given by word of mouth by my Lord Treasurer in the Councell Chamber in Octob. 1572 FOr the Kings answer to the advice of her Majesty given in two points, viz. that the King would cause the world to understand of his deed upon the Ad∣mirals death, somwhat better then yet it did. Secondarily, that he would see that his Edicts be better observed, her Majesty meaneth not to reply thereto, wishing that both in the one and the other the King find good success. To the motion of the Enterview to be before the 20 of October, and i to the
Queen Mothers letter, is to be at the Isle of Iersey, seemed to her majesty so strange both for the time and place, as if the Admirall had not shewed the Letters from the King and Qu. Mother to that effect, her Majesty should either not have believed it, or that the Ambassador had mistaken the same, as without long speech the Ambassador may easily perceive: for the 20 day of October is not 14 days off from the time of the motion, nor one month from the date of the Kings letter, and Iersey is a place so far distant, as neither King of this land would ad∣venture to sail unto for many causes, nor yet any Merchant would take upon him to pass thither almost in that time. Besides, that the late proceedings in France to the destruction of all sorts of her Majesties Religion, which also is not ceased to her Majesties understanding, cannot but argue this manner of motion very ab∣surd, and besides ingender in the subjects of this Realm such conceits as it were a dangerous thing for Councellors to be so careless of their Prince, as to give ear to such motions; and it is the stranger now to make this motion by letters of the 23 of September, when the French Ambassador the same 23 of September did say at Reading to the Queens Majesty, that the Queen Mother was content to come into any place of this Realm, which is now strangely changed, that the ueens Majesty should come to her over the Sea to the coast of France, being more then three days sailing, except she might have wind at her commandment. And in this matter also the Queens Majesty can give no answer untill she hear answer from her Ambassador to her letters sent after the Kings letters were dated. As to the offer of continuance of Amity, & renewing the League by a new Oath, the Queens Majesty meaneth nothing more then to continue the Amity. And for renewing of any Oath, she knoweth no cause of her part to be required a new Oath, for that she hath not violated the same, nor meaneth to do, and trusteth as much in the Kings part that he will keep it without any new Oath. As for the proceeding for the establishing of a commerce in certain Towns in France, it is over-evident by the late murther in Roan (which the King saith was by the mean people) how unmeet it were at this time to motion such a matter unto her Mer∣chants, who be now marvellously intimerated, and before these murthers did hear not most willingly thereof, because of divers evill treatments that they have suffered at Roan and divers other places; and therefore this matter is to be suspended untill the Merchants may understand that the King shall have cor∣rected the late murthers at Roan, that they shall not attempt the like another time upon them, and that they may perceive that the King is so willing to do ju∣stice upon the Catholiques, which may have the murtherers, that they may as∣sure them, that under his protection they may go safe, and not fear the rage of the furious people. As to the sending of the Earl of Leicester, or Lord Treasurer after the Queens avouchment, her Majesty indeed is very sorry that there is such an alte∣ration of occasion of doing such an office; for as her Majesty before had inten∣tion to have sent either one of them, or such other, as should be as agreeable to the King, so now there is to all the world one great cause that her Majesty may not with honor, nor with law of nature send any whom she loveth to be in dan∣ger, as it seemeth they may be, though the King have never so good a meaning: For by the death of so many whom the King doth not avow, nor yet punish the murtherers, what surety can strangers have, especially when the King pretend∣eth, as by his own letters appeareth, that it is the fury of the Catholiques against those of the Religion. As to the difficulties found by her Ambassadors return, and to leave a Secre∣tary there in respect of the danger wherein he is at this time, her Majesty think∣eth that the King might otherwise think thereof; for when he saith, he will
revoke also his Ambassador from hence, if hers should come for a time: It is well known with what liberty and surety his Ambassador may and doth travell in this Realm, who may go when he will without danger, and without fear of mind do his negotiation: where contrariwise her Ambassador dare not go out of his doors without a guard, being to his great charge and disquieting. And so the Queens request is to have her Ambassador from thence but for such a time as the tempest may cease in France, and the murtherers be in awe of the King by Justice. REQUESTS. That the Kings Declarations maintained in his Letters for our Merchants good usage at Burdeaux, and elswhere, may be published in print, as his othe Edicts are. That it may be also notified, that the King will have the English Merchants restored to their goods which were left in the hands of his subjects that have been murthered, for that many of them in Roan, and elswhere, were by way of Merchandise indebted to the English. That for the hearing of English complaints for causes both in Normandy and Gascoigne, there might be some extraordinary indifferent Commissioners to hear the same with expedition; whereupon if the Merchants shall find favour and ju∣stice, they may be the more easily induced to allow the Conditions of a Com∣merce. To the right honorable and his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. IT may please your Lordship to understand, that by certain that returned from Frankfort Mart, I understand that one of the Gentlemen that departed hence with intention to accompany your Nephew Mr. Philip Sidney to Hedelberg, died by the way at a place called Bladin in Lorain, who by divers conjectures I took to be the Dean of Winchester, who, as I advertised your Lordship by Mr. Argall, I employed to encounter the evill practices of your said Nephews servants. If therefore your Lordship, he now being void, shall not speedily take order in that behalf (if already it be not done) the young Gentleman your Ne∣phew shal be in danger of a very lewd practice, which were great pitie in respect of the rare gifts that are in him. Touching news, I refer your Honor to these inclosed occurents, and the report of this Bearer, to whom I have given order to communicate certain things unto you. And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humblie take my leave. At Paris the 17 of October, 1572. Your Honours to command, Fr. Walsingham.
To the right worshipful Francis Walsingham Esq her Majesties Ambassador resident in France. SIR, I shewed to the Queens Majesty and my Lords of the Councell, both your letters to me written the 8 of this instant; the one contained your ne∣gotiation, the other was a discourse both wisely written, and very well liked. On Thursday last, Monsieur du Crocque was here, and had audience given him by my Lord Treasurer, my Lord Chamberlain, and my Lord of Leicester, because the Queens Majesty was not at time perfectly whole of the small Pox, as the Physicians did say, although her Majesty and a great sort more, will not have it so, now it makes no matter what it was, thanks be to God she is perfectly whole, and no sign thereof left in her face. On Sunday he had his answer given unto the Steward of his house, the sum and substance whereof I send you here in∣closed, whereby you may know his negotiation which was long in words to make us believe better of that King then yet we can; and replied, as I understand, li∣berally enough, although in that Prince and Countrey who have so openly and injuriously done against Christ, who is Truth, Sincerity, Faith, Pitie, Mercy, Love, and Charity, nothing can be too sharply and severely answered; Yet Princes you know are acquainted with nothing but Doulceur, so must be handled with Doulceur, especially amongst and between Princes. And therefore to tem∣perate as you may perceive not that they may think the Queens Majesty and her Councell such fools, that we know not what is to be done, and yet that we should not appear so rude and barbarous, as to provoke where no profit is to any man I think, I for my part do not doubt but you will use this answer as you were wont, gravely and wisely, for the King there will look to have it, as well at your hands as at his Ambassadors. You are carefull (as wisdom doth lead you) of the wel-doing here in England, which needs must be well esteemed of her Majesty and all her Councell; and I tell you, we are not so remiss and negligent as peradventure another that know∣eth not, would think. In time things be done unlooked for as well for mischief, as that was in France, as to good and remedy, where God giveth grace and cir∣cumspection. Truth it is, that God disposeth all whatsoever a man doth pur∣pose, as Divines do say: and it is his gift, if wise men do provide for mischief to to come; and yet whatsoever they do devise, the event doth come of him onely, who is the God of hope and fear beyond hope and expectation; because you shall understand, that even the Scots our neighbours be awakened by your Beacons in France, I have sent you a Scotish proclamation herewith, Du Crocque and Viracque have already taken their leave of Scotland, and be come to Barwick. The 20 of this moneth they appointed to be here at Court. By that we can see the Lords in Scotland draw neerer and neerer to an accord, that rather it is in hope then in despair. These cruelties in France have helped not a little, and now continuing much more will: You gave good advice that all Scotish men should not be stayed, no more they be not; some of the late Com∣mers have given the rest in Scotland a good—to make them awake, yet there may also be false brethren come amongst them; which as reason is, shall be stayed and sent back if they may be known. Yet it is true, That much water goeth by the Mill that the Miller knoweth not of; but mans wisdom must provide as much as may be, as it would, always it cannot. The answer of the Ambassador may justly seem to you to debar your coming home, and to pro∣long it longer then you would: yet I assure you, your friends do not cease by all means possible to provoke her Majesty so much as may be for your Revocation,
and her Majesty is as carefull for you as any Prince may be for such a subject as you are, of whom assure you her Highness maketh no small account, and so it is reason. You know that things go here slowly with much respect of irresolution; but for my part I hope to see you here shortly, there shall no occasion be left which I will not take to further it. Although your friends here be as forward as may be, yet your wife ceaseth not continually to cry on them. Fare you well. From Windsor the 13. of October 1572. Your assured friend, Thomas Smith. To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principall Secretary. SIR, it may please you to advertise her Majesty, that of late the King and Queen mother have had sundry conferences with the Scotish Ambassador, to whom there is repaired out of Flanders one English Gentleman called Tempest, and another called Musgrave, servant unto the Earl of Westmerland, they both have also access unto the Duke de Aumale, and to his Nephew the the Duke of Guyse. Davy Chambers since his return out of England, hath had also conference both with the King and the House of Guyse, who hath let fall these words, how that the death and execution of the Earl of Northumber∣land hath increased the number of the Queen of Scots friends; and that she is now grown to have such a party in England, as that five or six thousand shot, with some good Leaders, will make her strong enough to encounter any forces her Majesty can make. It is also secretly whispered in Court, that there is some new practice in hand for the Queen of Scots delivery, the particularities I can by no means decipher; but the circumstances of these conferences well weighed, the conjecture is great, that there's somwhat a hatching. Little Douglas who conveyed the Queen of Scots out of Loughtean depar∣teth out of hand into Scotland; who besides other conference with the King, hath had long conference with the Queen mother, the Ambassador being pre∣sent. And so for other matters, referring your Honor to this Bearers report touch∣ing divers particularities, I most humbly take my leave. Sir, I most humbly desire your Honor to further a most reasonable suit, that this Bearer my Secretary is to prefer unto her Majesty, as wel in respect of his great travell already taken under me in her Majesties service, as also for that thereby he may receive encouagement to continue the same, and in time through the experience of his service, and the good parts that are in him, may hereafter grow able to serve her Majesty in a better calling. For my own part, I have no means to recompence him, as you, Sir, well know; and if therefore the conside∣ration grow not by her Majesty, neither he nor any other shall have courage to serve in aservice both so dangerous and painfull as this is wherein he serveth. And so not doubting of any furtherance you may yeid him, I leave to trouble your Honor any further, taking my leave. At Paris 18 of October, 1572. Your Honors to command, Fr. Walsingham.
To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majestiess principall Secretary. SIR, I am glad by your Letters to receive some hope that there is good care taken to prevent such mischiefs as may happen; notwithstanding untill such time as the root of the evill be removed, it is rather to dream of re∣medies then to apply such as the disease requireth. I am glad to hear that there is some hope that they will grow to an accord in Scotland: if that postern gate were shut up, and other inward medicines applied, and her Majesty strengthened with the outward Amity of the Almain Princes, she should be the more esteemed and feared of those that mean her not great good. And though the remedies may seem chargeable, yet considering the ne∣cessity of the same; and that they may avoid both great charges and no small dan∣ger, I hope her Majesty will prefer safety before cost, especially when the di∣bursing of one pound may save a thousand. Surely Sir, the more I observe their doings here, the more I increase my jealou∣sie of their evill meaning. They never spake more fair to the Admirall, then a few dayes before he died; nothing was demanded by him that was not granted, insomuch that Tilligni said to a Gentleman, a friend of his a few days before the execution, that their liberall granting of requests without any difficulty, did make him to suspect some unsound and hollow meaning, and thereupon alledg∣ed that Italian Proverb,—They never used fairer speech then presently they do, nor greater protestations of Amity; and because it is more then was ac∣customed, and is now at such time as we have cause to suspect the contrary, I cannot but be jealous of her Majesties safety, so long as any thing is left un∣done that tendeth to her Majesties preservation. And so leaving further to en∣tertain your honour with my jealousies and fears, I most humbly take my leave, beseeching you to continue your assistance in procuring my revocation. At Paris the 25 of October, 1572. Your Honors to command, Fran. Walsingham. To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principall Secretary. SIR, although I had no express commandement from her Majesty to com∣municate unto the King and Queen Mother such an answer as was yeilded unto those things that were propounded by their Ambassador here, notwith∣standing I thought it convenient to impart the same unto Queen Mother, as she that hath the Helm in hand, to see in what sort the said answer would be inter∣preted at my access unto her; I shewed her at large, that the Ambassador had propounded four things unto certain Deputies by her Majesty of her Councell, she being through sickness in that time, in state not to give audience. To the first touching the Enterview The 2d touching the confirmation of the league, with renewing of the Oath. The third touching the establishing of Traffique.
The fourth the Kings requests to have the Lord Treasurer, or the Earle of Leicester come over after the Queens delivery. To these four Requests I made her acquainted with such answers as were made unto the same. To the first touching the time, she said, that she wrote unto the Ambassador, that in respect of the young Queens delivery, (which she thought would have been ere his time) the meeting could not be before the twentieth of this mo∣neth, and that therefore he should move it against that time, not meaning that it should be so precisely set down, but it should be referred chiefly to her Maje∣sties choice. To the second, touching the place, she shewed me, that forasmuch as she had never intention to come over, the same being mistaken by the Ambassador, and that the interview by Sea was thought inconvenient, hearing that the Isles of Iersey did belong unto her Majesty, she thought that that was a convenient place for the said Enterview, and therfore she caused the Ambassador to pro∣pound it, protesting that the same was void of any evill meaning or intention, and that there were Letters written to the Ambassador for that purpose before the late execution here. To the second, touching the renewing of the Oath, she said that the same pro∣ceeded of advertisements from the Ambassador, that her Majesty should say, that she could not tell what accompt or assurance to make of the late League con∣cluded; whereupon the King willed him to make offer unto her, that what she could devise for the assurance and faithful keeping of the same, he would most willingly put in execution; and thereupon willed him to offer, that if her Ma∣jesty should think it requisite, the same should be confirmed by a new oath; and as for my self (saith she) considering the same had not been violated of either party, I concur with your Mistres in opinion, thinking the same needless. To the third, touching the establishing of Traffique, she said she saw some rea∣son to think her Majesties answer reasonable; That the time seemeth now im∣proper; considering the late disorder at Roan; notwithstanding the Kings mean∣ing was to take such order as well for the punishing of offenders, as for the well using of Merchants, as that they should have no just cause to fear, to which pur∣pose the King had written both to Caranges the Governour, as also to the chief President there. Touching the fourth, concerning the Kings request for the coming over either of the Lord Treasurer, or the Earl of Leicester, she said that the same also proceeded of advertisement from the Ambassador, that he thought that if their Majesties would require the coming over of either of them, after the Queens delivery, that the same would be yielded to; whereupon the King gave him Commission to move her Majesty in that behalf, he desiring nothing more then one of them, to whom he knew he might communicate matters of weight as frankly as unto her Majesty; and as touching any peril that might happen unto them, she said that the King would take such order for safety, as they should be in no less surety here then at home in her own realm. To that I replied, that it would be very hard for her Majesty or any other to be so perswaded in that behalf, for that it was not possible any disorder in a State could be reduced to order without punishment, and that therefore neither stranger nor their own subjects can make accompt to be in safety within their government, so long as the malefactors should remain unpunished. To this she said, that the injuries done by those of the Religion against the Catholiques were so great, as it was hard to bridle the peoples fury, especially upon the discovery of this new Treason; notwithstanding such order was taken, that no publique person or Ambassador should be touched.
This was the sum of her reply unto such answers as were made by her Majesty to the Ambassador there. I made her also acquainted with her Maje∣iesties answer to the Ambassador touching my Revocation. To the which she said, That the world would judge some alteration to be between the two Crowns if any such thing should be done, without sending some other to supply my place. I then delivered her a copie of the three Requests given to the Ambassador, there to be exhibited unto their Majesties here in the behalf of the Merchants, wherein she promised that there should be such order taken, as should be to the contentment of her Majesty, and the safety of her subjects, and that already the matter had been considered of. Being given to understand, that the Baron de la Garde was arrived here, I re∣quested her Majesty, that if it would please her to deal earnestly with him, as well for the release of those English ships that were stayed already, as also to give order that those that are now presently to repair to Burdeaux, may pass to & fro in safety without any molestation, either with the Gallies or of the other ships there. Whereupon she sent unto me the next day the said Baron de la Garde, who after long circumstances used of the great good will he bare unto her Maje∣sties Father, and to her Majesty her selfe, and to our Nation, assured me, that the ships that were staied were delivered: That he had taken order before his depar∣ture from Brouage, that our Merchants should pass freely without any molesta∣tion or trouble; and that there were already some passed, whom onely he did forbid that they should not touch at the Road before Rochel: he shewed me that he had received such strait commandement at her Majesties hands, for the well usage of our Merchants, as I might assure my selfe they should have no just cause to complain. She requested me in the conclusion of our talk, to write unto her Majesty, that she was given to understand, that one Sorez their sub∣ject lately retired hither, did seek some shipping there within her Majesties Do∣minions, she therefore desired her that she would take order for some restraint to be made in that behalf, for that he is so ill an Instrument, as he would be glad to do somthing to breed unkindness between the two Crowns, which oc∣casion she said she hoped her Majesty would avoid. Moreover she shewed me, that divers of her subjects did complain of injuries done unto them by certain ships that lye about the Downs and the Isle of Wight, and therefore desired me to write unto her Majesty, that there might be some redress given in that be∣half. And so leaving to trouble your Honor any fnrther at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the 25 of October, 1572. Your Honours to command. Fr. Walsingham. To the right honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principall Secretary. SIR, it may please you to advertise her Majesty, that the young Queen was brought to bed of a daughter the 22 of October, whose Nativity was conse∣crated with the blood of Briquemont and Cavannes, who the same day between the hours of 5 and 6 in the evening, were hanged by Torch-light, the King, Queen mother, and the King of Navarre, with the Kings brethren, and Prince of Conde being lookers on. As Briquemont was going up the ladder the Under-Provost of the Town said, that the King had sent him to know whether
he could say any thing touching the late Conjuration, which if he would confess, he would save his life. Whereunto he answered, that the King had ne∣ver a more faithful nor a more truer subject then he was; but this I know pro∣ceeded not of himself, but of evil Counsellours about him; and so lifting up his eyes to heaven, he said, O my God, upon whose Tribunal Seat I stand, and whose face I hope shortly to see, thou knowest well that I know nothing, nor did not so much as once think of any Conjuration against the King, nor against his Estate; though contrariwise they have untruly put the same in my process; but I beseech my God, that he will pardon the King, and all those that have been the cause of this my unjust death, even as I desire pardon at thy hands for my sins and offences committed against thy Divine Majestie. Being then drawn up another step on the ladder, he uttered onely these words, I have somewhat to utter unto the King, which I would be glad to communicate unto him; but (said he) I see that I may not; and so shrunk up his shoulders, to forbear to use any further speech. As his constancy generally was much commended, so was his death much bewailed of many Catholiques that were beholders of the same. Cavannes used no speech, but shewed himself void of all magnanimity, who before his death, in hope of life, made some shew to relent in Religion. Two things were generally much misliked at this execution; the one, the pre∣sence of the King, as a thing unworthy the Head of justice, to be at the exe∣cution of justice; the other, that Briquemont, being a Gentleman, was hanged, a thing very rare in France, especially he being reputed of his enemies to be innocent of that thing which lately had been laid to his charge. About an hour after the execution, the cruel and bloody people of this Town, not content with their death, took them down from the Gallows, and drew them about the streets, thrusting them through their bodies with dag∣gers, and shooting of dags at them, cutting off their ears, and omitting no other kind of villanous and barbarous cruelty. It was thought also, that there should have been another general day of execution, of as many as have been known at any time to have been of the Religion; the stay whereof, I am credibly informed, was procured by the Queen Mother, who with no small difficulty and intercession, obtained the same at the Kings hands, who protest∣ed that the same was but deferred for a time. The King is grown now so bloody minded, as they that advised him thereto do repent the same; and do fear that the old saying will prove true, Malum consilium consultori pessimum. At the time of my Congratulation of the birth of the child, I used these speeches following to the King: Sir, knowing the mutual good will that is between my Mistris the Queen and your Majestie, as between whom good and evil, pleasures and displeasures are com∣mon, I could do no less, being her Minister here, but congratulate as well the prosperous delivery of the Queen your Majesties wife, as also the Nativity of the yong Princess your daughter, who is, as it were, a pledge of some issue∣male to follow, that may hereafter supply the Royal Seat that you presently enjoy; which when it cometh to pass, no Prince, Neighbor, Ally or Confe∣derate will be more glad thereof then the Queens Majestie my Mistris. Where∣unto the King answered, after private thanks given unto me for the office of Congratulation, that I did use such speech as appertained to the good amity be∣tween them; which was, That pleasures and displeasures should be common to either of them; which as I look for no less a my good sisters hands your Mi∣stris, so she may assure her self, saith he, at my hands; and I wish that my Am∣bassador might have occasion to use like office of Congratulation towards hr
as you do here towards me. I thanked his Majestie for wishing that wish, for that it was a general desire to as many as truly loved her Majestie. As I was taking my leave, he told me, that they of Rochel, against whom he did mean presently to send his Forces, did give out, that her Majestie promiseth to send them succours; which thing (saith he) I do not believe, considering the good intelligence that is between us. To this I replyed, that if his Maje∣stie should give credit to any such thing, he should do her Majestie great wrong, considering the late protestation I made unto him on her Majesties behalf, that her meaning was not to do any thing that may tend to the violating of the late League concluded between them. As for the Brutes given out by them of Ro∣chel, who are now in desperation; I shewed him, that men in that state are glad to give out any thing that may draw others to joyn with them in assist∣ance. He answered, that he believed it was so. And so I took my leave of him. I was then brought unto Queen Mother, unto whom I used like speech of Congratulation. After which speech, I shewed her, that the King had made me acquainted with certain brutes given out by them of Rochel, of some ayd promised by her Majestie, which thing very honourably (said I) he protesteth he would not believe. Whereupon she shewed me, how it was true, that certain Letters were lately intercepted, sent by them of Rochel, in the which there was mention made that her Majestie underhand had promised to assist them, that the Count Montgomery would repair unto them with the said assistance, but for my part, saith she, I know the Queen your Mistris to be too honour∣able and too wise to intermeddle in any such matter, who I know will give the King my son leave to deal with his subjects, as shall seem best unto himself. I shewed her, that in so judging of her Majestie, she judged rightly; and that I hoped she would give more credit to her Majesties late protestation touching the inviolable observing of the late League, then to any brutes that should be given out by desperate men. This was the effect of that which passed between us for that present. About the seven and twentieth of the last there arrived here a Currier out of Spain, sent from the Ambassador Resident there, who hath brought unto them very grateful news, especially Monsieur, as I hear, seemeth to be most contented with the same. He hath lately had great conference with the Ambassador of Spain, who beginneth now to shew great magnifi∣cency, and hath lately clad fourteen of his servants with Cloaks of Scarlet, garded with Velvet, and given them other apparel suitable thereto. Before the arrival of the said Currier, there was some unkindness grown betwixt Spain and this Crown, upon a complaint made by the Captain of Callis, of a Barque cast up this Summer by the sluce, which is like, upon the next glut of water▪ to drown the whole Gountrey of Oye; but now there is a promise made that all shall be addressed; so that it is thought, that there was never so great amity between Spain and this Crown, as presently is like to be. The Ita∣lians discourse, that the King must leave no means unattempted to procure the having of the young King of Scots for a match for his daughter; which thing they think, with disbursing of an hundred thousand Crowns amongst the needy Scotish Nobility, will easily be brought to pass. The Scotish Ambassador the eight and twentieth and nine and twentieth of the last, had often confe∣rence with the Cardinal of Guise and the Duke Aumale; his abode in Court was more then ordinary for an Ambassador, for he continued there two whole days, which maketh men to judge that the matter was of importance, and therefore required present expedition. It is looked for here that her Majestie should send some body to congratulate the nativity of this young Princes, for all other Princess do the like.
And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I humbly take my leave. At Paris the first of November, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham. It is thought la Crocque shall succeed la Mote, who laboureth most earnestly presently to return. To the Right Honourable his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer. TOuching the present estate of things here, I refer your Lordship to these enclosed Occurences, and to my Letters directed unto Master Se∣cretary. As they have been alwayes constant here in their doings, so were they never so inconstant as at this present. Not two days before the executi∣on of Briquemont, they were resolved not to have executed him, and seemed very much to lament that which already hath been done, as a thing which hath much weakned the Realm, and made them odious to other Nations. The al∣teration now of this humor, for themselves most honourable and profitable, is thought to proceed of advertisements lately out of Spain, who promiseth great things; so that it is now thought their cruelty will rather increase then asswage, which all men do foresee will prove more profitable for Spain, then for themselves. The wisest sort are now least acquainted with mat∣ters of great moment; such as are parties and passionate, are they that bear greatest sway in the greatest matters, who in respect of their pri∣vate passion and revenge, care not what becomes of the Prince and the Realm. The long Gowns, who are men of the greatest experience, are onely em∣ployed in the expedition of ordinary causes. All men do look for some mis∣chievous issue of their kind of Government. There lacketh but the Cardi∣nal of Lorrains presence to hasten the same to his full ripeness. If the mis∣chief might only reach to themselves, the harm were the less; but it is feared that their neighbours shall participate some part of the smart of their folly; amongst other, none is more threatned then poor England. I pray God there∣fore her Majestie take profit of your Lordships good care and counsel, and then shall I fear the less. The Emperours death, which was made so assured, groweth now to be doubtful, for that Letters of the seventh of the last from Auspurg, make no mention thereof. And so leaving to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the first of November, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. I Have not at this present much more to say unto your Lordship, then that that is contained in my Letters directed to Master Secretary in these inclosed Oc∣currents. Briquemants death, through his constancy and earnest protestation made of his innocency, hath bred in all men a general compassion of him, as also, a ge∣neral misliking of the kind of his death; for that men of his quality and service, whatsoever their offence hath been, have not accustomably been hanged. Generally all men do cry out and say, that the liberty of France is lost, yea, and of some the most vehement Catholiques, do wish both themselves and that they have out of this Countrey. Some here do perswade the King, to stand upon the greatness of Spain, and not to suffer men to have that free access into his Chamber as accustomably they are wont to have here. Surely if he continue his severity, it will not be much for his safety to suffer men so freely to come near him. What will be the issue of these Tragical doings here, God onely knoweth, but generally every man feareth that all will go to ruine. In the mean time, considering the late greatness of Spain with this Crown, I fear they cannot be content to do that thing that may tend to their own ruine, but also they will seek the ruine of their neighbours. I am therefore glad to hear that your Lordship, with the rest of my Lords of the Councel, do so carefully take order to withstand the malice of those that envy your present quietness and repose. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour, at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the first of November, 1572. Your Honours to command, F. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador for the Queens Majestie in France. SIr, I have nothing worthy to write unto you at this time, but because this bearer promiseth to see you, I would not let him pass without my letters. What was done in Scotland, he can best tell you; sithence de Crocque and Viracqe went from thence, they grow nearer to accord then they did before; yet what they will do in the end, it is hard to say. Mr. Killegrew hopeth for the best; wisdom would teach them, for all considerations, to agree within themselves, and amongst themselves, and by themselves, and that they may do (as far as they can see) now no more lets them. Here at home we stand looking somewhat to our security against sudden attempts, and expecting what new occurrents time will bring. The Parliament is prolonged until the twelfth of January, which should have begun the first of November. When we hear again from you, you are like to have another dispatch, and not before, as far as I can see. I and your friends do not cease to call for a successor for you, but as yet her Majestie cannot resolve on the person; and that once known, and he commanded and provided, you may assuredly then hope upon your return. I am acquainted with these matters, before that time arm your self with patience, and that time we will hasten as we may. I pray you buy me the Commentaries of Mathiolus upon
Dioscorides, translated into French, and let it be bound there with two or three sheets of paper before and in the end, That book was never wont to go from me, and now I cannot tell how it is stoln from me: because it was noted with my observations and notes, I had rather have lost a far better thing; and in Lon∣don I cannot buy any other, and therefore I pray you help me to one, and I wil repay it where you will appoint in French Crowns, with a hundred thanks. Fare you well. From Windsore the thirtieth of October, 1572. Your assured Friend, Th. Smith. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq her Majesties Ambassador Resident in France. SIr, yesterday came Williams your servant to Windsore with your Letters and Advertisements of that which he had to declare concerning Lions, Flo∣rence wherein I see strange dealing for the party once offered to remain Prisoner, until the truth might be tryed, and so to lose his head, if the tale were not true; wherefore I see it is good reason to be slow in credit to such matters. Presently there is here one York, come as he saith, with Letters from Lyons,  of credit to the Queens Majestie, and his message is to declare secretly the danger of and that if 3 would be so content, E would come to lie into hall 2 with such other fond devices, as for many respects the party is greatly suspected; where∣fore her Majestie hath willed me with all haste to will you by some good means to understand the truth of the party himself; that is to say, of Glasco and if he have not sent any such, then with speed to advertise, for I think it will be necessary for 3 in honour, and for  in safety to utter the mat∣ter, or the party to  Florence. This messenger pretendeth great devotion in Religion, and we understand that he is of great levity, and fully meet for any dangerous enterprize. I cannot write any more for haste of sending away this Pacquet, because her Majestie would have speedy answer. I trust you shall shortly hear of some comfort of a successor. The Queens Majestie is content that I shall speak to Mr. Fris Carew to supply that place, with whom to morrow I will speak, and that earnestly. We are wont to have all evil news from thence, but now we have also very evil news in our North parts. The nine and twentieth of the last, the good Regent of Scotland dyed, as I think, by a natural sickness, and yet the certnty is not known. This will make our cause the worse in Scotland, for I fear the conveyance away of the King, and yet there is care taken for his safety, but I can almost hope for no good using; our selves all by heps, and why the heaps fall not upon our selves personlly, I se nothing to the let thereof in our selves; God be merciful unto us. Yesterday the French Ambassador sent me word to declare to her Majestie, that the French Queen hath brought forth a Daughter; and to know, wheher the Queens Majestie would be content to Christen it with her own name, and to send my Lord of Leicester or me thither. Her Majesties answer was, That she would not desire to Christen it, nor would send my Lord of Lester o me; but if the King would dese her
Majestie to be God-mother, she would not refuse it, but would send some per∣son qulified. What will follow hereof, I know not. From my house at West∣minster, the third of November, 1572. Your assured loving Friend, William Burleigh. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador for the Queens Majestie in France. MY Lord, I do thank you for the speedy answer to my former letters which I wrote touching a Rider, and I perceive you used so much care as you have already hearkned out one that is recommended very sufficient; but his demands you think are very great, and so they be indeed: But as I am desirous to have such a man, so am I loth to pay too dearly for him. I would gladly hear how Moret doth imploy him now, or whether you think him not a meet man for that purpose. If he be of his wonted mind, he is very desirous to return again hi∣ther, and to serve very reasonable; and I am given to understand, that he hath profited very well in his profession since his being there. If he be to be had rea∣sonably, and that you hear of his ability therewith of men of judgement to be confirmed, I had rather have him then any other. If he be not, then this I say for the other, whom I thank you again for, I will give him 150 Crowns a year wages and his meat, and drink, and lodging in my house for him and his man, and allowance in my stable for two horses; and if he prove a man to my liking, I think, you do believe, I can find in my heart to be better worth to him one way or another then 50 Crowns besides his wages. If you can thus agree with him, the sooner he come to me the better; not doubting but that you will in the mean time make good inquiry of his trade and life, and what his conditions be. And if ever he have been honest, I trust to keep him so; and if his nature be not too bad, I hope he shall be contented here with his usage, as I mean he shall be treated. And so, Sir, I most humbly desire you to let me have some description of the man by your next, and what you think he will do. Now, Sir, Touching our estate here: First, thanks be to God our Mistris is in very good health, and I trust in God ere it be long will shew some care over us all. The matters in Scotland stand but in tickle terms between the parties, I mean between the King and the Queens side; and so have they Agents—for that the King left them, who be now returned with better hope (I think) then in the end they shall have cause to bring their practises to pass. Other particular news of weight here is none at this present worth the writing, but that we are all here yet quiet, and by Gods good assistance, I trust, shortly more certain hope we shall have of the continuance of it. We your poor friends here are continually labourers for your coming home; and surely, I trust, you shall return ere it be long. For my own part, I will not cease till it be granted; and in hope of that, I will forbear to write somewhat now, which when you come home (if you will affirm)  will tell you. So my good Francis fare you well. In some haste, the seven and twentieth of October. At Windsore. I mean to morrow or next day, being at London, to visit your wife, ceaseth vvho not to call daily upon all your friends here by your letters for your coming
home. I like not my Cypher I have, I will make new, and send it you, and then you shall hear of a matter worthy the writing. We hear here that Montmorecy is in some danger. Your very Friend, Ro. Leicester. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq her Majestes Am∣bassador Resident in France. YOur messenger that brought your dispatch of the five and twentieth of October, arrived here the second of November, and my Lord Treasurer imparted unto me such matters as you advertised him of, by whom again you shall understand her Majesties pleasure, for that I think his Cypher is better then mine. I am loth to enter into some of tose things which I am very desirous else to say somewhat to you of; but not doubting but his Lordship will signifie the whole, I will now forbear, and descend to smaller matters. And to answer you for the two Captains you wrote to me to move her Majestie for; she is now pleased to entertain the one, him that hath most means am I lothest to name, lest he might be suspected. In this mysterie you know whom I mean, and shall also by your servant: she is content with 50 l. yearly, whether it will like him or no, I know not; if it do not, we will do what we can to increase it; also, the other her Majestie yet is not minded to use his service. We perceive the party Saint 4 is very coy in his dealing; but surely he is not to be blamed, the world being there with you as it is. You shall hear of another manner of mat∣ter, I am sure, by my Lord Treasurer, which is lately offered me here, but we greatly suspect it to be some practise, or else the choice is not well made of the party in my opinion. And you shall do well to understand it with all expedition, as I am sure my said Lord doth advise you throughly therein; for it is of con∣sequence, and it behoveth us withal speed to know whether it be right or wrong; if it be wrong, by my consent there shall be right example made of the like, &c. The Regent of Scotland is dead, as we are advertised this day. I suppose it to be very true: I trust her Majestie will not lose the opportunity offered there. If the Emperor be dead also, it will make a great change. I hope better for Christendom, I mean, for good Christians. I have sent you a letter two days ago by a Scotchman, one Duglas; wherein I have sent you my mind touching the Rider, whom I desire greatly to have, if I may reasonably have him. You shal perceive by this Letter at large, that if I may have him for 150 Crowns a year for himself, and to give him meat and drink, and his man, with a couple of horse found in my stable: I think I shall be worth to him otherwise, half as much more, if he like me well, as I mean he shall try me and I him for a year: And if so he be content, the sooner he come, the better. God send him to be an honest man, and I warrant you he shall be very well entreated. For his sufficien∣cy, I leave it to your good enquiry. I trust shortly you shall be at home. I have not ceased daily, since your wives arrival, to call upon her Majestie for it, and she is fully agreed thereto, and hath named some for your successor. I think Francis Carew shall be the man, as it is yet resolved, or Henry Cobham; but one of them, I care not who, shall be hastned for your sake, assure your self. I pray you shew all the favour and coun∣tenance you can to Benedict Spinola; he hath a great cause there in hand, which
he hath heard you have favourably furthered. He hath required my thanks, he is my dear friend, and the best Italian I know in England. Her Majestie hath written for him. Let his brother know, that I have written to you, I pray you, if the Rider conclude, I am sure Spinola' s brother, if he be there, will answer his brother here again. So good Francis fare you well. Your good wife is in health. In haste the second of November. Your assured Friend, Ro: Leicester. To the Right Honourable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principal Secretary. IT may please you to advertise her Majestie, that Standen arrived here lately in post out of Flanders, where he staied onely five daies, and had daily con∣ference, for the time of his aboe there, with the Scotish Ambassador, toge∣ther with Lggens; who at his return, which was by post, accompanied him in∣to Flanders. Those that observed the manner of their conferences, his coming and returning by post, being accompanied by Liggens at his return, maketh the Sotchmen that wish continuance of quiet in their Countrey, to fear that there is some dangerous practise in hand. The said Ambassador doth now daily re∣pair to the Court, and hath often conference with the Queen Mother at an extraordinary time in the morning, when as commonly no Ambassador hath access but in the afternoon. Not long ince, in talk apart with his friends, he said, that if the troubles of Scotland had not been, his Mistris had been at li∣bertie, and perhaps enjoyed a better Crown then Scotland is. He said further, that if his Mistris had as many good friends in Scotland, as she hath in England, she had not long remained in prison as she doth. Thus you see how dangerous a ghest her Majestie harboureth. The Spanish Marquis, who is come hither to congratulate the Queens delivery, under the colour of the same, as I learned secretly, he hath commission to treat secretly of three points. The one, to cause the King to enter into the League. The other, to the marriage between Monsieur and his Masters daughter. The third, to propound some way for the Scotish Queens delivery. Being procured thereto by the house of Guise, in recompence of the execu∣tion done upon them of the Religion, whereby the King of Spain acknowledgeth to have saved the Low-Countreys. The Cardinal of Lorrain by his Letters, procured the King to write earnestly to his Ambassador in Turky, to cause him to travel, by all means, to compound the differences between him and the Princes of the League. The Almains do fear much the election of the Emperors second son in Polonia, as that thing which will make the house of Austria too great. And so for other matters referring your Lordship to these enclosed Occurrents, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the twelfth of November. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. MY very good Lord, touching the Scotish matters, her Majestie desieth to be advertised of, your Lordship shall understand, that I should know the partie my self, ever since my repair hither, who is of the Religion▪ and though not taken heretofore to be very zealous, yet always reputed to be very honest. He had been slain, if he had not been saved by  in this last broil, with whom he is most assuredly in great credit. Steward at his return told me, that meant to send him into England with letters of recommendation unto  and at that time he also requested me to recommend him by letters, which I promised to do; he saying, that he would send for them. Knowing the familiaritie between the said party, and the other abovenamed, and knowing the trust that  reposeth in him, I thought I could no way be bet∣ter informed of the truth of the matter then by him; for that I know, that if any such matters were, he was acquainted with all: I sent for the said party, who secretly repaired to me, and upon the first opening of the matter, he dealt roundly with me, assuring me, that both he and the other sent before as men of special trust, were imployed by  but the latter onely with Letters of credit, which the principal himself shall avow unto me, if it were not for suspicion, his doing being very narrowly observed. As for the Coyness used by  pro∣ceeded onely of forgetfulness, through a dangerous sickness he had not long before I sent unto him. He willed me to assure her Majestie, that she might as well give credit unto him, as to  himself. He told me he could not declare the contents of the parties Commission, for that it was upon shutting of the gates, but would find a time for that, I perceived he was one whom  trusted. He desired that the matter might be communicated by her Majestie unto few, for that he did assure me the D. had great intelligence in her Countrey. He re∣quested me also, that the letters of the party might pass in my pacquet, the same being so disguised as they will never be known: This is asmuch as pssed between us. And so leaving, &c. At Paris the twelfth of November, 1572. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principal Secretary. SIr, it may please you to advertise her Majestie, that the eighteenth of this Moneth Monsieur Mannesire repaired unto me, sent from the King and Queen Mother, to shew me that they have made choice of him to be sent out of hand unto her Maestie, to invite her to be Gossip, together with the Em∣press, and the Duke of Savoy, who as it is thought, will be here in person. He told me, that the King willed him to assure her Majestie, that there was no al∣teration in him of good will towards her Majestie; and that in confirmation of the same, he could do no less but desire her Majestie to be his Go∣ssip. Further, I gathered by him, he hath some charge to feel her Majesties mind and inclination towards Monsieur Duc d' Alanson, from whom he hath a letter un∣to her Majestie.
Touching Monsieur Mannesire himself, he doth all the good offices he may to continue amity betwixt her Majestie and his Master, and is altogether altered from Spain and the house of Guise, with vvhom I knovv he is quite out of cre∣dit, for that he hath not seemed the best to like of the late proceedings. Here he is in good opinion both vvith the King and Queen Mother; and therefore be∣ing in credit, and vvell-affected tovvards her Majestie, he may by receiving good usage at her hands receive thereby incouragement also to continue his good affection. The Legate is looked for here the four and tvventieth of this moneth: the end of his coming is to tvvo purposes, as it is said; the one, to procure the King to subscribe to the last Councel at Trent; the other, to suffer a levy of mo∣ney to be made vvithin his Dominions, termed by the name Crusado, for the maintenance of the Turkish Wars. They are advertised from the Ambassador at Rome, hovv that the Christians Army is retired. Don Iohn de Austria, being already arrived at Messina, and the Venetians being at Corfu. And so having nothing else to advertise at this present, &c. At Paris the tvventieth of November, 1572. Your Honours to command, F. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador for the Queens Majestie in France. MR. Walsingham: First touching your revocation, her Majestie is fully re∣solved thereof, and that all the expedition that may be devised, shall be used therein, as you shall further understand from others. Your good wife was here yesterday with me, who prevented me, meaning to have gone my self to her house to have een her, for that she is so great as was  meet for her to tra∣vel about. Such was her earnestness of your coming away, as she was come to me, before I thought any body had known of my being in London; and coming from Windsore, my Lord Treasurer and I met with your messenger young Ni∣casius. We find still new tragical parts playing in that Countrey; among others, none more strange, and more unnatural then his last, going in person to see one of his Subjects and eldest Souldiers executed; an example used by no Christian, but the most mighty God will not suffer long such Princes to dwell over his peo∣ple. As for his good intention to our Mistris and this Realm, when he sheweth himself friendly to his own, then we will hope he may be friendly to his neigh∣bors. Since the death of the Regent of Scotland, we have not heard any thing what is done there: You shall hear, assoon as we are advertised of any thing worthy. Touching the Rider I wrote of, I have referred to this bearer to declare my mind unto you, to have a good one; I will be content to strain my self far. We have no news here, onely her Majestie is in good health; and though you may hear of brutes of the contrary, I assure you it is not as hath been reported. Some∣what her Majestie hath been troubled with a spice or shew of the Mother, but indeed not so: The fits that she hath had hath not been above a quarter of an hour, but yet this little in her hath bred strange brutes here at home. God send her, I beseech him a long life. So I bid you heartily farewell, the of No∣vember, 1572. Your assured Friend, Ro: Leicester.
To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq her Majesties Ambassador Resident in France. SIr, your Letters sent by Niasius his son, came to my hands yesternight coming from the Court, and therewith I also received a small pacquet of some advertisements; for the which I thank you, and shall to morrow impart it to her Majestie. Where of late I wrote unto you of a person come, as he saith, from Florence but yet I cannot, for certain respects, but be jealous for such practises; and therefore I am willed to require you, to use some secret means how to understand the truth; and to this end, I do send you herewith certain Letters, which the party hath written to Rome  which you may peruse and use, as you see cause. The party  remaineth here in London, as in ape and yet I doubt the P. will smell of him. I have commanded these letters for to have the answer, as I cannot write any more. I trust your old acquaintance Mr. Carew shall borrow your room shortly. From my house in Westminster the seventh of No∣vember. Yours assuredly, William Burleigh To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principal Secretary. SIr, it may please you to advertise her Majestie, that the King dispatched with∣in these ten days Viracque, with a good sum of money, to entertain a party in Scotland, until such time as he hath propounded the matter here in France. One William Seers, servant to the Earl of Westmerland, arrived here the four and twentieth of this moneth, sent hither by the said Earl. Immediately upon his arrival, Viracque went with him to the Court, which is at this present at Monceaux. He reporeth, that in the North Countrey, from York, to the bor∣ders, all the whole Countrey is at the Earls devotion; so that a few men imploy∣ed there by the King, may assure him, that her Majestie shall be kept so occupied, as she shall have no leisure to send any supply to Rochel. I learn further, that one Stephen Wilson a Scotish man, taketh upon him to draw the Earl of Argile to be wholly at the Kings devotion, so that the said Earl may receive that estate and honour that his Father had at the King his Predecessors hands. The Bishop of Glasco hath had long and several conferences with the Legate since his last ar∣rival. If her Majestie do not compound the matter of Scotland before Viracque his coming, she shall find more difficulty in the matter. It is evident, how much money may do with that Nation; therefore it were well before his coming, her Majestie took the benefit of the Market, for that many Chapmen maketh deerer wares. Such Noblemen of Scotland as are here, were never so much made of. I am well assured that the Duke of Alva not long sithence, did write unto the King here, in recommendation of the practice that tended to the disquiet of her Ma∣jestie; but what it was, or what answer was made, I cannot learn. At this present there is not that entertainment used towards the Legate, that appertain∣eth to his calling, and as heretofore hath been used, which maketh all men of judgement to suspect, that the same is done for the nonce, to blind the eyes of
all the Princes Protestants. And that those speeches that were given out, that the Marquis of Egremont departed without good satisfaction, for that he ob∣tained nothing of those things he propounded; and that the Legate is like to obtain nothing of those things he is to propound, are but to abuse the world. Things do not pass here as they were wont to do, through many hands; be∣sides the Duke of Nevers, not many Counsellours that are made privy to the affairs of most secrecy. As I learn secretly their Ambassador there findeth himself agrieved, for that he receiveth not that good countenance and entertainment that he was wont to do. Though I have most just cause to think that there is but little good meant towards her Majestie, whatsoever outward shew is made, yet in my poor opinion it were not amiss for her Majestie to use all outward shew and entertainment that may seem to appertain to good amity, and yet not to omit any thing that tendeth to her safety. And so for other matters re∣ferring your honour to these enclosed Occurrents, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the seven and twentieth of November, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. YOur Lordships of the seventh I have received; the Letters enclosed I have delivered to Steward, for that Glascow 8 was not here; he therefore de∣sired me to tell Davison, that his absence is the cause why he hath not answer, but by the next he shall hear from him; in the mean time he bideth me tell him, nn 3 that he is now without fear of danger, but that he hath many good friends who will suffer him to take no wrong. He telleth me further, that he is resolved to revenge the death of his friends, hap what may hap. He wisheth 3 to look well to Scotland, and that Munnesire is sent but to abuse her Majestie with words. If Steward himself, of the 9 shall learn any thing that toucheth  I shall be advertised from time to time. I see more great cause now to nourih this humor contrary to my opinion in my last Letters, for surely there are great mis∣chiefs a brewing. I am assured, that within these eight days Florence  protested, that he should never be quiet so long as the exercise of Religion continued in any one place of Christendom. I know further particularly, that he said he will ne∣ver forget New haven, until revenge be made. I never knew so deep a dissem∣bler; I am sure that the murther of the Admiral should have been executed at Bloys, but that they saw him too well accompanied. It is agreed, that both he and Spain shall, for the avoiding of suspicion of the Legats coming, entertain the 3 with good words; and that Spain should make some shew to be glad to grow to some accord  did send expresly Gentlemen unto me, to know in what state and terms things do stand here, being requested so to do by the Princes of Germany, for that there are many contrary brutes there. He sendeth me word, that they mean shortly to call a Dyet, to consult for their safety, and for the revenge. I have not yet dispatched the Gentleman, but mean to do out of hand, in such sort instructed, as I hope shall rather heat then cool them. I have requested H to be throughly ad∣vertised
with all convenient speed how things do pass there, &c. Paris the six and twentieth of November, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham. To the Right Honourable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principal Secretary. IT may please your honour to advertise her Majestie, that the King here is given to understand from the Count de Lude, who lieth at Morte, how that they of Rochel have of late taken the Isle of Rez, which hath bred great con∣tent here; for it is a place of great importance, by the having whereof they are Masters of the Haven, and may thereby receive any succor by sea. They have also taken in the same divers ships. He doth further advertise, that they have taken eight or ten Brittains laden with corn. Touching the Kings intention for the besieging of Rochel, this bearer shall inform you at the full, who hath talked with one who knoweth what is resolved in that behalf. There is daily here look∣ed for the Master of the Emperors horse, being sent hither to congratulate the Queens delivery, as also to bring word, that the Emperor hath chosen Monsieur and the Duke of Lorrain Knights of the Order of Toison. By letters out of Germany they write, that it was determined upon the news of the execution of those of the Religion here, to have slain as many Catholiques of the French as were found there; which afterwards, upon better consideration, was stayed, for that they thought the same would prove but a poor revenge; notwithstand∣ing, this Nation groweth so hateful there, as for avoiding of danger, such of them as travel in those parts, are driven to take upon them the names of Burgundians. They write also, that there is hope that the Elector Brandenburgh, shall be chosen King of Polonia, which news doth nothing content those here. Fur∣ther, they do advertise, that the Princes of Germany are in great jealousie of the Legats repair hither; and that thereupon they do put themselves in order of defence, for that they think his repair hither cannot be but to continue some dan∣gerous practise. A day or two after the Legat had made his entry, the Court of Parliament sent unto him, according to the ancient custom, to see his faculties. To whom he answered, that the intention of his coming was not to execute the office of a Legat, but only to visit the King, and to treat with him certain private and par∣ticular matters. Touching the manner of his receiving and entertainment since his access to the King, this bearer shall enform you. They do all what they can to make the world believe, that his coming is not grateful unto them. The Ambassador of Spain doth give out, that the five and twentieth of the last moneth, Zutphen was taken by the Duke of Alva, and that eight or ten of the Princes ships have been also lately distressed. Pynart of late willed my Secretary to tell me, that whereas hereto∣fore Monsieur de la Mot had usually certain imposts of wine granted to him, he is afraid that he shall be debarred of the same, or at the least some part of the quantity cut off; which thing he wisheth not to be done at this time, for that it may give the King occasion to think, that his Ministers are not so grateful to∣wards her Majestie as heretofore they have been. Seeing that the Gentleman is not to make any long abode there, being in hope of revocation, me thinks it
should be well done if he were used as he may return with good satisfaction. And so having nothing further to impart unto your Honour at this time, I most hum∣bly take my leave. AT Paris the fifth of December. Your Honours to Command, Fra: Walsingham. To the Right Honourble, and his very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. SInce I last wrote unto your Lordship, Steward repaired not unto me, for that there is an eye had to such as resort to my house. He sendeth me word, that Glasco 4 9 party increaseth in strength, which will well appear when the sea∣son shall serve. His letters of advice this bearer shall deliver you. The party that is recommended unto you from Berwick, telleth me that Iames Kirkaldy departeth hence out of hand with such money as Viracque should have carried into Scotland; for that he hath gotten license to stay here for a moneth, for that the King mindeth to imploy him there as an Ambassador Resident. Fur∣ther, he telleth me, that de la Mot hath advertised the King, how that the Lord Athol is won to be of the Queens party, which now sithence the death of the Regent is grown far the stronger: And to the end that Liddington may travel more earnestly in strengthening the faction, there is some offer made unto him of some great pension; he saith meover, that the Bishop of Glasco giveth him to understand, that with some assistance of money, the Lord Athol, and the Lord Argile being revolted from the Kings side as they are, they shall be more able to make their party good against any force her Majestie shall send, until such time as he hath setled his things here. Touching Seers, the Earl of Westmer∣lands man, I can by no means learn what answer he received at the Kings hands. He telleth me only, that he stayed here four days. These his advertisements I have confirmed otherwise, and therefore I do the rather credit them. They have written to the Ambassador, to use all the means that may be possible, what∣soever it cost, to have the Queen of Scots spoken withal, willing him in any case to beware to use in that behalf any Hugonot. The B. of Glasco hath lately divers times conference for the devising of some good means for that purpose; one whom he meant to imploy in that behalf, discovered no less unto me, who think∣eth that there is some practise for the stealing of her away. They caused of late Briquemont and Cavannes a little before their death, to subscribe to certain blanks, which they have filled up with such matter as may best prove that there was a conspiracy pretended. Which blanks so filled up, they sent by Fregoz and one Carpenter into Germany, to shew some unto the Princes there, for the better justifying of the late execution. If Kirkaldy be well used by Mr. Killegrew, he will be no evil instrument: he desireth much the revenge of that that hath been lately done here. At Paris the fifth of December. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. RIght Honourable, the King here is advertised, that they of Rochel have of late taken the Isle of Rez, and divers ships in the same, a thing that imported the Rochellois much, for that thereby they have the Haven free, and at their commandment, and may receive such succours as may come unto them by sea. This Court is much agrieved with all, aswell in this, as in other mat∣ters, that things frame so untowardly and go backwards. The wisest sort do not stick to say, that the greatest troubles are now but a beginning. If it shall prove true that they write out of Germany, which is, that the Marquis of Branden∣burgh is like to be chosen King of Polonia, they may perhaps have just cause to repent their late doings; but howsoever that fall out, we shall see that God will work somewhat, whereby it may appear the blood of his Saints to be dear unto him: Perhaps we did build too much before upon the courage and wisdom of them that be dead: He can raise up stones to set forth his glory, so that we need not doubt to see the revenge, unless our sins be the let. What is meant by the King, touching the besieging of Rochel, this bearer shall impart unto your Lordship, as also, the manner of the entertainment of the Legat, and how they seek to make the world believe, that they are not content with his coming, nor he with his entertainment. They say here, that the Kings side in Scotland is much weakned, and the other side far the stronger; they have therefore dis∣patched of late from hence, some to keep the Queens party in courage, until they have setled things at home. I find therefore her Majestie shall have great difficulty to settle things here in such sort, as may prevent such mischiefs as hereafter may grow unto her that way. Her Majestie can of her self well enough judge of the peril, besides, I know she lacketh not good advice; and if sparing be not the let, I hope all will do well. And so for other matters, referring your Honour to the Lord Treasurers Letters and this bearer, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the fifth of December, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer. YOur Honour by Master Secretaries Letters shall understand, that the Isle of Rez is taken by them of Rochel; that there is some hope conceived in Germany of the Elector Brandenburgh to the Kingdom of Polonia. That the Ambassador of Spain here giveth out, that the fifteenth of the last Moneth Zat∣phen in Gelderland was taken. That certain of the Princes ships are lately di∣stressed, and that the two Dukes are at Boisleduc. The Legats doings are kept very secret, in so much that his Secretary is not made acquainted with them, for the avoiding of suspicion. The Ambassador of Spain hath no great conference with him, but by a third person named L. Angrlett Auditre della Rota, who passeth daily to and fro between them; he is one in whom the Pope layeth the chiefest weight of his legation, in respect of his wisdom and experience. The Duke of Savoys repair hither in person, maketh men to think that the unity
between this Crown and Spain is like to grow great, for that he is termed here Lame du Rey du esquire, and that therefore the matters of treaty between them are of great weight. I know that sithence my coming to the Countrey, the King hath openly used some speeches of misliking of the said Duke, but this late change, changeth all things upside down. The doubt of the Turks great preparation for the next year, is a great bridle of their intentions. For the removing of this impediment, the last of this moneth they dispatched hence their Ambassador, to make great offers both in Spains and the Venetians behalf, to draw him to an accord. The Venetians, as I am credibly informed, have been these three years past at the charge of 800 000 the moneth, and therefore would be glad to be rid of so weighty a burthen. And so having nothing else to impart unto your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the fifth of December, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer. BEcause this bearer promised to see my letters safely delivered unto your Lordship, I thought I would not let him go without them. The Legate stayeth here until there come resolution touching that they have lately treated here, which they have dispatched both toward Rome and Spain by two sundry Curriors. The King is of late advertised, that the number of those of the Religion in Lanquedoc is encreased very much, and that there are joyned with them 600 horsemen, and 1500 footmen, that are departed out of their Coun∣trey of Bern, who by the way have distressed the most part of Count Ioyeux Company. They have taken also upon the edge of Languedoc, a certain place called Sanins, where their Gun-powder is made: this encrease of their number maketh the King irresolute what to do. Before these advertisements, he was determined to have besieged Sancerre, but now he is advised to march toward them in Lan∣guedoc. The new accidents that happen, make them to change their purposes. Of late there is one arrived here from the Duke of Baviers, whose coming is thought to proceed through the Cardinal of Lorrains perswasions, with com∣mission to make great offers to the King, from the Duke, to the end en∣courage him, both to the imbracing of the league, as also to proceed to the rooting out of those of the Religion here. Monsieur de la Mot hath of late earnestly recommended to their Majesties here, certain requests commended unto him by my Lords of her Majesties Counsel. Whereupon Pynart ent unto me, to assure me, that there shall be such justice done to her Subjects, as her Majestie shall have just cause to rest contented therewith. And so having nothing else to impart unto your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the tenth of September, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principal Secretary. SIr, It may please you to advertise her Majestie, that by advertisement late¦ly come to this Court from Rochel, the King is given to undestand, that Strozz hath taken Marans, not far from Rochel, where he put to the sword two Companies of Souldiers placed there by the Rochellois. Further, he is given to understand, that de la Noue is entred into Rochel, being sent thither by the King, having beforehand given oath, that he would faithfully travel to re∣duce them to yield, who by perswasion hath much wrought with them, as they are content to grow to some capitulation, which proceedeth chiefly through a disagreement that is between the Rochellois and such strangers as are repaired thither. Also it is said, that the Baron de le guard hath taken three ships laden with corn by them of Rochel. These sundry newes hath put them of this Court in great jollity, for that they hope shortly to reduce the Realm to inward quietness. There are marched out of Burgundy a Captain footmen, and certain horsemen, levied by the Duke of Guise, and the Duke of Aumale, whether they shall be imployed at Sancerre, or whether they shall march directly to Languedoc, it is not as yet concluded. The Duke of Guise arrived here the twelfth of this moneth, who is marvellously well accompanided. The Cardinal of Lorrain his Uncle, is daily looked for here, as also the Cardinal of Guise his Cousin. By Letters of the fifth of this moneth out of Flanders they write, that the D. of Alva doth distribute his Army into Garrisons, and that the Roysters do remain at the Forrest of Arden, and in the Land of Luxenburg, where they commit great spoils and outrages, being not yet payed; for that the D. of Alva pretend∣eth, not to have wherewithal to discharge them. They write further, that the Prince of Orange remaineth at Dortrecht, where he maketh collection of money for the levying of forces for the next Spring. From Cullen they write, that there are certain Commissioners repaired thither, sent by the Emperor (as it is said) to treat some accord between the Prince of Orange and the D. of Alva; notwith∣standing, they do give out other causes of their coming. By Letters from Vienna they advertise, that the Emperor is repaired into Bohemia, to procure the electi∣on of his Son; which being done, he meaneth to repair to Germany, and there to keep a Diet for the election of the King of Romans. Further they advertise, that the great Turk of late hath sent unto him a present, commending him very much for the keeping of his promise, and the observation of the accord between them, requesting him to continue the same. Touching the election of the King of Polonia they write, that the Elector Brandenburg is most like to be chosen, notwithstanding they have great hope of Monsieurs election, which men of great judgement do think to be void of any good ground. By letters out of Italy they write, that the Turk will have in a readiness against the next Spring 400 Gallies, whereof they are very much afraid, the rather, for that their own Forces by sea do decay; the greatest part of their slaves for the furniture, being decayed by sickness this last voyage. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the eigh∣teenth of December, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Lord of Treasurer. BEcause Steward is absent from the Court, I can by no means decypher what is the end of Monsieur de la Noue's travel. If there be no mystery in the matter, then are others doing not so well grounded as they make men believe. So soon as I shall be able to decypher any further of the matter, I will not fail to advertise your Lordship. It is here said, that Monsieur de la Mot hath advertised, how that her Majesties meaning is to execute the Queen of Scots: Whereupon such as favour her do discourse, that it were good to stay the Noblemen that shall be sent hither by her Majestie for the Christening, as a pledge for the said Queens safety; that their Majesties here should have such intention, I know not. The Legate, as I am most credibly informed, hath, amongst other Articles of his Instructions, commandment earnestly to commend the Queen of Scots cause to the King here, and to devise with him, some mean for her delivery, whereby England may be reduced to the Catholique faith. The Scotish Ambassador hath more often recourse unto him, then any other Ambassador here, which maketh me the rather to doubt some practise. Hamilton, brother to him that killed the Regent, hath sent this message unto D. Chasteauherauld, following; that is, to do what he may to keep the Castle of Edenburgh, and to maintain his party until Whitsundy next, assuring him, that by that time they shall have assistance, both from the Pope, Spain and this Crown. The party himself that is to do the message, made me acquainted with all, which is now departed towards Scotland, and hath promised me to declare no less to Mr. Randolph, who knoweth him. And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the eigh and twentieth of December, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Fra: Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. WHat hope they have here to compound with Rochel, and by what means, your Lordship shall understand by Mr. Secretaries Letters; as also, what is written from Flanders, Germany and Italy If Rochel may be reduced to com∣pound, as they hope for, they think it will be a means to cause the other Towns to yield the sooner. It is said, that the Rochellois are drawn the rather to give ear to a composition, for that they see there is no hope of Forreign succours; and yet when a man considereth what is past, a man would think there could grow unto him no greater danger no other way then to grow to composition: I cannot therefore think, but that there is some other mysterie in the matter, more then I can as yet decypher. The hope of composition doth put them in great com∣fort, that they shall shortly settle their inward troubles, which I fear will breed some troubles to their neighbors. And so having nothing else to advertise your Lordship at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the eighteenth of December, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer. IT may please your Lordship to understand, that after the closing up of my Letters to Mr. Secretary, I was given to understand, that by a Currier late∣ly repaired hither from Rochel, they have received from Monsieur de la Noue certain Articles of composition, propounded by them of Rochel unto the King. Amongst the rest, I do understand: First, that they may have the free exercise of their Religion, as heretofore they have had. Secondly, that they may keep inviolably the old and ancient liberties of their Town. Thirdly, that instead of Monsieur de Byron, they may have la Noue to be their Go∣vernor. It is though there, that the King will consent unto their Articles, with inten∣tion to observe them, as he hath done others before. He thinketh that the Composition with Rchel will serve for an introduction to others that hold out to do the like; the hope whereof doth make them here very merry. For other ad∣vertisements, out of Germany, Flanders and Italy, I refer your Lordship to Master Secretaries Letters. At Paris the eighteenth of December, 1572. Your Honours to command, Francis Walsingham. To our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Francis Walsingham Esq our Ambassador Resident in France. ELIZABETH R. TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well; there hath been with us Mon∣sieur de Mannesire, with the Letters from the King and Queen Mother, and the Duke of Alanson: His credence was in three points: The continuance of the Amity. That we should be God-mother to the Infant; and to pursue still the request of marriage with the Duke of Alanson. To whom we answered: First, that as for amity, having it of late by league so straitly made betwixt us, on our behalf we never attempted nor minded to attempt any thing that should impair it, but rather do study and wish to encrease the same, if we could; and therefore you may say, it is that, and the good will appertaining to that Amity, that made us by you before, and now by de Mannesire, to declare what we have heard of our good brothe, which we are sorry to hear: First, the great slaugh∣ter made in France of Noblemen and Gentlemen, unconvicted, and untryed. So suddenly (as it is said at his commandment) did seem so much to touch the honour of our good brother, as we could not but with lamentation, and with tears of our heart, hear it of a Prince so near allied unto us, and in a chain of undissoluble love knit unto us by league and oath: That being after excused by a conspiracy and treason wrought against our good Brothers own person, which whether it were true or false, being in another Princes Kingdom and Jurisdiction, where we have nothing to do, we mind not to be curious; yet that they were not brought to answer to Law and Judgement, before they were executed, those who were found guilty. We do hear it marvellously ill taken, as a thing of a terrible and dangerous example; and are sorry, that our good brother was so ready to condescend to any such Councel, whose nature we took to be more
humane and noble; but when more was added unto it, that women, children, maids, young infants and sucking babes, were at the same time murthered, and cast into the river, and that liberty of execution was given to the vilest and basest sort of the popular, without punishment or revenge of such cruelty done afterwards by Law, upon those cruel murtherers of such innocents; this en∣creased our grief and sorrow in our good brothers behalf, that he should suffer himself to be led by such inhumane Councellours: And now sithence it doth appear by all doings, both by the Edicts, and otherwise that the rigor is used onely against them of the Religion reformed, whether they were of any conspi∣racy or no, and that contrary to the Edict of Pacification so oftentimes repeated, they of the reformed Religion, are either driven to fly, to dye, or to recant, or lose their offices; whereby it doth appear, by all actions now used by our good brother, that his scope and intent doth tend only to subvert that Religion that we do profess, and to root it out of his Realm; at the least, all the strangers of all Nations and Religions so doth interpret it, as may appear by the triumphs and rejoycings set out, aswel in the Realm of France as others, which maketh that it must needs seem very strange, both to us, and to all other, that our good brother should require us to be Godmother to his dear childe, we being of that Religion which he doth now persecute, and cannot abide within his Realm: And if we should believe the perswasion of others, and the opinion of all strangers our friends, who be not our Subjects, we should in no case condescend to any association in that or any other matter: But as we have always hitherto had special love to our good brother in his younger age and a desire to the considera∣tion of his good estate and quietness, which we have in deeds manifestly shew∣ed, never seeking any advantage of time against him▪ as peradventure other Princes would have done; but ever sought to preserve his Estate and his Subjects, of what estate or condition in Religion whatsoever they were, ex∣horting them to unity and concord, and with loyal hearts to live together in quiet under our good brother, without offering injury the one to the other, glad of their agreement, and sorry of their division and discord; so the late league of straiter amity made betwixt our good brother and us, to the which he did so frankly and lovingly condescend, or rather procure it at our hands, is so fresh in our memory, that we cannot suffer that in any jot it should be dimini∣ished, but rather encreased daily, so long as our good brother doth shew the like unto us; and that maketh us to interpret all things in better part then otherwise by any means they can appear, such is our love to our good brother, and so can we be content to perswade our selves for the love that we do bear un∣to him; and for the hope of his continuance in our begun amity, without faint∣ness or dissimulation: And this for the matter of Amity. For continuance of declaration of which amity, we said to Mannesire, we would not be slack in any good office doing, at the request of our good brother. And so notwithstanding the doubts and impediments beforementioned, we intend to send a worthy per∣sonage, a noble man of our Realm, to repair to his Court, and to visit the King our good brother and the Queen Mother, and the rest who have written in our behalfs, and to do that office which is required as appertaineth, wishing that these spiritual alliances may be to us our comfort and conservation of the amity begun betwixt us. To the motion of the marriage with the Dke of Alanson, wherein de Mannesire seemed somewhat earnest; after declaration of inconveniences that might come in that marriage, by the diversity of age and Religion, which we termed in our talk extream and true impediments, we made this final resolution and answer, That forasmuch as we had given to our Ambassa∣dor resident there, charge to demand and make relation of certain things touch∣ing
that matter, to the King and Queen Mother, to the which you had no an∣swer, but of the Queen Mother in a certain generallity; before that we shall have a special answer to them, we cannot well resolve; the which once being done, we shall the better understand what to answer for any other proceeding in that request. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador Resident for her Majestie in France. SIr, I heartily thank you for your often advertisements; and also, that you are so careful for our estate, the which, so far as I can learn, dependeth on∣ly upon the providence of God, as it hath done always, but is easily sustained by the policy of men, and yet hath sped better then any man would think, and so I pray God it may do still. De Mannesire hath been honourably received, and friendly; and yet to say the truth, sith those late and execrable murthers of the true servants of God there, the minds of the most number are much alienated from that Nation, even of the very Papists, much more of the Protestants here; and if in countenance and entertainment some coldness might appear, it must be ascribed to our English nature, which as yet cannot dissemble so deeply as the French can and hath done; but I am sure De Mannesire hath no cause to complain. In Scotland, after the death of the Earl of Marre the late Regent, about the four and twentieth of November they chose the Earl of Morton Regent, with a great common consent of the Lords & Brgesses in Scotland; who (as we hear say) doth very carefully and wisely endeavor himself to reconcile, as much as may be, the Lords one with another, and to appease both the factions, which I fear will not be but with some charge to the Queens Majestie, and some grief to the French Ministers and Procurers, who can least abide quietness in that Realm. Mr. Killgrew is yet there still, who assoon as they appear to agree within them∣selves, shall return (as he would gladly do) hither to receive some thanks for his pains. I pray God for so much as he hath deserved for his integrity and dili∣gence. Our men be all come from Flushing, either before, or at, or sith their return∣ing, the most part all sick. Sir Humphrey Gilberts sickness is turned into a Quartain, some of them that came with him be buried at London. I thank you for the Matthiolus you sent unto me: I like it well, but yet if I could recover mine own I noted through with mine own hands, I would like it far better, but he that stole it from me, doth think that I shall have it again of that price. I pray you buy me a case of Instru∣ments, such as be to be sold in the Palace; I mean, containing two compasses or three a square, a pen of metal, and other things. I have two of them already, one of the least, and the other of Copper or Latyn, and the manner of Iron: Now I desire to have of the biggest volume, which is with the case a foot long, or there∣abouts, and if more, it were not the worse; whether the instruments be of Iron or Latyn I care not. I have shewed your man mine, to the intent he might know what I mean. I have sent you by him five French Crowns of the Sun to pay for my book of Matthiolus, and the case of Tools, and if it come to more, I will pay whatsoever it be, with most hearty thanks. I am sure you have heard of, and I think you have seen the new fair Star or Comet, but without beard or tail, which hath appeared here these three weeks, on the backside of the Chair of Cassiopeia, and on the edge of Lactea via. The bigness is betwixt the big∣ness
of Iupiter and Venus, and keeps there to my appearance, who have no in∣struments to observe it, and because of this cold weather also, dare not observe the precise order of the fixed stars; such a one I never have observed, nor read of, I pray you let me know what your wise men of Paris do judge upon it. I know they will not think it is the Admirals soul, as the Romans did of the Comet next appearing, after the murther of Iulius Caesar, that it was his soul. It may be Astraea now peaking out afar off in the North, to see what revenge shall be done upon so much innocent blood-shed in France at a marriage banquet and reer suppers after it. It would be to me good yet to understand what your Astronomers and Heaven-gazers there do judge of it. If I were not so much occupied as I am, I would turn over all my old books, but I would say some∣what of it my self, and gess by chance, even as wisely as they, though I would not publish it but to my friends; for folly, the more it is kept in, the better. Methinks I hear you say, what a mischief meaneth he to write to me of new Stars and Astronomers, and telleth me nothing of my coming home▪ Sir, if I should tell you any thing thereof, de die & tempore, I should but guess as Astronomers do; but this I can tell you, all your friends have not onely been diligent, but more then importunate to bring you home; and your wife with tears and lamentations: And the Queens Majestie seemeth to incline and grant our requests; but when a pin is set fast in a hole, till we have another to thrust that out, and tarry there it self, it is hard to get it out. Your successor cannot yet be found; yes, find enough, but we cannot get one that will tick fast till he might be thrust in indeed, and so you to be thrust out; and ye know how long we be here a resolving, and how easie to be altered. At the signing of her Ma∣jesties letters to you this morning; I said to the Queen, Madam, my Lord Am∣bassador looks now to have some word from your Majestie of his return, it would comfort him very much. Why, faith she, he shall come. Yea (quoth I) when the poor Gentleman is almost dismaid; your Majestie hath heard enough with what grief he doth tarry there. Well, saith she, you may write unto him, that he shall come home shortly, we think with my Lord of Worcester. I said, in∣deed my Lords train should be the more honourable, if he had one Ambassa∣dor to go with him, and another to return with him. Yea, saith her Majestie, there be some make excuses that they would not go, but their excuses shall not serve them. I thanked her Majestie, and came my ways; for she made haste to go a walking with the Ladies, because it was a frost. Fare you well. From Hampton Court this eleventh of December, 1572. Your assured Friend, Th. Smith. Her Highness appointeth still upon Mr. Carew to be your successor, but he maketh great labour to the contrary by Ladies of the privy Chamber, and others; but as I can perceive by this last speech, and others, he shall succeed you.
To the Right Honorable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador Resident for her Majestie in France. THis bearer your servant, cometh onely with credit; for I have no leisure to write but this. Mannesire hath gotten knowledge, for which Glasco 9 sent Marcellis le davison hither, as Davison this present night telleth me; where∣by he saith, that if Mannesire shall come hither before this bringer, then shall 9 Glasco and he be in great danger; and therefore Davison doth write by this bringer to Steward, as I think, and to 9 who as Davison thinketh, will surely come hither: For which purpose, he hath required me to provide a passenger to attend at Harwieh. Le the Port of 2 0  6   The rest of things your ser∣vant shall shew unto you; and this do I depeach, without knowledge of the Queens Majestie, until I may have answer. From Westminister this eleventh of December at Midnight, 1572. Yours assuredly, William Burleigh To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principal Secretary. SIr, her Majesties of the eleventh of this moneth I have received, but have not yet communicated to their Majesties here such answers as were made un∣to the things propounded unto her by Monsieur de Mannesire; both for that he is not yet returned, as also, for that the Queen Mother, at this present, is not in the best health, whereby Ambassadors can have no access to her as yet. Her sickness is onely a Catarrh, so that I think by his return she will be in state able to give access: seeing the Government resteth wholly in her hands, without committing the matter unto her, as well as unto the King, it will be to no great purpose, for that he receiveth his light from thence. The eighteenth of this moneth, the King by mischance of another mans sword, received a little hurt in his left arm, which is not great, but that every small hurt is great in a Prince. The hope of the Rochellois is yielding is now worn away, they having lately re∣ceived advertisements from them that Monsieur de la Noue can do no good, and that they imprison as many as do perswade them to yield, as those whom they hold suspected; so that now being out of all hope to obtain the same by com∣position, they here consult of the means to obtain the same by force; and there∣fore it is said, that Monsieur, and Monsieur le Duc shall march thitherwards about the latter end of Ianuary. Yesterday, as I am credibly informed, they re∣ceived news that did not best content them out of Switzerland; which is, that the last Diet holden there, they have concluded, not to suffer the King to have any succors fom thence, for that they suspect that the fire lately kindled here, is to extend to themselves. The Souldiers here do conclude, that without either Switzers or Almains the King can besiege neither Rochel nor any other Town; for the Frenchmen are not fir for the keeping of Artillery, nor to make the body of the battel of footmen. The King doth send into Germany, to see if he can appease the Almains, as also to procure succours if he shall need them. He hath received at their hands
many a churlish answer; and notwithstanding, without respect had of the diffe∣rence of their degrees, he for beareth not to woo them. The nineteenth of this moneth, there arrived here the Bishop of Valences Secretary out of Polonia, who giveth them great hope of the Election of Mon∣sieur; and yet some part of his tale giveth men cause to judge, that there is no great reason so to think; for that he saith, by the reason of the plague that there reigneth, the Nobility to whom the election appertaineth, have not yet assembled: so that all this hope seemeth to be grounded upon some particular conference that the Bishop hath had with some of the said Electors, who per∣haps when the matter shall come to through debating, will change their opinion. Men of judgement here, that know that Countrey, do think, that if the Bi∣shop of Valence had had a million of gold, accompanied with his eloquence, to be stow amongst them, he might then be able to do somewhat; but otherwise they think, that eloquence without treasure will gain no Kingdom. The Venetians of late have taken four French ships, and have put some of them to torture, to make them confess the colouring of certain Turkish goods: as which news the King was very much offended, and therefore hath given them leave of Marseilles to use all means of revenge. From Antwerp they write, that the Duke of Alva, by the benefit of the last frost, hath taken certain Towns in Holland, which thing is not altogether believed, for that the Ambassador here hath received no letters for confirma∣tion of the same. The news of the Earl of Morton to be chosen Regent, Boughan and the Lords of Lougleuin to have the Government of the King, doth very much mislike them; and therefore her Majestie hath cause the more to like of it. And so leaving to trouble your Honour any further at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the two and twentieth of December, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. MY very good Lord, I had very well hoped, that the reasons for my return would have countervailed any that Mr. Carew could alledge for his stay. I forbear to express my grief, for that I am somewhat in hope some other shall be choen that shall not slip his head out of the collar. I beseech your Lord∣ship therefore to continue your assistance in that behalf. Touching the hope of having Rochel by composition, the wind is come about, they being now per∣swaded, that there is no way to have it but by force; whatsoever her Majestie saith to the contrary, they cannot here but believe that they of Rochel receive encouragement from her Majestie to hold out. The Switzers, as I am given to understand, have concluded at a late Diet, held by them, to give no succour this way, which falleth out contrary to their way. Those people are not so gross, but that they foresee the end, that the late accident here tendeth to. I would others, whom it toucheth as nearly▪ would so think, The late election of the Regent in Scotland, doth altogether miscontent them here; and some threat∣nings are given out that it shall not so long stand for good, for that the same passed not with the content of both parties, but onely by the choice of one faction.
So leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the two and twentieth of December, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord of Burleigh. STeward being made acquainted with the contents of your Lordships Letters, telleth me, that 9 meaneth to stand upon the denial; and therefore request∣ed me with all diligence to dispatch this messenger, and in his name 3 to deny also, if any question shall be moved in that behalf, That Davison never propound∣ed any such matter; notwithstanding, he desireth that the ship may stay at 2 6 ry 9 or 10 days; that if upon better consideration, reason shall move him to alter his opinion, he may take the benefit thereof, if necessity shall force him thereto. He willeth me further to advertise your Honour, that 9 meaneth to send a Gentleman expresly with full mind unto Davison, with order to com∣municate the same from him to 3 to whom he desireth that there may be cre∣dit given. I perceive by them, that they cannot tell well what to resolve, un∣til there be conference had with  if they mean not to take profit of the ship. I have taken order with them to send one to the Port, to cause him to depart. Because your Lordship is sometimes absent from the Court, I thought good to send your Lordship the Copy of the Letter I write to Master Secretary; be∣sides the contents whereof, I learn, that Monsieur D'Aux is stoln away from Constantinople, and is presently retired to Ragusa, where he remaineth; the cause of his departure from thence is unknown unto the King, who is very much offended withal. He hath expresly sent a messenger unto him, to will him upon his allegiance, to return unto Constantinople, and to continue his charge there. Some do gess that the cause of his departure from thence was, for that he feared, that the King would take some order for the murthering of him there, as suspected of Religion. The Cardinal of Lorrain hath took upon him before his departure from Rome, to promise the Pope, that the King here should enter into the League, which thing is thought not fit at this time, until the King hath appeased his trou∣bles at home. It is thought that one chief cause of the Duke of Savoys coming, tendeth to make some complot against Geneva; as also, to conclude some straiter amity then heretofore hath been between this Crown and Spain; the means whereof is thought to be the marriage of Monsieur and the King of Spains daughter. They seem here to be no less sorry for the E. of Derby, then for D. Chasteirault; what moveth them so to be, I know not. Though there hath grown some alteration in her Majesties resolution touching my return, by the choice of Mr. Carew, yet I hear there lacketh no care in your Lordship to find out some other to supply the room; for the which I have most just cause to render unto your Lordship most humble thanks. And thus having nothing else to impart unto your Lord∣ship, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the two and twentieth of De∣cember, 1572. Your Honours to command, F. Walsingham.
SIr, the day after Monsieur Mannesires arrival, which was the 23 of this pre∣sent, I had access unto the King, at what time I made him acquainted with the contents of her Majesties Letters. To the which he answered, that touch∣ing the amity, he received no small contentment, as well by the assurance given unto him by Mannesire, as also by me, that her meaning is to continue the same without doing any thing that should be disagreeable thereto; and there∣upon he took great occasion to make great protestations of the greatest account that he made of her Majesties amity, saying, that he esteemed the same above any wordly thing. In this point he was very long, wherein I make the shorter recital, because I kno  how his outward speech and his inward meaning do agree. Then I proceeded to shew him, what her Majestie conceived, in re∣spect of the good will she beareth him, touching the slaughter of the Admiral, and the rest of the Nobility of the Religion here, without any form of justice, a thing disallowed of all men, though it were true that a conspiracy were made. I further shewed him the redoubling of her Majesties grief, as well to see such as by no means could be privy to any conspiracy, given up even to the vile and base people, whose execution was without respect of age or sex, in a most bar∣barous sort, as also to see those that are alive forced by Edicts lately set forth, either to abjure their Religion, to fly, or else to be murthered; a kind of pro∣ceeding which sheweth, that his meaning is to root out all the professors of the Gospel within his Realm; and therefore could not but make her Majestie to marvel, that he should move her to be Gossip, he persecuting with such severity those that profess one Religion with her. To these he answered, that touching the slaughter of the Admiral, and the rest of the Nobility, he had well hoped that her Maj. had been throughly satisfied by such demonstratios as had been made unto her there by his Ambassador, of the cause of the same. Touching those that ere killed by the fury of the people, he said, it was a thing that he was sorry for, but could by no means remedy it. For the third, it was the re∣vocation of the Edict of the liberty of Religion. He said, that his policy forced him so to do, seeing the in convenience that otherwise would follow by the tole∣ration of two sundry Religions. To this I replyed, that curiosity did not move her Majestie to use that kind of speech, but the good will and affection that depend∣eth upon the amity lately concluded, who was sorry to hear hard judgements of others touching such kind of proceedings; whose opinions and advice, if she of her self should follow, she should then not onely refuse to be his Gossip, but al∣so forbear all other kind of intelligence with him: and that those that do so ad∣vise her, are not onely her own Subjects, but also her Neighbours abroad. Not∣withstanding, I shewed him, that her Majestie, as one that hath from his child∣hood been affected towards him, who never took advantage of time to do any thing that might prejudice him, as one in whom the late league hath taken so deep impression of amity; as she cannot but interpret in good part any friendly request tending to amity; and therefore, for continuance and declaration of the same, all doubts and impediments laid aside, she intendeth to send a Nobleman, as well to supply the office required, as also to visit him. To this the King an∣swered, that he could not but think himself most bound to her Majestie, for ac∣cepting in good part this office of his, which proceedeth onely of amity and good will, to that end (as her Majestie saith) that this spiritual allyance may be to both their comforts. And for further confirmation of the amity lately begun be∣tween them. And as for the Nobleman (saith he) he shall be very welcome, and receive such honour as appertaineth to one sent from a Princess, whom I esteem so much.
Touching the third point, concerning Monsieur D'Alanson, he said not much, but only this, That the marriage betwixt her Majestie and him, is a thing that he much desireth, as that thing that would make a perfect uniting of their two Crowns. After this speech, upon complaint made by me of the small re∣dress that our Merchants have at Roan, at such Commissioners as lately by him were deputed for the remedy of such injuries as they had received in the time of the hurly burly. He shewing me, that Sorex and other Flemings were a rigging out, to the number of fourteen sail, in certain Creeks and Ports belong∣ing to her Majestie, for to repair with the same to Rochel, wherein he desired her Majestie to take such order as may be agreeable to the good amity and league lately concluded between them. This was in effect as much as passed between us at this present. To the Queen Mother I could have no access, for that she is not yet rid of her Cathera. Monsieur Pynart sent me word by my Secretary, that the Baron de la Guarde hath advertised, that fifty English sail were about to have entred the Haven of Rochel, had not he stayed them. And whereat Pynart saith, he doth much mar∣vel, considering the protestation that lately hath been made touching the con∣tinuance of the amity. In answer hereof, I sent him word, that if they had been minded to have entred the Haven, his forces could not have stayed them; and that if her Majestie had intention to imploy any of her ships that way, a quar∣ter of that number would serve. But this (said I) is but a cunning of his to cause the King to be cold in yielding redress to certain injuries that he had lately done to our Merchants, who for spoils sake could have been contented to have his Master and the Queen my Mistris at variance. And therefore is glad to send such vain advertisements. Monsieur Mannesire, who reporeth very honourably of her Majestie every way, desired me, in their Majesties name, to hasten as much as I could the coming of that Nobleman whom her Majestie meaneth to send, for that the Emperors Ambassador, who is already arrived, attendeth onely his coming. Further, of himself, he desireth me to advise him not to bring any great train, for that otherwise, he shall be very much troubled to have horses provided for them; for that, saith he, he cometh in post a dozen Gentlemen, and half a score others, shall be as honourable, as though he came with two hundred. The experience, Sir, that your self have had in this behalf, cannot but make you to think Mon∣sieur Mannesires opinion to be good; as also, give the like advice. And if he did transport some Geldings of his own, I would take it to be the best way; for that otherways, as you have some experience he shall be hardly pro∣vided. The Emperors Ambassador, who is Master of the horse, hath not above twenty in his train. I make full account, according to her Majesties promise, by her last letters, to see my successor in company with the Nobleman that repaireth hither. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. Paris the five and twentieth of December, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Burleigh. IT may please your Lordship to understand, that since the writing of my last Letter I have spoken with Steward, who knoweth not by whose pro∣curement he was set on, that discharged the Dagg against La Motte▪ but doth ghess, the party named in my last Letters should be the Authour thereof. For other matters, he saith, all goeth well; as you shall further understand by one sent for the purpose, who imbarqueth at B. his name is R. he is of good quality▪ and one that accompanied 8 I am warily dealt withal in the matter. And for my self, I dare not desire to know more then they are willing to make me acquainted withal. Steward telleth me for certain, that there are of late 800 at least of Strozzies company cut in piece; which thing is kept very close, for by others I can learn no such thing. There arrived lately here a Gentleman out of Languedoc, sent from Monsieur D'Aumale, who reporteth, that they of the Religion do hold, at least, in Town and Castle, to the number of chosen Souldiers; which Town can no way be taken, but by fa∣mine, for that they cannot possibly make any trenches about it, the soil and seat being rocky. Both the Admiral and De la Aumile, do send the King word to send them both men and money, or else there being there is to no purpose. Upon these advertisements lately come from thence, it is now thought that Monsieur shal go to Languedoc, and that Monsieur Le Duc shall be imployed at Rochel: Howsoever they shall be imployed, it is held for certain that they depart from this Town about five or six days hence, as well the two brethren, as also the King of Navarre with the Prince of Conde. I send unto your Lordship a lewd Letter written by Carpenter, in defence of the late doings here; the original written in Latin, and afterwards translated into French. Divers of those in Latin have been sent into Germany; but the Authors lewdness is so well known, as it will but little help their case. They have also sent of them into Polonia, for that the Bishop of Valence writeth, that the late accident here will be one of the greatest lets of that they seek there. It is reported also by Letters lately received out of Flanders, that the Duke of Alva is so dangerously sick at | Nunege,Quere as men do doubt of his recovery. Furthermore, they give out, that there hath been of late a Conflict in Hol∣land, between the said Duke and the Prince of Orange, in the which there were slain of the Dukes side 500 Spaniards; and, as they say, a double number of the other: but as yet the certainty is unknown. And so beseeching your Honour to impart these Letters to the Earl of Leicester; for that through the hasty departure of this messenger, I had no leisure to write particularly unto him. I leave, &c. At Paris the second of Ianuary, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham.
To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principal Sretary. SIr, it may please you to advertise her Majestie, that Monsieur Mansire gave me to understand, how that their Majesties here were given to understand from the Ambassador there, that there should be certain ships, to the number of fourteen, preparing to repair to Rocel, and that though French men and Flemings bear the name of them, yet were they not unfurnished of some Eng∣lish Marriners; and that therefore they deire that it may please her Majestie to give order for the restraint thereof, as to good amity appertaineth. To this I answered, that I would not fail to advertise her Majestie thereof; notwith∣standing, I said, it would be very hard to restrain them, forasmuch as at this present there are a number of marriners and ships unset a work, in respect of the unkindness between Spain and England, which kind of people will hardly be restrained. I willed him also to desire their Majesties to consider, how the like falleth out in their Government here; for that divers Gentlemen of good quality, notwithstanding the League between the Turk and this Crown, and notwithstanding an express inhibition of things, did serve this last summer under those of the League, some be conducted by the Marquis d Min, others under the conduct of the Count Martinego, the Kings Pensioner; the which thing the Turk doth interpret in good part, for that he knoweth that the same is done without the Kings consent; the like consideration must their Majesties have also of her Majestie, who is not able so to bridle her Subjects, but that some of them will hazard themselves, without having any regard to her Majesties commandment that unto their duties appertaineth. To this Monsieur Mannesir shewed me, that he used like speech and perswasion towards the Queen Mother, wherewith she seemed to be reasonably well satisfied The sixth of this moneth he was dispatched hence towards Cllis, with certin Coaches, to meet the Barl of Worcester. They have often sent unto me to know, whether I heard anything of his coming, wherein I have answered, that since the twelfth of the last I heard nothing out of England, which seemeth strange unto them, considering that their Ambassa∣dor hath advertised, that my Lord of Worcester should be forward the second of this Moneth. Touching Monsieurs speedy departure from hence towards Rochel, men of judgement do think it rather to fear the Rochellois, to make them to condescend to an accord, then indeed to have an intention to besiege them as yet, considering that this time of the year is very unapt to besiege a Town sci∣tuate in a marsh. Of late there hath been some purpose held with me, whether I did not think that her Majestie by some perswasion used by me, might be induced to be a Mediator unto the K. Whereunto I answered, that I my self could hardly be per∣swaded to be a dealer in that behalf, having that regard that a servant and a subject ought to have to the honour of his Prince and Mistris, considering what evil success such Compositions heretofore have had, as have passed between them King and his Subjects, especially seeing those to enjoy the Kings ear, who have both abused his ear and his honour, having had more regard to their own parti∣cular passions, then to that reverence and duty, that becometh good Subjects to bear towards their Prince. When I shall see (said I) such removed, then I can tell what to answer in this behalf. Our Merchants at the beginning here, sith the last troubles, received good expectation, so far forth as con∣cerned the obtaining of the Kings Letters: but now that it meth to exe∣cution
they find it but expedition in words; so that I perceive, it were better for our erchants to lose that they sue for, then to continue their suits. The Kings Letters Patents sent to Roan to certain Presidents, to see such Merchants there restored to their goods, as sustained loss at the time of the late troubles, are as much regarded, as if  had sent my Letters thither. Our Nation is so evil liked here, as whatsoever fair speech they use, they think it injustice to do them justice. Monsieur I a Mot, as I learn, hath sometimes written most earn∣estly to them here, to cause them to do better justice then they do; notwith∣standing, I see it prevaileth nothing at all. And so leaving further to trouble your Honour at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the eleventh of January, 1572. Your Honours to Command, Francis Walsingham. To the Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. THis bearer, besides the enclosed Occurents, hath charge to communicate certain things unto your Lordship by mouth; and therefore at this pre∣sent, I leave to troble your Lordship with many lines, saving, that I cannot but renew my old suit, most humbly beseeehing your Lordship to continue the furtherance of my revocation. Touching a Rider, Captain Lassetty hath written both to Millan and Florence: from the last he hath received answer, that one worthy of entertainment will not be hired under 300  the year, and such other benefit as by our Lordship is offered: He looketh shortly to have answer from Millan. I fear your Lordship shall hardly be furnished of such a one as you desire of that calling, unless it would please God to make one of that profession to be of the Religion, who then would be glad to have such an offer, and to live in so good a Sanctuary as England is. I do imploy divers in this behalf, and by some I am put in hope to have your Lordships turn served. And so having nothing to impart at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the eleventh of January, 1572. Your Honours to command, Fra: Walsingham. To the Right Honourable his very good Lords, the Lords of her Majesties most honourable privy Councel. ACcording to your Honours order by letters of the six and twentieth of October, I recommended unto the King here this bearers brothers cause: whereupon he directed his Letters to certain Presidents at Roan, appointed by Commission to see such of our Merchants as sustained loss in the last troubles restored to their goods. At whose hands, neither by virtue of the Com∣mission directed to them, nor by the Kings particular recommendation, he could receive any other answer, then that they had advertised the King touching such in∣formation as they had received of the injury he pretended to be done unto his brother; wheby it may well appear, that there is nothing less meant, then to
make restitution of the spoils as were made in the time of the disorders: be∣sides, this bearer, notwithstanding he had the Kings safe-guard, which I pro∣cured him, was sundry times like to have been assaulted (as he informeth me) by such as outraged his brother; and his host also where he lay was threatned, be∣cause he received him. He making complaint thereof there, could have no redress; and I making complaint of it here unto the King and his Councel, found as little. Ere he could receive answer what information was sent hither, he was driven to attend a moneth. In the end he was answered, that one of the Presidents deputed their Commissioner, was repaired hither, and had in∣formed them, how that this bearers brother was a lewd young man, and riotously consumed his substance, and therefore used this as a mean to defraud his Creditors, and that he onely payed twenty Crowns for ransome, to such as had imprisoned him; and that the cause of imprisonment proceeded upon certain quarrels about a wife he had married at Roan, contrary to the will of her friends. Whereupon I sent word to Secretary Pynart, who gave this an∣swer, that he might be well able to discern, by this kind of proceeding, what will they have to do justice, in that the answer was not made at Roa, where he might have procured justification of his brothers behaviur; and that therefore in apparence there is no other reason why the party should be driven to attend answer here, but that they think onely by such kind of de∣lays, to make him weary of prosecuting the matter. To this Pynart answered, that forasmuch as the President was a publique person, and of such integri∣ty and uprightness, as he could not be charged with any untruth or wrong done to any person; and n the other side, Stallenge one that was touched in his life and behaviour, he could do nothing in his behalf. Nevertheless, he said, that to gratifie me, he would write again to the President, if I thought his Letter would prevail any thing to the furtherance of the poor mans cause. Your Honours may perceive by these answers, what good will they bear to do justice, considering that they had authority granted unto them to have determined the cause there: But this answer they used for a delay, to make him weary of prosecuting the matter. I find them of late very slow to yield any expidition, not onely in this bearers cause, but also to such other of our Mer∣chants as lately I have preferred; and therefore considering how chargeable it would be for him to continue his suit here any longer, and little hope there is of redress in the end. I have advised him to repair to Roan, to procure a testi∣monial, as wel of his brothers behaviour and conversation, as also of the evil usage he received during his abode there; to the end, that having inform∣ed your Honours thereof accordingly. Your Honours may take order, as to the same shall seem fit. And so leaving to trouble your Honors any further at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the thirteenth of Ianuary, 1572. Your Honours to command, Fra: Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq her Majesties Ambassador Resident in France. SIr, I am sorry that I wot not what to write unto you, things do fall out so here. Dr. Dale was warned to dispatch, and your revocation ready; When it came to signing, no such thing meant. Dr. Dale wrote unto me, he had pro∣vided half a score horse in his stable, men to go with them, and their own horses, their liveries already bought, and he altogether ready at my Lord Treasurers warning and mine; and now understanding, that he should not go, the effect of this Letter, I shewed this day unto her Majestie. She beshrewed them it was long of, Dr. Dale could not go before Midlent or Easter, there was other matters which she would trust to no new men, but to you, and to none other. Well, Madam, quoth I, the poor man hath been already at these charges, and chargeable it will be yet to him, to put them away is loss, to keep them, charge; besides my Lord Ambassador in France, your Majestie knoweth in what state he is, and the poor Gentlewoman his wife. Yea (saith she) that pity of her is that maketh all this haste; and I am sorry for her, but there is no remedy, he cannot now go before Midlent or Easter. Well Madam (quoth I) seeing it be so, may it please you, may he be sure to go at Easter, and may I write so to my Lord Ambassador. Yea, saith her Majestie, now you have my Commission; and so much I can say, judge of it as you shall please, but I assure you my Lord of Leicester, my Lord Treasurer, my Lord Admiral and I, and some other of your friends, have done what they can for your return; but whether it be Fatis, or what else hath letted, I know not, nor can guess, but I perceive what is the issue at this time. You are a wise man, and can comfort your self with wisdom and patience; and the rather, if the promise do hold, that by Easter you may return. My Lord of Worcester bringeth full instructions for that he hath to do, or may fall out in communication, the which he must and will commu∣nicate unto you, and use therein your advice. I send you some Occurrents out of Scotland. If you would know what we do here, we play at tables, dance and keep Christmas. The Queens Majestie, and all the rest of my Lords, thanks be to God, be in good health. My Lord Privy-Seal, what with age and sick∣ness, is not thought long to abide in this world, and the Earl of Kents health is almost desperate. Farewel. From Hampton Court the twelfth of Ianuary, 1572. Yours alwayes assured, Tho: Smith. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador Resident for her Majestie in France. SIr, I am both sorry and ashamed that I cannot write of any matter meet for satisfaction in your own case, as I would, and as I know you have had oc∣casion to expect, but the impediments thereof I know you shall understand by other your friends, and therewith do assure you (that whatsoever any of them do write) of my former care taken for you, and that I have now promised to follow, I have as much or more, and will continue and persevere to the utmost of my power, and so wish you as much patience as you have cause of grief. This bearer finding me here at my house at Westminster, telleth me, that he is dispatched
from the Court. I think i needless to advertise you of the coming of my Lord of Worcester, and for that I think surely that Mr. cretary doth advertise you of all things, I do forbear. Glasco Daviso longeth to he from Lyos 9 the ship abode in the place ap∣poied 23 days. And so I end, trusting to see you here amongst your friends within this ix weeks, at the least to be revoked at that time. From Westminster the 2 of January, 1572. Your assured friend, Will. Burleigh. To my very loving friend Mr. Francis Walsingham, the Queens Majesties Ambassador in France. THe cause of her Majesties longer stay of your abode there, and not to send presently D. Dale, is onely in respect of some persons you have there to deal withall, which you may easily conceive whom I mean, though I name them not; the cause I write it not plain, is lack of a cypher, having worn mine to pie∣ces this progress time in carriage, and pray you to bear the more with this dark writing: but it concerneth such as you wrote a little of to my Lord Treasurer. Her Majesty doubteth greatly the state of that person, and hath in expectation that some great matter will proceed from them: and neither doth she think Dale to be a fit man to be imployed, neither that the other will deal frankly with him as with you. For my part I am perswaded that great matters will fall that way, and surely you shall do well to enter the more speedily and deeply with them for the knowing of their whole intent. I must but tell you mine own conceit, I fear it be but a practice to dandle us; for so many are acquainted here with the cause, I mean of that Nation: but it is impossible but that the Ambassador here must know it. Besides, I see that the hope of the marriage is still entertained here, and our Mistres made to think it is ever incerely meant; which if it were in∣deed, and the other matters true of the parties disposition, what could with-hold to put that in execution which were most like for him to get it, for his own va∣lue must sue more for him then his friends commendation, or else his party here will be little, as I think. But this manner of dealing, I see serveth to no pur∣pose but winneth them time, and loseth us all good opportunities, and hindreth your retur, where your friends wish you, both for your self, and chiefly for her Majesties better service. You shall do well therefore for her Ma∣jesty, for I cannot imagine what good this great suspence will do her, to seek by all means you can at their hands to know their full mind, and the scope of their intent; for by these the dealing of the Ministers here with her Majesty, hath no cause to find any way direct or substantiall, she takes great hinderance otherwise, and no good shall come to them neither, in this sort of proceedings. And as none here are privy to the matter but my Lord Treasurer and I, so is it too great a burthen so long to conceal her Majesties so great hindrance of her greater cause, as the time wants for lack of certainty & through understanding the intent and bottom of this Cause, which surely hitherto giveth more cause of suspition of practise then of good meaning. And yet if it were minded as they pretend, ex∣cept they proceed otherwise then I perceive yet they do, they shall rather hurt themselves and us both, then further any good purpose that may bring hope of that good success we would wish. Thus as well as I can utter my poor conceit both for your self and us, and do wish you to deal accordingly with all speed, and
to return your answer thereof with all diligence you can; and thereupon we wil take occasion again to procure your return, which if staying might yield service to her Majesty and good to the Countrey, I would no way hinder if you were my brother: Otherwise finding no more cause then I do, you have no friend here will further sooner the other. My Lord of Worcester hath desired me to write to you, that you would deal friendly and frankly with him, he disableth himself and trusteth to your advice in all such sort as belongeth to his place. I heartily require it for him, onely it may suffice you to know he is a Papist, and a favourer of all such, especially a . otherwise a good simple Gentleman, and fit for the Christning. Shew him, I pray, all the courtesie you can, as I doubt not of it. My Lord Privy Seal is dead this morning. Her Majesty in good health. So God be with you. In all haste this 12 of January 1572. Your assured friend, Ro. Leicester. To the Right honorable Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesties principall Secretary. SIR, if the cause of my stay here grow onely in respect of her Majesties ser∣vice, as by your Letters I am assured (though I have as much cause to de∣sire my return as any other that ever was imployed in the like service) yet can I with more patience digest the same, as he that thinketh both his travell, sub∣stance and life as well imployed in her service as any other subject she hath. I hope when her Majesty shall find my stay here not needfull, she will tender my case, and yeild to my Revocation. Sithence the Cardinall of Lorains arrivall here, the direction of Scotish mat∣ters are committed to his charge. The Lord Levingston and the Lord Ogleby look shortly to be dispatched hence, who receive at the Cardinals hands great entertainment, and great promises of great good that they and divers others of their Nation shall receive at the Kings hands here. Amongst others they have commission to assure D. Castelherault to be retored to—the King∣dom here, and that the Marshall Montmorency shall be otherwise recompenced. That the Lo. Arboth shall be General of the Scotish men at Arms. That the Lo. Clade shall have the reversion after Losses death, of the Captainship of the Guard. That the Lo. Huntley and the Earle of Argile shall have the great Order sent unto them, and assurance of great pensions. And though it seemeth by the occurrents out of Scotland, that the said Earle of Argile incli∣neth to the King, yet the best there are of another opinion, and think him to fa∣vour the Queens part, which they are resolved to maintain. I am advertised by one, at whose hands I have received advertisements, that the Cardinall of Lo∣rain hath brought—from Rome for Monsieur to marry with his Neece, who as I hear, as he doth hope after the marriage, of Polonie, so he doth not greatly like thereof, and would be loath that Monsieur should be removed so far off. The Marshall Tavannes who was held here for dead, is now in some hope of recovery. And so, &c. At Paris the 21 of January, 1572. Your Honours to command. Fr. Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer. YOur Lordships of the 14 of this moneth I have received, by the which I per∣ceived two sundry Letters which I sent you by the Vidams man, with cer∣tain books, are not come to your hands, which maketh me to mistrust some some wrong measure, for that he departed the second of this moneth. The mat∣ter of most importance contained in the same, was touching a Gentleman of departed hence to 2)  6.) 4 with intention to imbarque there if the Barque were not departed. Steward, who is gone to Rochel, as I sent your Lordship word by my servant William Williams, promised before his departure to have come and seen me, and to have had some conference with me, which he did not, but sent onely his man unto me with a fond Cypher requesting me to hear often from me. To whom I answered, That the Cypher he sent me, was not for the purpose; and as for writing often, I told him I could not tell what to answer untill I might speak with his Master, and that therefore I desired most earnestly to confer with him before his departure, as well of that as of other mat∣ters; notwithstanding his own promise and my request, he is now departed; so that considering his loose kind of dealing, I cannot tell what to judge of the matter. If the party that cometh over do not deal more orderly and roundly there then I am dealt with here, I think it were well if it were at some end, for that I fear the issue will prove such as the parties are that deal in it, who are over young and lack experience, that were fit to guide a matter of so great weight. I serve in the same but for a distributer of Letters, and yet as it should seem, the chief cause of Religion groweth thereby. If I thought there were good faith meant therein, or that by good guiding there might grow good effect to the benefit of her Majesty, I should then with the less grief continue my abode here. Such Letters as I received lately from Davison, I know not what to do with, having no sure means how to convey them; for one of mine own cannot with safety travell that way. And as for any of this Nation, I find none whom I may trust in that behalf: and therefore untill such time as I hear further from your Lordship what liking you have of the overture that shall be made by them that I sent over, who as I am informed by Steward, is to grow to some through resolution, I mean not to deal any further with them unless I see they proceed more orderly. Of this loose kind of dealing I thought good to adver∣tise, to the end you may rather grow to some through conclusion with the said party there. At Paris the 20 of January 1572. Your Honours to command Francis Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, my very good Lord, the Earl of Leicester. YOur Lordships of the 12 of this present, I have received; and though I cannot at large write unto you touching the contents of the same, through this Bearers hast for his own particular affairs, yet I thought to write these few scribled lines in answer. Touching Stewards matter, which as I perceive is the chiefest cause of my stay here, I assure your Lordship I know not what to think of it: They deal very warily with me, and seem to have more will to deal with you there, then with me here: I stand but in stead of a Post to receve & to de∣liver
Letters. By one that departed from thence, I am shewed, that you shal be ful informed what is their intention in that behalf. I fear the issue thereof will be such as are the dealers therein. In my Lord Treasurers Letter in respect of the Cypher, you shall more plainly know my meaning. If my stay here imported her Majesties service, I could not so importunately seek my return, though I have more them just cause so to do, being rather over∣pressed then over-charged. But seeing I do but serv here to entertain a bro∣ken matter, having no great credit with the parties otherwise then in generall terms. I hope through your Lordships good assistance, her Majesty will tender my cause by sending over my successor. Now that the Cardinall of Lorain is arrived here, who beareth the whole sway in the affairs, they conclude somwhat touching Scotish matters. In the mean time there is one lately dispatched hence with great offers to entertain the Queens party, as your Lordship may perceive by the inclosed. And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the 20 of January 1572. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham. To the right Honorable my very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer. IT may please your Lordship to understand, that B. who hath great conference with B. G. in matters of greatest importance, did discover to a friend of his, who imparted the same unto me, that he learned at his hands, that the 19 of this moneth, Queen Mother held a secret Councel, at which was present one∣ly the Cardinall of Lorain, and two others: In the which it was debated, what course was to be taken for the appeasing of their troubles here. And after long deliberation it was concluded, That untill such time as England might be kept occupied, there could grow no through redress here, without hazarding of the whole estate, and that therefore it was requisite now to yeild to them of Rochel any reasonable kind of surety they would require, as also to other Towns in France that would not yeild. And rather then fail, to yeild to them so far, as to let them have the liberty of their Religion, to suffer the Nobility of the Country that inhabit near the Towns, to live in the same, to keep such Garrisons in the same as they may think fit for their surety, with condition that the said Nobi∣lity shall deliver some of their children to be Hostages with the King for his assu∣rance that the said Towns shall be kept to his use. And amongst others it was a∣greed, that the offers should be made to Count Mango to retire himself to Rochel, with condition to yeild his son to be a Pledge. These offers they think to be so large, as they make full account they will be accepted. This thing being done, it is then concluded to send under the conduct of the Marquis de Maine 1000 shot, which thing shall be done as proceeding from him himself, in respect that he is the Queen of Scots kinsman, and disavowed by the King, who shall land at a place called Aier, & shall after they have joyned with the Qu. party, repair to Edenburgh, where Liddington and Grange Kirkaldie have promised to deliver up the Castle unto such as the King shall appoint, upon recompence to receive some living here in France, there leaving a sufficient Garrison, they shall besides fortifie themselvs in the town of Loghbreton at Brochty besides Dundee, & at Haymouth: And that this being done, the Duke of Guyse and Chevalies shal come over with other forces to procure the delivery of the Queen of Scots:
such of the Queens friends as are in England, wil incontinently take Arms, who do give out to them here, that her party and forces are so great there, that having good Leaders & munition, they shal be able to make their party good enough, & to deliver the Queen of Scots in despite of her Majesty. In the mean time till the King hath compounded with those Towns that now hold out, they are re∣solved that the D. of Chastelrlt and the . of Huntly shall seem to yeild to any composition that the Regent will have them, onely to keep out that her Majesty shall send thither no forces in assisting of the Regent; which thing they have ad∣vertisements from their Ambassador that she hath meaning to do. And for the communicating of those matters unto the Queens party there, it is determined that Viraque shall depart thither forthwith, he shall also have commission to bear the Regent in hand, that the King here doth not mislike of the present go∣vernment there, nor that he is chosent Regent, and to use all such like speeches as may entertain him for a time, untill such things here be setled. He shall also have charge to offer him the entertainment of men of Arms to all such young Gentlemen as are serviceable, as well to them of one part, as to those of the o∣ther. Other particularities he said he learned of him, which he might not utter, and were of great consequence. The Gentleman to whom this was discovered being a Scot, is one whom I do very well credit, and for that he is thought to incline towards the Queen of Scots, the party above named did deal the more frankly with him; and because I thought it necessary for her Majesty to under∣stand so much, I thought good to send this Messenger of purpose withall, and have promised for his recompence to have 6 pounds 13 shillings 4 pence. For that mine own men are not returned, I am driven to use him. If her Majesty desire to hear often from hence, then must there be order taken for the sending back of those I send thither. And so leaving, &c. At Paris the 24 of January, 1572. Your Honors to command, Fr. Walsingham. Viraque is already departed, and com∣manded to use all expedition possible. To the right honourable Mr. Francis Walsingham, Esquire, her Majesties Ambassador in France. SIR, as Dido said, Non ignara mali miser is succrrere disco: so I who know what things they be whch Ambassadors do most desire, will not let you want that intelligence which I can give you by your man. I send you the occur∣rents of the Scot. By my L. of Worcesters instruction you shal understand what is to be answered to all questions likely to be moved either to you or to him: yet that all things might be perfect, I have sent you a Peer of my L. Treasurers sent to me, because the French Ambassador shewed the . ajesty, that the Empe∣rours Master of the Horse, who cometh for the Emperesse, doth intend to hold the Child himself. The Queens Majesty to save money will have my Lord do so too, except as in the Instructions. The childs name, as the Ambassador told her Majesty, should have the name of both the Godmothers, and so be called Mary Elizabeth; so neither shal strive with others for the name. This is all I can say for that matter. And for your re∣turn and successor, as much as I could know I wrot to you by your servant Ia∣como. We have had intelligence lately from Rochel, that there was a servant of the
late Cardinall Chastillans put to death there for going about and conspiring to betray the town of Rochel; and the same as he went to execution confessed, that it was he that poisoned the same Cardinal in Egland: whereby it may appear, that this design of murdering had the plot laid long before, and a man may doubt whether the Queen of Navarre passed out the same way. I thank you for your notes which you sent me of the Comet, or new Starre; but in the placing of it your Astronomers and ours differ exceedingly. Yours do place it in the 29 of Piscis, and ours in the 7 degree of Taurus, so they vary one whole sign and 8 degrees. Your printed Book goeth upon it If any hath more boldly written of it in print, I pray you let me see it. Our men do not deny but that he riseth in that degree of Piscis, or the first of but it is one thing to rise with the degree of the Zodiack, and to stand in a place after Sexion of the Zodiack: and our men do find him far above the Moon, and above the height of the Sphere of Venus. Then it cannot be a temporarie Co∣met. Now things above the Moon do rise and die, which was never believed afore, but either a new star made, or an old star new seen. Fare you well. From Hampton Court the 13 of January 1572. Your assured friend Tho. Smith. Part of my Lord Treasurers letter to me touching the enterview, and such things as have passed for marriage. FIrst, for the matter of Monsieur d'Anjou, and next to the Duke of A∣lanson, I trust I need not make any other rehearsall then your self can gather by the instructions you had when you were sent into France, after that Du Foix had been here, who departed fully answered, saving in the Arti∣cle of Religion, which was also so tempered as that he pleaded no misliking, but but that it was restrained with the words, that the Duke should use no Religion that was contrary or repugnant Eclesiae vel verbo Dei; and how you found Monsieur altered from the offers of du Foix, in that he would have his Religio wholly as he had in France. Now you can also tell how the Offer of the Duke of Alanson was be∣gun, and how prosecuted here by Monsieur and du Foix. And since that time this Ambassadour there could find the Queen Mother: It ought to be re∣membred with what absurd Offers it hath been handled: To have an En∣terview it was required that the Queens Majesty would repair to Dover, and the Queen Mother and the Duke should come to Bulloigne, and the advice that they should meet upon the Sea in October▪ All which was taken off, and utterly misliked as vain and ridiculous. A more foolish motion was made, that the Queen would meet with the ueen Mother at Iersey, such a device as argued either a gross ignorance in them that named Iersey, as not know∣ing how farre it was by Sea from England, or else a flat mock, in offering a thing so unreasonable, and to say the truth, impossible. And surely, it could not have been better acquitted then to have required the Queen Mother o come into the Isle of Scotland to have spoken with the Queens Majesty the next year, if she would make her progress to Berwick. Since these follies passed, they have by the Ambassadour generally pressed the Queens Majesty to the Duke, but no special dealing hath been for any enterview, or for answer how he will
accord in Religion, in which last consisteth the greatest difficulty of treat∣ing, so as his person might by sight be first allowed. Thus much of this matter. To my very loving friend, Francis Walsingham Esq the Queens Majesties Ambassadour with the French King. SIR▪ this day I received your Letters with two French Books; the one, of Carpenter the Apostate; the other, by an unknown malicious French Writer, taught by a rebellious crafty Papist of England, wherein though he meant maliciously to the State, yet he rometh his choler and despite chiefly against me and my Lord Keeper by Nick-names. God amend his spirit and confound his malice. And for my part, if I have any such malicious or malignant spirit, God presently so confound my body to ashes, and my soul to perpetuall torment in hell. I know not whether you shall be able to understand the Author; but if by the Printer it might be found out, I would gladly bestow any reward upon the discovery; if it cannot be found, then I wish that some means were used as of your self to Queen Mother, that the print may be de∣stroyed. For otherwise we shall think our selves, considering the places we do hold in this estate, not well considered by that estate. I have not imparted any thing to my Lord of Worcester, but leave the order of the whole to your direction. This licentiousness to inveigh against men by name in printed bookes, that use not by books to provoke any, is in all good E∣states intolerable. God send this Estate no worse meaning servants in all re∣spects then we two have been, who indeed spared not labour nor care to serve our Queen and Countrey; and if we had not, we may truly avow, neither our Queen nor Countrey had enjoyed that common repose that it hath done. I am required to recommend my Lord of Worcester unto you which I need not, because you know his Office and cause of coming; and besides, you shall find him a Nobleman of great gentleness and thankfulness. And therefore you shall find cause to shew him all good Offices and favours. And if my hearty commendations of his Lordship may do any thing in his gratification, I pray you his Lordship may understand my good will, for in very truth I love him dearly. And so I end. From my House at Theobals, where are with me Mr. Ralph Sadler, and divers others, as Mr. Denny, your good friend. The 14 of January, 1572. Your assured loving friend, W. Burleigh. Sir, when I consider of this lewd Book, I think it will be replied unto you, That it is reason that answer be made to such books as are published for the condemning of the Queen of Scots: And so for my part I yield that Writers answer matters. But to have the Duke of Norfolks cause brought in question, and Us that are Councellors to the Queen, to be so maliciously and falsly calumnied, may not wel stand with the term of the Amity professed. But yet I leave all to your consideration and wis∣dom.
Instructions for the Earl of Worcester. ELIZABETH R. FIrst, you shall make our Ambassador there resident Mr. Francis Walsingham privy of the office, which at this time you have to do, and the Letters which you have to deliver, and confer with him of the manner of the Court, and the use at this present; and as he shall be able to inform you, and you of your wisdom and discretion do understand, with all convenient Honour, Amity and Love you shall deliver our Letters, and do such offices as to our Ambassage doth appertain. And if the Emperors Ambassador hold the child himself, you may also do it; but if that you shall perceive that any device or other sinister means shall be given about to bring you to their mass, or any other superstiti∣ous ceremonies, which the order of our Realm doth not allow, you shall not consent nor assist it, but rather absent your self, and understanding that before, with honourable excuse require the Queen Mother, that the Queen of Navarre, to whom we have in this case written our special Letters, to be our deputy for you; or in the absence or let of her, any other Princess or Noblewoman, whom it shall please the Queen Mother to appoint and address to it, according as we have also written to the said Queen Mother. And you shall not need to break neither with the King nor Q. Mother, nor any other, or any matter, but of such courtesies and other Court-like entertainment as shall be ministred unto you. But if it shall happen the King or Queen Mother, or any such person, to go further with you, and to feel you with words in any of the points hereafter mentioned, we think it honourable for you not to shew your self ignorant of our mind therein, nor how things have proceeded heretofore in those matters, and how they stand at this present. And therefore we have thought good to inform you, in those points whereupon it is most likely they will make some mentioning and questioning with you, to know our further resolution and mind therein, that as in all other matters likely to be moved unto you, you shall do well first to confer with our Ambassador there, by whom you shall understand how things have gone hitherto. And for this time you may say, besides all other things, whereof they be already fully advertised of our mind, we think it now reason that the matter of Religion be first esclared; for because that there in his Realm there hath been made great alteration in that point, since the late communication thereof; and therefore it is now reason that we should the more carefully provide, that the difference therein should breed no distur∣bance, disquietness or doubt in ours. And as the said King hath held a stiff hand to maintain onely one Religion in his Realm, although he with open Edicts did profess the protection of two, and the defence of them both indif∣ferently; so it behoveth us rather, who did maintain but one onely in our Realm, and never yielded to the other by any Edict, or Protection, or favour, now at this time not to change our course, but to profess all one thing, which we have done sith we came to our Crown, and to suffer no permission or winking at of any other Religion then that which we and our Realm hath always held and maintained, and by Gods grace intend always to do; and so much the rather we have cause to require it at this present time, because that in the dealing with Mon. D'Anjo, in the treatie with Mon. De Foix, matters were made more easie and temperate, to the which we did the rather incline; when it should come to the knitting up, that Sir Tho: Smith now our Secretary was sent, then such things were required as never before were expected, as open Mass, a Church, a Chappel proper, and all such solemnity of other ceremonies
and abuses which our Realm and policie cannot suffer, whereupon necessitie was for us clearly and plainlie to break off; and least the same inconvenience should follow, or that protracting of time should be thought but a dissembled entertainment of other cause then we have in mine, you may say, that we pray the King and Queen Mother, to cause first this point of Religion to be clearlie esclared and opened, that upon that we may more clearly judge what is to be done of us to the proceeding any further of that matter of marriage. And you may say more, that it is that point that we have thus long attend∣ed, that our Ambassador there Resident should have certified us from their Majesties so, that before we have answer from them of these points, by reason we cannot proceed to go any further in this matter, in which heretofore we have not been answered, and the answer thereof lieth in their hands. As concerning the demands, that such as of late were fled hither sithence these late troubles, that we should rather admonish them, or command them to avoid the Realm, as Rebels to the French King our brother: You may say, that we do understand of no Rebellion that ever they were privy nto, and can perceive nothing, but that they are well affectionated to their Prince; but when such common murthering and slaughter was made generally throughout France, of those who professed the same Religion, that it was natural for every man to fly for his own defence, and for the safetie of his life; and it is the priviledge of all Realms, to receive such woful and miserable persons as do fly to it onely for defence of their lives. And for their return, the chiefest of them have been spoken unto; and they make their answer, that the same rage of their ene∣mies, which made them first to fly hither, doth still continue the cause of their tarrying here; for as they then did kill with fury, and as it may appear the greatest number of those that were killed without the commandment or avow of the King; so it is most like they would execute still their malice, if the persons were there against whom it was then, and is yet inflamed; notwith∣standing any letters declaratory, or other prohibition by the King, as it is manifest and notorious that very many have been publiquely, and are almost daily slain and murthered in France, that be of their Religion, sith these contrary Edicts were published, and cryed by sound of trumpet. And there∣fore until they may see that the quiet of the Realm be better established, the fury of the people and the bloody murtherers appeased, they will live here, and obey the Kings Edicts. They think themselves unsure there, and pray∣ed us of our mercy to have compassion of their miserie. And if so be the King (you may say) would suffer them to enjoy their revenues, whether they remained here, or went into any other Countrey, you may say, that we suppose they would be as faithful subjects to him as any other in his Realm, for other we espie none in them. And if we can perceive at any time, that they were otherwise minded, or should attempt any thing for the disquiet∣ness of his person or Realm; you may say, we will not suffer▪ them to re∣main within our Realm. And as for the Commerce and Traffique of our Merchants, there was, nor is in us any difficultie, why not thereby, as by all other waies, the Amitie and League should not in all points be perfect∣ed? But such things have sith that time happened in that Realm, that even to this day our Merchants be in horrour and fear to meddle therein; especially to go much within the Land, sith such libertie is given or suffered into the hands of the popular, to kill or murther whom they could, without punition therefore or justice; nevertheless, we are in hope, that in time the King will peovide, that he shall be better obeyed, and that his sword of justice
shall rule, and not the unbounded lust of the populer, to the which no wise man or careful of his life, will hazard himself, we could not but as a good Princess and mother of the Commonwealth, bear with our Subjects in this fear so probable. Nevertheless, we shall give order that our Secretarie and others, who do favour the cause, shall be joyned in Commission to treat with his Ambassador here, and as shortlie as time will serve, and as our Merchants do by little and little get more boldness to traffique there, and no part of that which was begun for the more streighter Amitie, be∣twixt us and our Realmes be left unperfect and unaccomplished on our behalf. For Scotland, you may say, that Monsieur de Crocque' s going away so soon, wherefore we were very sorry, because he tarried not until the peace was concluded, we suffered our servant Henry Killegrew to sollicite the conclu∣sion of peace. And although there appeared great likelihood from time to time to follow of an universal peace, and very reasonable conditions offered; yet they of the Castle, as appeareth, not minding to have any peace, would not agree to them; wherefore, as it appeareth, they are like again to have civil Wars, a thing most displeasant to us, being their next Neighbours; and for our part, we think they have misused both him our good brother and us; the King to imploy Monsieur de Crocque; and us, the Marshal of Ber∣wik first, and now Henry Killegrew, whereas it appeareth they meant no∣thing less then agreement, especially two or three of them in the Castle, who have offered unto them all humanitie, their lands, livings and offices, and whatsoever could be reasaonably desired, yet will not condescend for common quiet to acknowledge their King, and to deliver him that hold, having as good offered them for their own suerty, which in common peace should seem needless; so that for ought that can appear unto us, we think it not fit that we or our good brother should suffer such outrage at their hands, or our two travels being Princes, to be had in so little reguard; besides that, we have kept in our hands the Castle of Hume at our charge, being to us no pro∣fit or commoditie, but that we desire to bridle both the parties, to come to an accord: For being by the League bounden to deliver it, but any of the Scotish if we should have delivered it to any of the adverse party, though the peace had followed, we know not how to compel them to render the same to the natural Lord thereof, to whom we most desired to render the same, although he had smally deserved that kindness at our hands; if we had delivered it to him before, we doubted there should have bin occasion to make him hold out more obstinately from the Agreement and Peace, who as it appeareth, is too much obstinate without it. And as we have divers times by our Ambassa∣dor there, and writing, declared to them, that assoon as they were come to a full Agreement and Peace within themselves, we would most willingly ren∣der the same Castle, and the Territory thereof to the said Lord Hu: So you may say, that our good brother shall well perceive, that if yet they will grow to common peace within themselves, the Castle of Hume shall be streight restored to the Lord Hume, as it hath been often declared both to him and them before. And if he and the rest will not come to Peace and Accord, peradventure we shall deliver it (as we may well do) unto them of that Nation, out of whose hands the Lord Hume shall have enough to do to get it, which is nothing in our default, which desires them most earnestly to have them at quiet and peace within themselves, and to be ruled by justice, so should our Subjects near adjoyning to them be in more rest, and have better justice upon the Out-laws and Thieves who do offer daily injury to our Subjects with∣out
redress, because of the civil troubles. And if any mention be made un∣to you of the Scotish Queen, either for her life, or for her deliverance, that you should be a mean to us for her, You shall answer, that her attempts be known to have been such, both towards us and our Realm, as you cannot gladly hear her spoken of; and that you could not think your self a good Subject, if once you should open your lips for her; and therefore you shall require, that they will no more speak to you of her, nor of any such mat∣ters. Given at our Mannour of Hampton Court, the eleventh of January, 1572. in the one and twentieth year of our Reign. Thomas Smith. I think it shall not be against the Queens Majestie to offer, that if Hume Castle shall be delivered to the Kings party, that there shall be assurance given to restore it to the Lord Hume, when he shall recognize the King as heretofore he did. William Burleigh. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador Resident for her Majestie in France. MR. Walsingham, I have received your Letters sent by Williams, I perceive it is hard to recover a Rider, but to pay too dearly for him, I will stay therefore till better occasion shall serve, and do heartily thank you for your good remembrance and travel therein. I wrote of late to you, which Letter I hope be come safely to your hands; the rather, for that I write somewhat openly for want of a ready cypher, for these causes, I have since considered more of the person and the matter: and surely I can no way perswade my self, that the cause you should stay for, is any way sincerely meant there, but rather a meer practise to entertain us here, and to discover of the other side, what may be under the hope, that by that means many may be drawn unto, for no other way but this have they left to beguil the world, especially us; and those they seek to destroy, seek narrowly and deeply into it; and in the mean time consider how slightly the great post haste matter was slipt off, that our ship tarried so long for; what was it else but a plain work to hold us with such a sudden amazed chance, the same in their opinion, we should believe their case to be as dangerous as they would make it. Weigh also, the pretty escape of the disguised attempt of the party, that seemed to be in so great peril, who can believe other, then that it was a made matter, to continue a belief, whom they think they have inchaunted at their wills. Let us examine also, the instruments what they be, those of the most arrantest sort of Papists, those here never count∣ed, setled, or informed in Religion. Besides, the process of the doings over both sides, doth shew no good end towards, but even a stratagem it will prove in my opinion; and therefore I am the more careful that we may so espy it, and so use it, as it may return upon their own necks. For my own part, I promise you I did suspect it, the first time of his opening of the matter, for truth will seek no angles. Truly he was fain to seek all his brains, to make any
matter worthy of credit, for these suspicions were found even at the first, he was divers in his tales, his Letters delivered assuredlie were counterfeit, and so was driven in the end to confess in a manner, albeit in a sort they were after confirm∣ed there from you to his better credit: for first, he avowed, they were all the parties own hands; Next he said, after the Letters were compared with others of the parties, the Letters were of his own writing, that escaped a late, but the superscription the others; Lastly, he could not tell it for cer∣tainty, for that it was sent to him. But the message was surely delivered by the person himself, which we after perceiving the party there to avow, did alter the minds of some, albeit for my part it would not enter into me; Since how great suspicion again is given, I refer to your self. The matter known to many of his Countrey men, as well as to you, and yet a shew to be kept secret from the King, who will believe it? again, his often sending his own servants, and never none met withal who can think it likely? Also, the parties chief instruments there to be imployed, being so great a Papist, and not to take such a matter as was lately offered him in worse part then he doth, who will believe there can be plain dealing in this case. O it were a happy turn to make some small trial what we were there, and that we might have occasion to trounse his companion here for his pains; and yet to pay them with their own rod, and seem to crave thanks for discovering to the King there such a dangerous practise, which we may easily and well do. And I dare venture my arm to be cut of, that it will fall out a plain practise, and in the end the King may take his advantage against her Majestie when he list, and say justly, that she was willing to offer him such an injury, by en∣tertaining such practise. I am bold to discover thus much of mine own con∣ceit to you; you may use it to as you see cause. But truly, I for my duties sake do not spare to inform her Majestie what I think of it; albeit she is yet somewhat loath to discredit the party there, she is born in hand his love is great. Now also a little further, as your friend, I will be bold with you, I pray you consider accordingly of it: We find certainly, that oft-times your advertisements be made more common even of the greatest, then is thought convenient. You know what opinion is here of you, and to what place all men would have you unto, even for her Majesties sake; besides that, the place you alreadie hold is a Counsellours place, and more then a Counsel∣lours for a time; for oft-times Counsellours are not made partakers of such matters as you are acquainted withal, and do advertise hither, so much the less are others to be acquainted with your secrets: And the more boldlie this, for that it hath been friendlie told me, and in this sort, That you have written sometimes more largelie to some private friends, then almost to her Majesties self; if it be so, then I pray you accept this friendly; if not, yet I will tell the parties and their names. And even upon this your last advertisement, which you committed to your messenger, to deliver to my Lord Treasurer and me, the same was also communicated to others, being no Councellors, and by your Letters referred to receive the understanding at the Messengers hands; and I will tell you what followed, and this we speak upon knowledge, before we had either imparted your Letters to her Majestie, or scarce read them all, I assure you the Count Montgomery was advertised (being this day here in the Court) of the matter, which if it should grow further, may happilie turn to that Gentlemans destruction; besides, the like secret matter which you committed to be delivered to my Lord Treasurer and me upon the slaughter when you durst not write, was likewise communicated unto others, which came
also to our knowledge, for it was in open talk within ten hours after we had it; yet upon our honour we had not delivered it to any Councellour living, one or other; wherefore you may see it is not good to trust messengers nor to impart any of your weighty causes, how near or dear soever they be to you: for I assure you they go from friend to friend, and my self have had them brought to see; and yet I must say, I saw no matter of so great weight, albeit▪ I saw that such were fitter to receive almost no letters, then to send them abroad. This I assure you, Mr. Walsingham, I do upon meer good will and honest friendship towards you, and so I pray you take it. And I desire you to commit this letter to Vulcan. And being weary, I commit you to God. In haste the eighth of Ianuary, 1572. Your assured Friend, Ro: Leicster. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador for the Queen's Majestie in France. I Have received your letters of the of this moneth, and my Lord Trea∣surer hath imparted unto me his Letter, which was sent with the Cypher, as also since, two other of the four and twentieth of this moneth, which all con∣tain matters of importance, specially this last, which is to be foreseen▪ and for my part, I believe the advertisement to be very likely and true, the further you may grow into the certain knowledge thereof, the better service you may do. I perceive the King doth earnestly prosecute the reformation of his Sub∣jects: how God will prosper him, methinks he should greatly fear, for his victo∣ry doth not consist in his great numbers. My hope and prayer is, that our mighty God will shew his wonted mercie and grace towards innocents, and his poor af∣flicted flock. Here hath been of late a Gentleman for the partie you wot of, one that I know, and have seen him here before, though he be not forward in Religion, yet is he a faithful Gentleman, and of great trust with his friend. The matter doth stand very tickle, and methinks they deal far more unsafely, then if they had dealt by you, and yet is it the cause of your stay onelie. I am glad to hear of the good fortune of the Rochellers, God send it to be true; as also, that the King is of no better credit with the Almains and Switzers. I wrote of late to you of some length, but it hath pleased Mr. Secretary to forget the sending these ten daies. I pray you send me word whether it hath been opened or no. If I thought you should tarry longer there, I would send you a Cypher, but I think otherwise, and therefore in that full hope I will forbear. I thank you verie much for your mindfulness of the Rider; if he be good, your bargain is verie reasonable. My Lord of worcester hath great judgement in those matters, but I durst trust Claudio my old friend, that he would not abuse me. What you promise on my behalf, shall be performed towards him to the uttermost. Thus having no news, but of our Mistris's perfect good health, I bid you fare∣well. In some haste the nine and twentieth of January, 1572. Your very Friend, Ro. Leicester.
To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq her Majesties Ambassador Resident in France. SIr, the Instructions of my Lord of Worcester have in them such a clause, that if he be not provoked to answer to any of those points mentioned in them, he should not minister occasion of talk on them, and possibly they will say nothing, and yet with you they will be busie, which if it come to pass, there is no doubt but you can and will answer to the effect of those Instructions, and further, as occasion shall be ministred. But in one point, that is, for the breach of the abstinence in Scotland, which then was not certain, and now is certain, hard it is if they be not questioning with you; for I am sure de la Mt will not be without his intelligence from Scotland, nor negligent in advertising to France: And upon occasion of time, whether you be demanded or not, it is thought meet that you take occasion to shew the King, that to the grief of the Queens Majestie, the Scots have not agreed, but be broken again into hostilitie within themselves; which although touheth joyntly the Fr. K. and her Majestie, because they two being Princes of so great authority, and so conjoyned in love and amity, and both by mutual con∣sent by their Ambassadors, labouring to bring them to unity, peace and con∣cord within themselves, should be so illuded and scorned of a few petty compa∣nions, that having all things offered unto them that they could desire reason∣able▪ and more; yet they would still maintain war in their own Countrey, and in the tender age of their young King, whom to set up and Crown they were the first doers. This injury you may say, touched the King, as well as the Queens Majestie, because joyntly they both like Princes in most amitie agreed in their Leagues together to pacifie and unite Scotland in it self, which now by discord intestine being disunited, is brought almost to extreme poverty and misery. The other cause toucheth more her Majestie, because they being her Neighbours next adjoyning, and bordering upon her Subjects, while the Realm of Scotland was united, and peace within it self, if any of their Thieves and Out-laws had injury by theft or murther, any of her Majesties Subjects, upon complaint, re∣dress was had, the Malefactors punished, and he who had the injurie re∣stored, and so was it on both sides reciprocally. Now in this Civil dissention, mise∣ries, robberies, stealth and murthers be committed daily, and then the one part or the other beareth them out; so that it were almost as good to have a border war betwixt England and Scotland, for the poor men that do dwell thereabouts, as civil wars betwixt the Scots themselves; and therefore this breach betwixt the two parties must needs grieve her Majesties Subjects more then the French King, being so far distant; and so consequently her Honor, who indeed doth take it and not without cause, heavily, for that they have not esteemed better her Majesties good will, and desire, that she had all their strifes and debates among themselves compounded and accorded, and that they have set so light by the authoritie of the French King their brothers and heirs. The young King is her Majesties near Kinsman, and her Highness desireth not onely to have him preserved, but also his Realm; if it could be in quiet, peace, and good oder, and aboundance, which without inward peace, cannot be had; and must needs think evil of these few petty companions, being gotten into the Castle of Edenburgh which for their wilful obstination and private bene∣fits, shall keep that Realm still in that dissention and trouble, in contempt of such Princes as the French King and her Majestie is, whose design
tended to nothing but to make unitie and concord among them there. And therefore if Hume Castle and Fast Castle, which her Highness hath detained hitherto in that hope, upon accord to have rendred them to the Lord and own∣ers thereof, from whom they were before by just war taken. Now her Maje∣stie seeth no longer cause to detain, but to render them according as is com∣prised in the Treatie, not to them who have so evil deserved of her Majestie, their own King and Countrey, by their perverse obstinacy; and of the French King also, but one of the same Nation, who acknowledgeth their King, and is desirous of unitie, peace, concord and good government in that Realm, and of this her design her Majestie thought meet to make her good brother the French King first privy unto, for the love that she doth bear unto him, and ac∣cording to the Amity and Intelligence betwixt the two Realms. I am glad to have this occasion to send this bearer Iohn Farry your man unto you; for I assure you I do pitty your case, that so many of your men be here together; peradventure occasion may serve shortly to send you another, yet methinks you forget me, to send so often to others, without any letters to me. Fare you well. From Somerset-house the nine and twentieth of January, 1572. by English account. I thank you for the case of Tools, I yet have not leisure to understand them all, nor looked not for so many, nor on that sort: When I shall understand the properties and use of them, I shall have more cause to thank you. Yours alwayes assured, Tho: Smith. To the Earl of Leicester. AFter the inclosing up of my other letters, I received at one instant two sundry Letters of your Lordships; the one, of the eighth and the other of the nine and twentieth. Touching the first, your Honour doth concur with me in opinion, as I conceive by the same, that the matter which is the chiefest cause of my stay, is but a meer entertainment, the matter through misguiding, is never like to come to issue. If they mean otherwise, which is most likely, why should her Majestie endure to be any longer abused? As your Lordship findeth the partie that dealeth there halting, and divers in his tales, even like unconstancie and doubleness do I find in him here, that dealeth with me. To disguise the matter, they borrow certain names out of Amadis de Gaule, wherein they deal most aptly, to adde to a fained thing, fained names. They judge us to be very gross, and do think that every fair and coloured speech is able to abuse us: I cannot be otherwise perswaded, but some here that rule all, are acquainted with the matter; for otherwise, the partie that last came over would never have medled in the same. God send it a better end then I look for. For your Lordships good advice in the latter end of your letter, I most humbly thank you, and do think my self much bound to you for the same, as for any other favour I have received at your Lordships hands since I entred into this service, The best recompence I can make unto your Lordship, as I know, is to take profit thereof. True it is, that sometimes in requital unto some of my Friends, who have given me large entertainments of the state of things, whereof otherwise I
have been ignorant, I have also largelie made them partakers how things passed here, and somewhat more largelie then I have communicated the things unto her Majestie, because it passed the bounds of my function here, which is onelie to advertise. Notwithstanding, seeing the same is not used with that secresie as is fit, I will avoid hereafter to offend. Touching the Counts being acquainted with the matter of secrecie, your Lordship shall understand, that the partie that made me acquainted, withal, delivered me certain Letters sent from the place you wot of, which I caused my men to deliver unto him, by the which he came to the knowledge of the matter. Now to come to your Lordships latter letter, I see great cause to confer the likelihood of my letters of the four and twentieth of the last; for that there is great hope con∣ceived here, that by large offers they have lately made to such Towns as hold out, they will grow to a composition, which in the end will be neither good for themselves nor for us, howsoever the Ambassador there speaketh by the absence of some from hence. I cannot be able to discover any more touching the Scotish affairs, then alreadie I have done. And now that the Court re∣moveth, I am cut off from all means to have any great intelligence, either for that matter or others, especially for that I shall be constrained for lack of abilitie, to remain here still, being unfurnished of all means to follow the Court: And then seeing my remaining here shall be unprofitable unto her Majestie, and to my undoing, I hope her Majestie will no longer defer my re∣vocation, which I doubt not your Lordship will further as much as you may. And so leaving, &c. To Sir Thomas Smith. SIr; after the closing up of my other Letters, I received yours of the nine and twentieth of Ianuary. Touching the contents of the same, I will not fail upon the next convenient occasion to deal with her Majestie here concern∣ing the Scotish matters, though I be not provoked by them, because I am directed so to do. Notwithstanding, in my poor opinion, as I mean here to say nothing, but to do somewhat that may tend to the continuance of the troubles there, until such time as ther own things being settled at home, they proceed in prosecuting their other practises; so were it not amiss for her Majestie to use like silence, and to provide to withstand their malice; but herein I am to do as I am com∣manded. The Scotish Ambassador is advertised by the ship late arrived out of Scotland into Flanders, how that Iames Cancald is arrived at a place, if I do not mistake it, called Aberdeny in the Earl of Huntleys Countrey, to which place Viracque who latelie departed from hence, is appointed to repair. The Lord Levingston desireth most earnestly to have a passport to pass through England, for that he is wearie of this Countrey, and would fain be at home. He promiseth to communicate to her Majestie, at his arrival at the Court, such things as she shall not repent the granting of the same. And if se shall have any doubt of him, he will be content to remain their Prisoner: for mine own opinion, I think it not amiss to grant it him, for that I learn by some of credit that he communicateth his secrets to, that he misliketh their doings here, and the pretended enterprize towards our Island, as one that tendeth to the overthrow of Religion, and the ruine both of England and Scotland. I have promised by the next to give him a
resolute answer: and therefore I beseech you to put her Majesty in mind of the same. Now to come to mine own particular, I had well hoped my stay here should not have been so long protracted, and that my miserable case should have been otherwise weighed; especially seeing my state here should breed but a hin∣derance to my self, and no benefit to her Majesty: For now the Court removeth from hence, I shall be driven to remain here, and not to follow the same for lack of ability, having neither furniture, money, nor credit. I beseech you, Sir, there∣fore to lay my case before her Majesty; who, I hope, will so graciously consider the same, as I shall be presently relieved, and others receive no discourage∣ment to accept like service. And so leaving further to trouble your Honor at this present, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris the sixth of February 1572. To the right Honorable, Francis Walsingham Esq the Queens Majesties Ambassadour in France. SIR, I have received your Letters of the 20 of this moneth, with the tic∣ket after your accustomed manner concerning  and was on Friday last with the party on whom you made mention to be from  he spake with Glasco.  and Davison with him. I see there was a great mistaking of our doings; for by Davisons writing of a ship sent to  imagining that Hall 3. had a meaning to provoke Glasco 9 to come hither; whereupon this last Gentleman came to enquire of Hall . some assurance if . should so do, to enquire. This you must think must needs appear very strange. Whereupon before Davison I did declare that all that was done came of him with earnest and lamentable requests to have Glasco  preserved; because he said that  had gotten such knowledge of the same, as the same would tend to the ruine of  and so the party that now was sent is departed well certified of the truth, but not satisfied of his request. It is good to deal warily herein, for some cause to mistrust that Davison and all his partners do nothing herein without knowledge of  and therefore it is in such sort herein ordered, as there can be no advantage taken, I trust: And so also you may look to your doings, as I see you are disposed, by the occasion of the fond handling, that you see I am much perplexed with the dishonor done to my Lord of Worcester, her Majesties Ambassador on the seas before Bul∣loign. Wherefore by his own report I know you shall know the truth better then I yet do know. I could wish my self a meet person for the service upon the seas to avenge it. I have received your French lying book, which might trouble me, if my life had merited such vile and spitefull poisoned speech: but I trust God will suffer the good to think of me as I have deserved. I have imparted to the French Ambassador my misliking of this lewd Book, in that it hath been translated by—a man of note in that Court: and he shew∣eth himself to procure the suppression of it. What he will or can do herein, I know not. After the writing of the former part hereof, your later Letters of the 24 were brought to me; by which you advertise of the like likely Councell there intended for the appeasing of those inward troubles in that Realm, and of the pretended favours to be shewed to them of the religion in odium trtii, accor∣ding
to which devises hath already been begun here by this Ambassador with the French King here; and such is his vehemency of speech, and fair offers, as he hath brought the most of them to hearken to his pipe. I have let her Majesty see and consider of your letters, saving some concerning our occurrents here. I will move her Majesty to be more earnest then yet she hath been. There lacketh no no sollicitation for your revocation; and untill my Lord of Worcesters return, it shall be hard to obtain any resolute answer. If the French King shall follow towards Rochel, I would wish you to procure means to tarry in some convenient place near Paris, and to send a Secretary to follow the Court, with some pretence of lack of your health. But hereof you shall best counsell your self. And so I end. From Westminster the 29 of January late in the night. After I had supped here at my house, all the Lords of the Coun∣cell, and by their means 20 Lords more, to the which I had commodity by the Queens Majesties being here at Somerset House. Yours assuredly, W. Burghley. To my Lord of Burghley the 11 of February. THis Letter I received the day of my Lord of Worcesters departure, and be∣cause I doubted your Lordship would not wel read the same, I thought good to copie it out; what the effect thereof should be, I know not, it seemeth to me but a Riddle. The party that brought them was as vain as vanity it self: he shew∣ed me that La. Motts departure without taking of his leave, was, for that he durst not repair unto me, being very much suspected. I told him he needed not fear so much, for that he dealt not with me in any matter, but that he might repair unto me any time safely without any danger for any thing that I know. I have of late discovered one that carrieth a box of Linnen to the Queen of Scots, who depar∣teth not this town these three or four days, I think your Lordship shall see som∣what written in some of the linnen contained in the same, that shall be worth the reading. Her Majesty under colour of seeing of the fashion of the Ruffes, may cause the severall pieces of linnen to be held afore a fire, whereby the wri∣ting may appear; for I judge there will be some matter discovered, which made me the more willingly grant the Pasport. To my Lord of Burleigh. I Should do my Lord of Worcester wrong, if should not impart unto your Lordship both his dutifulness and discreet usage of the—La. of Northumberland. His sister sent unto him at the time of his abode here, to the end your Lordship may make her Majesty acquainted with all. First, as soon as he heard of the said parties coming, his Lordship made me privie thereof, and shewed, that though she was his sister, yet in respect of her undutifull usage towards her Majesty, he did respect her as a meer stranger, and so meant to do untill such time as her peace were made. He would not
so much as vouchsafe to give ear to any Messenger or Message sent from her, and therefore willed him to forbear to repair unto him. The like usage towards the said Messenger, did Charls Somerset use, utter∣ly refusing to speak with him. And leaving, &c. At Paris the 12 of Fe∣bruary, 1572. To Sir Tho. Smith. SIR, According to your direction of your Letters the 29 of the last, I shew∣ed the King of the great grief that her Majestie had conceived, that the travel both of his and her Ministers took no better effect touching the appeasing of the matters in Scotland, as a thing dishonourable for them both, to be deluded and scorned by such petty companions as those are that are in the Castle, to whom was offered as much as they themselves could desire reasonable, and more; yet so are they carried away with their particular passions, as they de∣sired nothing more then to maintain still Warr in their Countrie, not having such a respect to the tender age of their young King as they ought, especially seeing that they were the first and chief doers in deposing of the Queen, and setting up of him. I shewed him also, That though the Kings civil Warr and hostility, touched both their Majesties generally, as they that desired the re∣pose of that Realm, yet it touched the Queens Majestie more particularly, for that during the time of these civil troubles amongst them, her Majesties Sub∣jects that are borderers, are marvelously charged by outlaws and thieves, where∣of no redress can be had by reason of their inward troubles amongst them∣selves. I declared unto him also, that her Majestie in regard of the kindred betwixt the young King and her, could not but wish his Realm to be in quiet and peace in this his minority; which thing would not be brought to pass so long as these petty companions in the Castle, through their own wilfulness, obstinacy, and private respects, shall keep that Realm still in dissention and trouble, in con∣tempt of both him and her Majestie, whose designe tended to no other end but to make unity and concord amongst them. And therefore the King to this answered, that he was sorry that their intentions in according of them, took no better effect. And as for Hume Castle, he said, that though by the League it was not expresly mentioned to be delivered to the L. Hume, yet the meaning of it was so: Whereunto I reply'd, that the meaning of the clause in the League touching the rendring of Hume Castle, had not respect to any par∣ticular person, but generally to set that Country free from all forein forces, and that therefore her Majestie might render the same to whom she would of that Nation. To that the King replyed, that he had rather it should remain in the Queens Majesties hands, who (saith he) is a Prince honourable and sincere, then to be delivered into the hands of any of the other party. But herein (saith he) I will advise my self with my Councel, and within a day or two make you ac∣quainted with mine answer. I told him according to my Lord of Worcesters Instructions, that her Majestie delivering the same would capitulate with those to whom it should be delivered, to restore the same to the L. Hume when he shall recognize the Kings authority, as heretofore he hath done. The King took occasion upon these Scottish matters to recommend unto the Earl of Worcester, the Queen of Scots case: To whom my Lord answered, that such
was their dangerous and unkind dealing towards her Majestie, as he should for∣get the duty of a good Subject, if he should once open his lips for her, and there∣fore desired his Majestie to pardon him, in that he refused to be a dealer in that behalf. To this the King answered, That he did not desire any favour to be shewed unto her, otherwise then might be with the Queens Majesties safety. At our access unto Queen Mother, she desired my Lord, that whereas there hath been long in Treaty a marriage between her Majestie and her Son M. Le Duc, de Alanzon, that he would therefore move her at his return, that the same may grow to some conclusion, as that thing which she hoped would prove pro∣fitable unto her Majestie, and beneficial unto her Realm and Subjects. To this my Lord answered, That the cause why the same grew not to some conclusion, either off or on, proceeds, for that they have not made answer to certain things propounded by the Ambassador here Resident, unto them; whereunto she an∣swered, That she did not remember any thing whereunto they were so give an∣swer; whereupon I took occasion to shew her, that there were two points to be answered, The one concerning Religion, the other concerning the interview: For the point of Religion, I shewed her, that her Majestie in respect of the al∣teration that hath lately hapned in this Realm, and that which passed in the Treaty of the Marriage between her and Monsieur de Anjou, had cause to ac∣cord that point first, as that thing which touched generally the quietness and re∣pose of her Realm. Touching the interview, I told her, that for as much as her Majestie could have no other way satisfaction then by the same, the point of Religion once accorded, some convenient means for the accomplishing of her said interview, was to be devised. To this she answered, that her Son was of the same living that the other was, and of the same Religion, and therefore hoped should have no less favour then the other should have had touching the point of Religion, for that it is a thing dishonourable and unchristian for a Prince to change his Religion upon the sudden. To this I replyed, that for mine own part, I did not remember, that while I had the dealing in the matter, any liber∣ty in that was accorded to Monsieur de Anjou: And if it were, Madam, said I, we see that a thing is tolerable—in the other. In conclusion my Lord request∣ed, in that she desired to grow to an end in this matter, that she would roundly set down in her Letters, what the King and she required touching that part of Religion. To this she answered, after some denial made thereof, saying, that their Ambassador should signifie in that behalf, that she would be content so to do. And touching the interview when matters of Religion should be once ac∣corded, she doubted not but there would be means found for the bringing of the same to pass, as should be to her Majesties satisfaction. I made her acquainted with the matters of Scotland touching Hume Castle, whereunto I received like answer at her hands, as at the Kings, which was, that after conference had with their Councel, I should understand what was their mind and resolution in that behalf; whereupon these Scottish matters she took occasion to recommend to my Lord the Queen of Scots, to whom he gave like answer as before. In the end, as my Lord was ready to depart, she shewed him that she was given to un∣derstand that there were certain ships a preparing in England, by certain Rebels there, whereof she desired her Majestie to give redress, as appertained to good amity. Whereunto my Lord answered, that she might be assured that her Ma∣jestie had never any intention to tollerate any thing that might tend to the breach of the same; so that if there were any preparation of ships in hand, as he knew not of any, he was well assured her Majestie was nothing privy there∣unto, as also that her Majesties Subjects were no dealers in the same, who hath forbidden them expresly not to intermeddle.
Why then, said she, if they be strangers, she ought to banish them, and not to permit them to attempt any thing to the prejudice of this Countrey, con∣sidering that she is as well bound to yield up ayd, requiring the same at her hands; as we to grant the like unto her upon like occasion; and therefore she desired him to put her Majestie in mind, that some order might be taken for the reme∣dy of the same, which he assured her he would at his return. This was as much as passed at the time of my Lords taking of his leave. The morning my Lord departed, Queen Mother sent for me, and shewed me, that by Letters sent from Monsieur De la Mot, they were given to understand, that her Majestie let fall some speech, that she could not think, that the continuance of the Treaty of Marriage with Monsieur le Duc should be sincerely meant, he being now retired from hence, and imployed by the King at Rochel: she there∣fore for the satisfaction of her Majestie, requested me to desire the Earl of Wor∣cester to signifie unto her, that there is nothing that the King and she desireth more then the accomplishment of the said marriage, and that to the end that the Earl should see the Duke, the King stayed him here until Twelf-tide. About which time they attended my Lords coming, whereas otherwise he had departed together with Monsieur his brother before Christmass; and, said she, if we had known the certainty of the Earls coming, he should have come hither in post, to the end he might have seen him. I took occasion hereupon to tell her my private opinion, if it would have pleased the King not to have imployed him in these wars against those of the Religion, he should be in better opinion with her Majestie, and more grateful to her Subjects. To this she said, that a young Prince that hath courage and desire to do his Prince service, could not with his honour remain behind, seeing his other brother imployed. I have made my Lord acquainted with such Occurrents as are here, to the end he should impart them to her Majestie by mouth. And so leaving, &c. the 12 of February, 1572. To Sir Thomas Smith. IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majestie, that the King depart∣ed hence to St. Germains en Lay eight days past, and that Queen Mother re∣maineth here still, whereof the King hath great need, and the same found hard to be recovered here. Touching their proceedings against Rochel▪ there repaired hither of late divers Curriers, who use great silence, which make men to doubt that things fall not out to their liking. I learn notwithstanding, that there is in the Kings camp great scarcity of victuals, and a great number of Soldiers, through cold, and want of other necessaries are dead, and do die daily. That the Duke of Nevers hath taken upon him, with the help of certain Italian Engineers, to make certain Fortresses in the midst of the Haven, to impeach all such as by sea would bring to the Rochellois any succour. For the two Fortresses lately made at the Entry of the said Haven, six ships notwithstanding passed by, laden with corn and other munition, as it is reported. The common opinion is, that it will be impossible by any device to make the said Fortresses that the Duke pretend∣eth to make. There is secret whispering here, of some intelligence given by Pacues, of an intended enterprize by Montgomery in Picardie; and that here∣upon the King hath given order for the impeachment thereof. The Cardinal of Lorrain hath within these two days taken up the enchange of certain Treasures of the Town, 300000 franks, to what end I know not: He is now retired from hence to Rome; the cause of his departure, as it is thought, is to remove the suspicion from the Protestants, that they suspect nothing of the great conferences
had at sundry times between Queen Mother and him. Here, since the depar∣ture of the King, upon the good assurance that hath been given me by divers, of the good offices that the Lord Levingston will do in Scotland at his return, I have taken upon me to give to him a passport, with condition, that if her Majestie shall not like thereof, then he to return hither back again, who pro∣miseth to yield such satisfaction to her Majestie, as she shall not repent her of any favour she shall shew him. The Gentleman feareth, that if he should not depart hence before Easter, he should be constrained to yield to their superstiti∣on, or to hazard his life in refusing the same, which is the cause why I grant him the same pasport without hearing from her Majestie. Schomberg is lately sent hence into Germany, as it is thought to two pur∣poses; the one, to observe their doings there; the other, to make some levy of both horsemen and footmen, if he shall see any preparations of succours for them of the Religion here. There arrived lately a noble Gentleman, sent hither by the King of Portugal, to congratulate the Queens delivery; and (as it is said) to renew the offer of suc∣cour by sea. It is said, that the Baron de la Guard is dead, and that Monsieur le Duc d' Alanson desired to have the charge by sea, whereto Queen Mother would by no means consent, as Mannesire shewed me. It is also reported, that Monsieur De la Noue hath discharged himself to Mon∣sieur of his promise made to the King, and professeth to live and dye with those of Rochel. And so leaving, &c. hoping that her Majestie will take order, by sending over Mr. Dale, that I shall be the next Messenger my self, I most hum∣bly take my leave. At Paris the 26 of February, 1572. To Mr. Secretary. SIr, this Gentleman, the bearer hereof, whom I dispatch in all haste, shall shew you the particularities of the late skirmish happened between the Camp and those of Rochel, to the end you may impart the same unto her Majestie: In the which skirmish D. d' Aumale and Schavigur were slain, two of the chiefest exe∣cutors of the late murthers here. God of his good beginning doth give us some hope that the blood of the innocent shall not beunrevenged. They of Sancerre the night after the breach was made, which was about the latter end of the last moneth, issued out of the Town, and gave the Camp a Camisad, who kept very negligent watch, so that they entred into their Trenches (as it is said) and slew 200 at the least, and three or four Captains of good conduct. Hereupon it is said, that Shaers, who is the General for the King, is commanded to levy the siege, and to repair to Rochel. I am credibly informed, that there should be certain Letters entercepted, sent out of Germany from Count Lodowick, amongst the which there was one directed to Count Montgomery, wherein was mention made of assurance of succours to be given to them of the Religion here, out of Germany. I have divers causes to conjecture, that the party which brought these Letters was directed unto me. This interception maketh them here much doubt Germany. Sir, Mr. Dale had need to bring with him over a greater train then he shall be well able to maintain, if her Majestie look to hear often from him, and if his servants shall be stayed ordinarily, as mine are. And so, &c. At Paris the tenth of March.
To my Lord Treasurer. IT may please your Lordship to understand, as I was upon my departure from this town towards the Court, I received this inclosed from my Scretary The∣vewes; the things contained in the same, are here very rife, and confirmed with great earnestness; and others, notwithstanding some here of judgment conside∣dering what good success they have lately had at Rochel, how much their enemies are therewith appalled, and how the giving out of these bruits may serve the Kings turn many ways, do not credit them; for my own opinion I assure your Lordship, I know not what to judge. I have seen within these few moneths so many strange and unlikely things come to pass, as I do rather suspend my judg∣ment then utterly not believe it. If her Majesty do not hear from me with that speed that were requisite, when there falleth out here matters worthy advertise∣ment, I am justly to be excused, for that I have none to send, my servants being all staid there, and not one sent over; which thing if it be not by some device remedied, I know not to what use an Ambassador will serve. And so having, &c. To the right honorable Francis Walsingham Esquire, her Majesties Ambassador in France. SIR, you may think it strange that I have writ no oftner to you then I have done, and that I have no sooner dispatched your successor unto you; but I think you know well enough the stile and order of the Court. Yesterday was the first day that I could get your dispatch signed, and the same night I sent word to your wife, and sent word to Dr. Dale who hath been with me in the morning, and prepareth to take his journey straight after the holidays towards you, where∣of I thought good to give you warning by your servant; for before her Majesty had signed, I durst never adventure to affirm any thing for fear of contrary winds, the which is no news in this Court. Well, now I trust you be pleased, if with nothing else, yet at the least, with your return. Montgomery is gone from hence, whether he hath taken shipping or no, I know not, but I suppose he hath. With his tarrying so long here, the Queens Majestie was fain to send to appre∣hend the Pirats of all nations thereabouts, who under the colour of the Prince of Orange, and the Count Montgomery, robed all manner of Englishmen and stran∣gers; some of them are like to pay for it, and the rest be gone, or will be glad to go; for it was time for justice to awake. Of Casteauneufs coming hither, on D'la Motts errand, I think my Lord Treasurer hath written unto you, who is pri∣vater of it then I am, and the answer. The pretence was to bring recommenda∣tions and excuse from the Duke of Alanson of his absence at my Lo. of Worce∣sters being there; the cause not pretended, what preparation was here to help Ro∣chel. And he might easily see there was none by common consent and the Prin∣ces avow. What Montgomery for commiseration, or love of private men, espe∣cially strangers, can get, is hard, and I fear by the event will not appear so much as is thought and spoken of, and were expedient at this time, if any great thing should be done. Scotland is very well come forward to an universall agrement, sith DuCrocque and Viraque went away. The Duke and Earle of Huntly be come in from them and all their followers, to acknowledge the King and his Regent. None holds out but Grange and Liddington, who keep the Castle.
(The King and the Lord Regent not being able for fair means to get them to the unity of the whole Realm, offering unto them all reasonable conditions that they can demand, so that they will leave the Castle, and to keep no longer Edenburgh (which is the London and Paris of Scotland) in subjection un∣to them, yet cannot be heard; and therefore is required of the Queens Majesty to bring them to order; the which the Queen may do for any league, treaty, or promise heretofore made, and so I think will do, if there be no remedy, Du Viraque who is thought to be sent to keep them still in dissention, by good hap and contrary winds was driven with six ships of Scotland into Scarbrough-Haven, stayed there by there by the Lord President. In the mean while was the Duke and the Earl agreed with the Regent, and the Scotish Ships departed. He is now thought to be in the way to come to London, for so my Lord president ap∣pointed, but not yet come. A man of his taken in Scotland, hath confessed, that he was sent back under another pretence to cast into the Sea the most part of his writitings: the which he did, which declareth good plain dealing. The Lo. Leviston is now come to London, pretending his desire to have his Conscence at liberty; but not yet trusted that he meaneth the quiet of Scotland, words have escaped him and his Companions by the way, which have not fallen to the ground. Farewell from Greenwich the nineteenth of March, 1572. Your assured friend, Tho. Smith. To my very loving friend, Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador for her Majesty with the French King. SIR, your letters brought to me were of the 11 of March dated at St. Cloud, and the next former were of the 25 of February, for which I thank you, that you do so carefully advertise me of the state of things as I find you have done, when I have been more answerable then now I can be. The reason of my frequent absence, is the intervall of times, when here I am no less mindfull of your causes, both such as belong to her Majesty, and such as belong to your self, then any other to my power is or can be, and even now on Wednesday last her Majesty hath signed all things meet to revoke you, and to send another in your place; wherein I know you haue found cause to think the time long, and so have your friends been lately grieved with it; but I trust now to see you shortly to your contentation. You shall understand that the French Ambassador hath of late time been very earnest with her Majestie in certain causes; as first, in offering by all good speeches the continuance of the Amitie, and with complaining as grievously that the Q. Majesties offering of Montgomery to be aided as he is, with mony, &c. must needs move the ing to think his Amity contemned. And with some sweet minatories, he intrated that he might be staied, &c. He also reneweth the marriage matter, and thereto requireth a resolute answer, as a thing necessary to be ended the one way or the other, for honor of all parties. He also hath see∣med greatly offended with the stay of Viraque at Scarborough. He hath made suit, that for the Queen of Scots, some ther in France, meaning two or three, might come hither to bring the said Queen money, and account of her Estate. In the end came hither an Agent named Chasteau Neuf from the Camp afore Rochel: his coming was, as we perceive, to disswade Montgomery from going to Rochel, but he brought loving letters to her Majesty from M. le Duc.
To these things briefly you shall know the Answers. His offers of Amity have been thankfully accepted, and it hath been told him that his Majesty is more bound to the Queens Majesty for her perseverance then any other upon like cause. For though it be manifestly seen, and fully discovered by such as are ar∣rived in Scotland out of France, having been dealers with the King in France, and others there, how the King is disposed against the Queens Majesty, and this Realm to offend it, when his own troubled causes shall be setled; and how he persecuteth the Protestants, being of the Queens Religion; yet her Majesty hath resolved to persevere in her League, meaning first to see the breach come indeed first from the French King, then she doubteth not by Gods Grace to preserve her, and her Realm, whereunto she also findeth all her people so willing to withstand all forces force, as she hath much ado to detain them from adven∣turing in great numbers to pass to Rochel of their own charges, and those are not of the popular, but Noblemen and Gentlemen of Ancient and great liveli∣hoods; who surely have offered of their own charges to finde an Army of 20000 footmen, and 2000 horsemen for six months in Gascoyn; and so earnest they have been, that it is already known to themselves, both where the men are to be had, and the money; onely they desire but a permission, and truely her Majesty hearing hereof, hath shewed her self much offended herewith, and with great charge for fear of her indignation of the same, the Ambassador confessed he had understanding, whereupon he was constrained to confess how much his Master was bound unto her Majestie. All this you may notifie unto the King and amplifie it; for it is true and meet to be uttered. As for the stay of Mont∣gomery, it was said that he desired to depart the Realm, considering her Majesty refused to aid him, and therefore her Majesty thought it a cruel part to stay him, whom she was not disposed to aid. And for his manner of departure, the Am∣bassador could tell how much he was grieved with that her Majesty had caused all such as were on the Sea for him and Rochel, to be apprehended, and all that which they had taken from other the French Kings subjects to be restored as in∣deed the like general speedy restitution hath not been made in my time; so as therewith also the King hath cause to commend her Majesties observation of the League. For the Marriage her Majesty caused me privately to confer with the Ambas∣sador, and her Majesty hath willed me to let him know, that you shall make the Answer, and yet he shall be acquainted with it, and so this it is, her Majesty would have you to let the King and his Mother understand that she cannot accord to take any person to her husband whom she shall not first see. Secondly, she can∣not assent that any person which shall be her husband, shall with her Authority and assent use any manner of Religion in outward exercise that is in her Consci∣ence, contrary and repugnant to the direct word of Almighty God, and so con∣sequently prohibited by the Laws of the Realm, whereupon these two Conse∣quences do necessarily follow, that in this case of Marriage with Monsieur de Duc if he will obtain her his wife without sight of him, her Majesty cannot be had, and yet therein hr Majesty is very loath that he shold think that she desireth his coming, but as himself shall finde it meet by the advise of the King his bro∣ther, and the Queen mother, to whom she remitteth the consideration hereof, with this assurance, that she meaneth in good faith to marry with him, if upon his sight the one may like of the other, and that for the cause of Religion, as he and she may so accord as that which he shall demand be assented unto without offence of her Conscience, or without trouble of her Estate, and that that point of Religion is thought meetest to be left at large to be communed upon betwixt themselves, so as if it should mishap that one of them might not fully like of
the other as to a conclusion of marriage, that the refusal or breaking up might be imputed the cause of Religion, and so either party might honorably be dis∣charged to the world, and no occasion grow thereby of unkindness betwixt them. This is the substance of her Majesties resolution, whereof to make the Ambassador here privy, she seemeth not to mislike thereof, and in the end con∣cluded with me that she took this course to be agreeable to the same resolution, which was delivered at Killingworth the last of August to him and La Mott. And so I think it in substance the same, whereof I do herewith send to you the last two Articles of that Answer in French, as then it was given; to which news you may refer this new Answer. And now to add of mine own, you shall understand, that I see the imminent perils to this State; and namely, how long soever she shall by course of nature live and Reign, the success of this Crown so manifestly uncertain, or rather so manifestly prejudicious for the State of Religion, that I cannot but still persist in seeking for marriage for her Majestie, and finding no way that is liking to her, but this with the Duke, I do force my self to pursue it with desire, and do flatter my fancie with imaginations that if he should come hither, her Majesty would not refuse him; and for his Religion, methinks if he may be otherwise liked, he would not lose a Queen with a Kingdom, for a Priests blessing of a Chalice. I cannot imagine that his Religion is rooted, that it may not be transported. Now if I am deceived, yet for the time it easeth me to imagine that such a se∣quel may follow▪ but you have cause better to guess hereat then I; for I guess at nothing but at the Queens Majesties disposition, which I take firmly to be bent to marriage; but you on the other part may guess, whether he may be liked, whether he may be induced to be qualified in his Religion; yea, whether his marriage be meant seriously and sincerely on that part; and upon these conceits you have cause to imagine more certainly what ought to be looked for or desired then I can. But now turning my paper I will leave and end this matter, praying you heartily to impart unto me your conceit herein, if thereby you see cause to stay my course, you see how long I have tarried in this matter; for the rest of the point (for Viracques) sending for me to come to the Scottish Queen, and for the matters of Scotland, I doubt not but Mr. Secretary hath enlarged his know∣ledg therein to you. And for more surety, because at the writing hereof he is gone into Essex, I will upon the closing up of my Letter impart by speech some part thereof to this bearer Walter Williams, to excuse me of longer writing. Not∣withstanding Gordens denyal, to be privy to the Book lewdly augmented with a blasphemous Prologue, I understand out of Scotland, that he is therewith well acquainted, wherefore I pray you search it better out, and let me understand what is now become thereof. And thus I end on Good-Friday at night, the 20 of March 1572. Your assured loving friend, W Burleigh.
Response de la Roigne d'Angle. au Sr. de la Mott Fenelon Amb. du Roy tres∣chrestien Fait par Mr. Le Grand Tresorier le 18 Marc. 1573. QUe se Maj. voyant que le Roy tres-christien son bon frere & la Royne sa me re perseuerent en le honeste desir de demander son alliance, encores que de puis le mois de Aoust dernier plusieurs choses soient entrevennes de la costè, par les quel∣les ell' a une grande occasion de ne suiure le propos. Neant moins a le prochas elle returne maintenant aux mesmes termes on les choses en estoient demures le 20 du dit mois d' Aoust lors que elle seant en son coneil a Kellingworth present le Sr. de la Mott fist une forme de response au dit Sr. Ambas. suivant la quelle elle dit de noveau. Que pour le bien de ses subjectes, lesquels monstrent de preveoir beaucoup de grandes dangiers en ce Royaume si elle les de laisse sans quelque lignèe prouve∣nant de elle, et sans successeur, a fin de les satesfaire quelle est firmement resolue de se marier de quelque bon et grand lieu, selon elle si elle peult trouver quelqu'n qui à elle et son estate soit convenable. Et sur le offre que les Maj. tres-christienes luy font de Mr. le Duc d' Alanson le frere et fils, elle trouve que la partie est fort honorable si toutes autres choses y pevent convenir, dont estime qu'il en consiste une bonne partie en l'enterveüe d'eux deux, tant a cause de l'inequalite de laage, que pour le rapport que ceux qui ont veu M. le Du ont fait de son visage, a fin de veoir s'ily aura mutuel consentement entre ux. Car ainsi at elle tousiours respondu a toutes autres Princes, qui l'ont recerché ce qu'un chascun scait bien que beaucoup ont faict, qu elle ne achepteroit jamais au∣cun pour mary si elle ne leust primierement veue. Que neant moins pour le miscontentement et autres displaisirs que pourroient succeder de la dit entrevee si d'adventure les choses ne sortient a effect, t craignant pour cela quelque diminution d'amitie en lieu qu'elle la veut augmenter, elle ne scait que desirer la dessus advis remettant a les Maj. tres-christi∣enes le it point d' entreveue, scachant trop bien qu'elles ne consillerent rien a leur frere et leils qui ne soit selon son honeur, esperant qu'il n'en sera aucun mauvaise interpretation, tant qu'elle procede simplement et sincerement, encores qu'il y puisse avoir les honores et amies, si fault il que les affections de deux costes soient absolues, en quo le gre de nul autre ne puist servir sinon celui des parties. Qu'elle entend que ce pendant qui toutes les articles qui nt este consentu par cy devant et trouves bons pour sa Maj. au props de Mr. demeurant entiers pour Mr. muant seulement les reserve l'interpretation ou esclaircissement des doubtes sur le article de la Religion, ceque sera remi a estre determine par elle et Mr. le Duc à l'entreveue. Qu'elle voit bien quant l article y aura maintenant plus de difficulte qu'il n'eust e au paravant par les evenements de France, considerant le course qu'il semble que le Roy tien contre les subjects pour le Religion agreant acelle d' Angleterre, mes∣mement a luy recorder celle partie de sa Religion que consiste principalement en sa messe attendu le scandale que toutes les consellers disent qu'il pourroient en ce temps advenir de luy permetre pour estre chose trop contre a la Saincte parolle de dieu et aux loix establies pour la Religion receus en Angleterre, de sorte que outre le scrupule de sa propre conscience elle estime que bien peu des sins le luy vouldront conseiller, ayant cause de present dy estre plus soigneux qu'ils n'ont estre parcy devant. Que neantmoins sur ceque le dit grand Tresorier dict qu'il luy a remonstre qu∣encores qu'elle ne deust trouver en Mr. le Duc toutes perfections qu'elle desireroit, d autant qu'il y en a plusieurs grandes et louables, et qu'il est de tres illustre et
royalle extraction, et que cest a present quune partie, tant honorable luy est offert avec tant serieux moiens tant par le Roy et sa mere comme par la continuelle pour suitte par messagiers et lettres de Duc mesmes comme tousiours, et que le tout court a elle de se marier, par ainsi qu'il ne fault qu'elle, s'arreste a petites diffi∣cultes, qu'elle dict quelle se veult encliner pour l amour de ses subjects (nonob∣stant qu'elle y vit aucunes choses non du tout a sa satisfaction) d'endurer aucuns defaultes et qu'elle ne vouldroit faire si ne foit pour la necessité de son mariage a contenter son Royaume. Qu'elle ne nie point ce que le dict grand Tresorier luy a pareillement remon∣stre touchant le point de la Religion: que plusieurs choses, moiennant qu'elles ne soient directement contre le parolle de Dieu, comme il dict estre quelque part de la messe, se peuvent laisser aller par connivence, qu'autrement on ne les ottroient pas et qu'il y a moins de scrupule et moins de scandale de ne le contredire, que si par expresse declaration on les authoriseroit, par ou le dict Sr. Tresorier pense qu'en telles et semblables moindres choses sa conscience se pourroit acquiescer esperant que Monsieur le Duc s'estant accoustume avec l'exercise de la' Religion d' Anglet▪ trouveroit avec le temps plus de raison de s'en lover que peut estre de la Religion de France. Car il est manifest qu'en le plus part des choses celle d' Anglet. ne varie point de la Remaine, forsque en Language, qu'est ce qu'elle peut respondre et ainsi leur faire dire par son Ambass. de par de là. Et le grand Tresorier adjouste. Que suivant ce que dessus estant fort presse par le dict Sr. Amb. a dire quelque chose de ce qu'il pensoit, Il dict, qu'il ne pouvoit aucunement penser si non que si Mr. le Duc trouve bon de prendre la poste avec une moderie compagne pour venir par de a en ce prin temps comme en May ou semblable temps pour veoir la Royne, ce qu'il pourroit faire sans le prejudice de luy considerant la grandeur de sa Maj. et qu'il n'a aucun estat Souverain ains l'honeur d'estre Duc et frere du Roy et com∣me une june prince desirant aussy de travailler et veoir le pais. Il pourra en ceste sorte venir a Greenwich, ou en quelque autre lieu icy pres de Londres a Kent, ou bien la parte ou la Royne lors se trouvera, qu'il auroit bonne esperance que l'affaire se conduiroit a une bonne et heureuse conclusion: Car accordant qu'il se peult trou∣ve autant agreeable comme plusieurs out fait rapport puis n'agueres, en ce que la Picotte de la petite verolle soit toute effacee ny voyont difficulte importance que celle de la Religion. Et quand le mutuel consentement se trouvera aux personnes il esperoit que la Religion ne l'empeschera, et qu'ily aura encores de conseilliers qui voudront ainsi adviser que Mr. le Duc le puisse contenter avec une telle tolle∣ration pour l'excercize d'aucuns points de la Religion que n'offenceroient l'estat de ce Royaume. Des autres propos du dict Sr. grand Tresorier s'est comprins. QUe la dicte Dame a la coeur et sa affection entiers vers le Roy en la Royne sa mere a vouloir demurer a jamais le bonne confederee, ainsi qu'elle pense bien aussy qu'ux de leux costes luy correspondent. Mais qu'il ne voit pas que ce la puisse lonuement durer non obstant sa presente urage intention a preserver et garder la traicte de sa part, attendu les deportements de la France, lesquels luy
semblent que tendent fort a deprimer les Protestants, la ou ce Royaulme ne pet faire que le porter faveur, ce que sera occasion, si le mariage ne succede que peu a peu toute la seurte de la ligue se ira perdre: et ny aura traicte, ny serment, ny commerce, ny lettres, ny bonnes parolles que luy puissent regarder. Car il vou∣loit dire librement que comme il pensoit par les opinions des plus sages, que la Royne sa maistresse ne pourroit faire qu'en fin elle et son estat ne fussent con∣traicte de suiure les deliberations et les generales resolutions que se prendront par les Princes Protestants pour la defense de la Religion et pour assister aux attempts de ceux qui voudroint invahir ce Royaume, dont pour toucher le paix a touts in∣convenients que pourroient sur venir en l'amitie et bonne ligue qu'est de present entre leur Maj. et entre leur deux Royaumes. Il ni voir aucun rien de plus expedient que de le confirmer et estraindre d'advantage par ce mari∣age. A Copie of the Lord Treasurers Letter to the French Ambassador. MOnsieur I Ambassador, according to your motion, I conferred with her Majestie upon the alteration or qualification of some points in the writing which you sent me, as concerning the matter of Religion to be tolerated for Monsieur le Duc, and after some long speeches passed herein, her Majestie col∣lected in a few words, that she would it should by me be imparted unto you, meaning to abridge the length of the form. First, That the King hath known her disposition to marriage, and upon what cause since the first motion for Mr. d' Anjou, and therein how she alway resolved not to marry without mutual sight and liking, nor yet to have the matter of Religion to be a cause of trouble to her state, and of the same minde she hath been, and yet is for Monsieur d'Alanson. Now what is to be done further by Monsieur le Duc, she leaves that to the King and him; with this, that if he should thus think beforehand, if he should come percase liking should not ensue, that then he should conceive such offence there∣of, as his good will should turn into hatred, her Majestie thinketh it not meet that in such case he should come at all, but if onely the matter of Religion should breed such difficulty betwixt them, as howsoever the one should like of the other, yet in respect of the satisfaction in that behalf the marriage should not take place, it were honorable enough for both or either of them, though upon the enterview the marriage did not succeed. And therefore no offence ought to follow, or an alteration of good will, which is, that her Majestie de∣sireth to be conserved, whatsoever happen of the matter of marriage. Thus after much long speech passed between her Majestie and me, praying you accor∣ding to the knowledge, that she is assured you have of her sincere meaning by conference with her Majestie you will also deliver it to the King. To the Lord Treasurer. IT may please your Lordship to advertise hr Majestie, That upon the receipt of your Lordships Letters of March 20, I communicated to Q. mother, her
Majesties Answer touching the marriage matter, which I thought to begin with∣al, and concerning the other three points to say nothing but as occasion shall be ministred by her. For the marriage I shewed her that her Majestie could not speak more cleerly in the matter then heretofore she hath done, which was that she could not accord to take any for her husband whom she should not first see. Secondarily, That she cannot assent that any man that shall become her hus∣band, shall with her Authority and assent use any manner of Religion in outward exercise, that is in her Conscience contrary to the direct Word of God, and so consequently prohibited by the Laws of her Realm. To the first of these two points she answered, that the King and she could not consent to his coming over without surety that the marriage should proceed. To the second, She said that it was neither honorable for him to abandon his Religion upon the sudden, neither could her Majestie require to have a husband to live without exercise of his Religion, and as for those words, whereas she saith that he cannot consent that he shall have any manner of Religion, methinks said she the words be very dark, and therefore I would be glad to know of you what they mean. To that I answered, that I had not Commission to interpret them, but in my private opinion, her Majesties meaning was to debar him of the exercise of any Religion repugnant to the Laws of the Realm. Upon these two points there passed between us long debating. I shewed her how necessary the contentation of the eye was in marriage, and that her Majestie by none that heretofore had seen him, could receive any such satisfaction as were requisite. Further, I used divers Arguments to prove unto her, that if the matter did not succeed, yet could there not grow any dishonour unto him otherwise then in opinion. For the second, I shewed her that as her Majestie had at all times cause to stick upon this point of Religion, so never more then at this present, considering what lately had passed here, which had generally bred in her Majesties subjects great jealousie of this Crown seeing them so earnestly bent to oppress those that pro∣fess the same Religion that they do. In the end she desired me in this behalf to shew unto her Majestie touching the interview, that the King and she could not consent that the Duke should come over unless he might be assured to speed, for that otherwise he returning without speeding, should receive great dishonor, which might hinder some honor∣able offer lately made unto him. And after other Covenants that depend upon the conclusion of the said marriage, which heretofore in the other Treatie were reduced to a reasonable accord, shall be so secretly debated here, by some choice persons elected for the purpose; with her Majesties Ambassador here resident at the same time, as shall not be made common to the world, and then the same being agreed upon, and assurance being given unto the King and her, by some Letter of her own hand writing, that her intention is to proceed to the consum∣mation of the marriage, he should not fail to come over; and yet should he give outto the world, that he adventureth to come over upon no other assurance then upon good hope. I shewed her, that in this point the Queen my Mistriss as I took it, was fully resolved not to receive any to her husband before she shall see him. Notwithstanding Madam (quoth I) I will make her acquainted with your requests in this behalf. And as for Religion (saith she) we onely require that he may have some se∣cret exercise for himself, and some few of his that he shall bring over with him, with this Caution, that her Majestie should depute some whom she should think fit for the purpose, to see that none of her subjects should resort to the same.
I shewed her that I would make her Majestie privy to these her requests though (said I) as far as I can perceive, I see her Majestie resolved to accept nei∣ther of them. So proceeding in further talk, she shewed me, that she hoped howsoever the marriage took place, the Amity notwithstanding lately concluded would continue. I shewed her, that if there grow any violating thereof, the cause should rather proceed from them then from his Majestie, though Ma∣dam I know that there are bruits given out here to the contrary: but I hope Madam the King and you rest satisfied, if your Ambassador hath made you truly acquainted with her Majesties proceedings. To that she answered, that the King and she was to think themselves beholding to her Majesty, notwith∣standing that they would have wished that Montgomery had not received at her Majesties subjects hands that he doth, though we know that Inhibition is made by her Majesty to the contrary. I then shewed her, that to the end she might understand how much she was beholding to my Mistris, I would (with her leave) make her privy to such reasons as might have moved any other Prince but my Mistris, who is consequently bent to make good Amity with them, to yield to C. Montgomory all assistance. First I shewed her, that divers of her subjects of great quality, courage, and likelihood, had laid before her Majestie sundry reasons to in∣duce her to think that the fire lately kindled in France to the ruine of those of the Religion there, if through Gods goodness it be not quenched, is also so meant that it shall extend towards her; saying, that if she forbear to support them, and suffer them to quaile, she would be the cause of her own ruine and of her Realm be∣sides; laying before her danger, they have laid before her also honor and pro∣fit, and have shewed her that now is the time for her to recover such Provinces in this Countrey as appertain to the Crown of England. And for the better incouragement have offered her to finde her an Army of 20000 footmen, and 2000 horsemen for the space of six months. Further I shewed her, that late it hath been discovered by such as are in Scot∣land arrived out of France, having been dealers with her Majestie and others here, how they are disposed when their own troubled causes shall be setled, to at∣tempt somewhat against her Majestie. Lastly, I shewed her, how her Majestie hath been put in minde how little account is had of the recommendations heretofore made by her and the Princes of Germanie of those of the Religion here, seeing them persecuted with such extremity, contrary to the assurance given by their Majesties unto such their Ministers as did recommend them, which may give just cause to think her Ami∣ty is little esteemed. All these courses notwithstanding which would move a∣ny other Prince, such is her affection towards this Crown, as she is fully resolved to persevere in her League, meaning first indeed to see the breach come from the King, and then she doubteth not in Gods goodness, but that she shall preserve her self and her Realm against him or any other Prince that shall attempt any thing against her, finding all her subjects most willing to withstand all forraign forces, whatsoever is given out by certain Rebels. To this she answered, that she knew by advertisement come from the Am∣bassador, that there was great sollicitation made by her subjects, as also great of∣fers, and that therefore they acknowledged themselves much beholding to her Majestie for her intention to persevere in good Amity. Now whereas you say, there hath been discovered by certain apprehen∣ded in Scotland, some intention of ours to disquiet her Majestie, I protest saith she, that both the King and I know of no such matter, and that the parties that so do say, do belie us. What Commission they have received from others of this Realm I know not; but if it may be proved that they have received any,
they that have given them Commission shall receive such punishment as the Q. your Mistris can desire. Our intention, saith she, touching the matters of Scot∣land, was never other then to perswade them to accord; and to acknowledge the ueens Majsty their Mistris, for their Governor. To this I replyed, in so doing they break the League, for that it was contra∣ry to that which vvas concluded in the same; for that it vvas agreed, that nei∣ther the one nor the other should give Lavv unto Scotland, but should joyn in maintenance of that Government. That they among themselves should agree upon to be most for their safety vvhich thing may give my istris just occasion to suspect that vvhich is discovered in Scotland, the rather to be true. Then she seeming to be sorry that she uttered so much, that she could do no less but say somevvt to recommend her cuse,  the allyance, and yet vvished any accord rather thn they shuld stry one anoher. Upon this occasion she fell in to some purpose about the staying of Viracque, and said that it vvas strange Ambassadors should be stayed, vvho vvere alvvays persons priviledged vvithin the Dominions of their Confederates. To that I ansvvered, that it migh seem more strange to the Queen my Mris. considering that it vvas agreed that the matters in Scotland should be treated in common, that any should be sent secretly thither, her Majesty not being made privy thereof, vvhich gave her Majesty a great occasion to suspect that vvhich vvas discovered by certain taken in Scotland, to be true; seeing such dealing un∣der hand, the Queen my Mistris (said I) ws rather perswaded that Viracque had been sent over by some of this Realm who envyed the good between the two Crowns, then by the King, and therefore shall be sorry to hear him be avow∣ed to be his Minister. To this she answered, That the Queen my Mistris had been made acquainted of their intention to send Viacqe long since by their Ambassador to the end to joyn with Mr. Kllegrew in the treaty of accord. I told her that I thought that they should finde their Ambassador had failed to let her Majestie understand so much, for that as I am informed she understood nothing of his going thither un∣til such time as she heard of his sty. And as for his stay, Madam (quoth I) though he avows himself to be the Kings Ambassador, yet her Majesty hath gi∣ven order throughut all her prts, that all her persons whatsoever they pretend, unless they be notoriously known to be Merchants, or have pasports or safe-Con∣duct, shall not onely be staied, but also sent up to the Court, and therefore this stay being generally upon good consideration considering the present state of Europe, neither he nor any other that either hath been or shall be stayed can com∣plain of any violating of any privi edge, &c. that appertaineth to any Ambassador; She seemed to be very much intangled with this matter, and had not therefore much to say for the staying of him. Afterwards falling into Montgomeries mat∣ter, I declared to her Majesty also at large, how much he was aggrieved with that her Majesty had caused all such as were on the Seas for him and Rochel to be apprehended, and all that which they had taken from others, the French Kings subjects, to be restored, and that with such speed, as the like speedy and general restitution hath not been in my time heretofore. Whereby, said I, your Ma∣jesty hath just occasion to commend her Majesties observation of the League; which thing she acknowledged to be true, and therefore as they had cause, did think themselves beholding to her Maiestie. This in sum was the effect which passed between her Majestie and me. And so leaving, &c. At Mouel, the first of April 1572.
To the Lord Treasurer. FOr satisfying of your Lordships request, touching my private opinion of the marriage. The great impediment that I find in the same, is the content∣ment of the eye. The Gentleman sure is void of any good favour, besides, the blemish of the small pocks. Now when I weigh the same, with the delicacie of her Majesties eye, and considering also that there are some about her in cre∣dit, who in respect of their particular interesses, having neither regard unto her Majestie, nor to the preservation of our Countrey from ruine, will rather increase the misliking by defacing of him, then by dutifully laying before her the necessity of her marriage; and that in true choice the satisfaction of the ear importeth more then that of the eye; specially, that seeing to one of her quality, there is not allotted that choice that is to other common personages, I hardly think that there will ever grow any liking; for the Gentleman himself, (his favour excepted) he hath many of those good parts that I would desire to be in one whom I would wish to be her Majesties husband, if the other im∣pediments were removed. And as for his Religion, I do not doubt, upon con∣ference had with some, but that he would be reduced to any conformity, so that the sticking in that matter proceedeth rather from others then from him∣self, and yet they not moved thereto of conscience. But for other respects, whether this marriage be sincerely meant or no, is a hard point to judge, where dissimulation taketh so deep root. In my opinion, I think rather no then yea, not for that they desire it not onely as a thing both honourable and profitable, but also necessary, in respect to have a vent for the separation of the brethren: But because they are altogether perswaded that her Majestie hath no intention to marry, a thing partly proceeding from her own disposition, and partly through the disswasion of others, who are not unknown to them, and therefore partly do use the same but for an entertainment, in respect of their troubled state at home. Such presumptions as I have to lead me so to think, I hope shortly to impart unto your Lordship, &c. The first of April, 1572. To Sir Thomas Smith. SIr, it may please you to advertise her Majestie, how that the twentieth of this moneth there arrived one here, sent to the King from the Marshal D'Anville; who reporeth, that the said Marshal hath lost at sundry assaults at Sancerre in Berie fifteen hundred footmen, besides fifty Gentlemen, of whom there is very good account made. Amongst the rest, there is very great moan made for the loss of Monsieur D'Candales, a Gentleman of a very ancient house, and one who married with Montmorencies sister. He reporteth fur∣ther, that there is in D'Anville's camp great scarcity of victuals, which pro∣ceedeth for lack of payment; so that if in time the King take not some or∣der for the redress thereof, the said Marshal shall be constrained to break up his camp. Upon this discouragement of D'Anvile, the strength and number of the Pro∣testants increaseth daily, they having at this present, as it is reported, of Castles and Holds almost a hundred, and of good fighting men eighteen thousand, yet dispersed in the said Holds, but like to assemble when the season of the year shall serve for the purpose.
The 21 of this moneth word was brought to the Court, how those of the Kings Camp that lay before Sansarra, as they gave assault to the Town the day before, sustained a great repulse, and lost six score of their best Soldiers, where∣upon they are driven to raise the siege. By Letters sent from Rochel, of the 21 of this present, the King is advertised how the Count de Retz is hurt in the rains of the back with a harquebush shot out of Rochel; and some say, he can hardly escape it▪ others, that he is not in any danger, and yet the pellet cannot be gotten. By Letters also of the 26, sent from Rochel to certain private friends, they are advertised, that there was no battery laid there before the 24, although it hath been bruted, that it is long sithence that Monsieur had beaten down a certain Bastion, called L'Evangile. Though it is reported of La Noue, that he should bring with him to Monsieurs Camp thirty Gentlemen, yet the Queen Mother her self at my last access, told me, that there arrived with him but twelve, amongst the which she named none of name unto me, but onely Rochnart. By others I learn, that La Noue escaped very hardly out of the Town with the safety of his life. It is said, that the King shall have 6000 Switzers, notwithstanding that it was otherwise concluded by the Cantons in the last Diet; and therefore being contrary to their conclu∣sion, it is thought there will grow some trouble among themselves. When they come, the Kings determination is, to make a Camp volant to go from place to place, with intent to detain all such of the Religion as are thought to be men of Conduct. Upon the news of Montgomeries preparations, there is order taken along the Sea-coasts of Britain, Normandy and Picardie, to withstand his landing. They make full account that it is not possible for him to enter the Haven of Rochel, in respect of the passage that is quite stopped with stones and timber; howbeit, others of judgement say, that if he bring forces enough with him to withstand the Kings Galleys, the spring-tide will favour him all this moneth, as that the stopping of the Haven cannot be any impeachment unto him; and that if he once enter, Monsieur shall be driven to leavie his siege; for that I am credibly informed, he hath not in his whole Camp above 7000 Souldiers. By the letters of Italy, as also out of Germany, it is said, that the Duke Elector of Saxonie, is arrived secretly at the Emperors Court; what should be the cause of his repair thither, men do rather ghess at then know; all men conclude, that it is for matter of great weight and importance. The Marshal Montmorency is departed lately from the Court, some men say, neither with his own satisfacti∣on, nor yet with the Kings; others affirm the contrary. By letters sent from Antwerp, of the twentieth of March, it is reported, that there was a sore conflict at sea betwixt the Prince of Oranges men and the Duke of Alva's, in the which, those for the Duke of Alva had the worst, and were constrained to retire them∣selves within the River, to a certain place called Berge, where they are besieged by the Prince of Orange's ships, so as it is thought they can hardly escape. In this conflict, besides divers others, a Spaniard being General, was slain. I am secretly given to understand, that the King here is offered by the Princes of the League support of money, upon condition that the next year he will en∣ter into the League, if by his mediation the peace of the Turk and them of the League shall not follow. And so for Italian news, referring your Honour to these inclosed occurrents, I most humbly take my leave.
To the Earl of Leicster. YOur Lordship by Mr. Secretaries Letters shall understand at large what suc∣cess the Marshal hath had in Provence, how he hath prospered at the siege of Sansarra, and what is lately done at Rochel, who as yet continue still resolute never to yield: Notwithstanding le Noues abandoning of them. I am very sorry to condemn that Gentleman, though he be generally condemned by others, until I hear what he can say for himself. If he be not well able to ex∣cuse this his doing in this behalf, I will learn thereby the less to build upon any man, who I perceive when God withdraweth his staying hand are more weak then weakness itself. This Example therefore and others, are to teach us to build upon God, and to weigh man as he is. They are much perplexed here with the Count Montgomeries preparation; they have therefore given order all along the sea-coasts, to withstand his Landing, fearing that if he once land, he will draw great numbers unto him. They give it out, that it will not be possible for him to enter the Haven of Rochel, through certain ships sunk in the channel. But if he enter, it is certainly thought that Monsieur shal be driven to leavie his siege. Upo the event of his Entry wise men shall be able to judge what shall be the issue of this trouble here. Howsoever, he speed, I believe most assured∣ly, this Realm shall not be free from trouble, until there be vengeance taken for the innocent blood shed here, and peradventure God will have it to be the work of his own hand, for that we are so ready to depend rather upon men then upon him. I am glad that the accord in Scotland is in so good for∣wardness; for I fear, if their own troubles here were settled, we should not long be free from troubles that way. Touching a Rider, your Lordship shall understand, that there is by the pro∣curement of the Italian Captain, one stayed for you in Italie (for that here is none worth the having) who is both skilful and honest. If your Lordship will have him, then must you send into Italy a Bill of Credit for so much money as may defray his charge into England. C. Massino shal inform your Lord∣ship of the means how to send to the Gentleman that hath provided the said Rider, who is acquainted with the matter by the Italian Captain; and there∣fore shall repair to your Lordship to know your mind in this behalf. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador Resident for her Majestie in France. AFter my hearty commendations. At the last, we have not onely gotten your revocation, and Doctor Dales dispatch signed, but have also set him forward, and am glad that you shall now come out of that bloody Coun∣trey, and so be all your friends. The news of Iames Kirkaldy was not alto∣gether true; but true it was, that by treason of the Souldiers he was two or three days in Blackness, and the Keeper thereof Alexander Stuard, and his brother prisoners, but by the same sleight was the  day taken away again, and Alexander Stuard and his brother delivered, and so Iames Kirkaldy brought prisoner to the Regent, and all the money which he brought out of France, and was unspent, which was 33000 Crowns, delivered to the Regents hands, and the Castle of Blackness to Alexander Stuard, to keep it to the Kings
use; sith which time also, the Duke of Chastelherauld and the Earl of Huntley be come in, and sworn to the King for themselves, and all their kinn and followers; and very friendly agreed with the Regent, who hath behaved himself in all his actions very wisely and very moderately. There is none left now but Liding∣ton and Grange, in the Castle of Edenburgh, which refuse the King and the Re∣gents authority in all Scotland, who must either yield, or else they will be pul∣led out by the ears. De la Noues revolting doth seem strange, and maketh some men to suspect that he hath been of longer time such a one. I trust you shall come now into a quieter Countrey. And so I bid you most heartily fare∣well. Your very Friend, Thomas Smith. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador for the Queen's Majestie in France. SIr, the best news I can send you is, that Mr. Dale your successor taketh his journey hence on Wednesday next. I dare say you will wish him a speedy passage. Since I wrote to you by Walter Williams, this French Ambassador hath had new conference with her Majestie, to have procured some alteration for his advantage, of such speeches as I delivered to him in conference of the matters of the Duke of Alanson, whereof I wrote to you: And because he would obtain the same, he offered his dispatch, which I thought he would have made before me; and now you may see how late it is, for on Friday last he was here with her Majestie, and in the end her Majestie yielded she would con∣sider with me what might be altered upon the former answer, which he had put in good length in writing, whereof I send you the Copy, the same being drawn by the Ambassadour, as you may ghess, to his advantage, yet agreeable with the substance of my speeches. Hereupon the Queens Majestie consi∣dering the writing, and finding it of some length, willed me to return it to the Ambassadour, and to write to him, as I did, the Copy, as I first conceived it in English; so I did send it him, and now ye may see what is passed in this mat∣ter, wherewith the Ambassador doth send this his servant. He did also on Fri∣day sollicite Viracques dispatch, whereunto her Majestie assented: but since that yesterday her Majestie had Letters from Berwick, by which she understand∣eth, that his coming into Scotland is so much misliked, both of the Hamil∣tons, Huntley, and the rest. The Regent will not license him to come in, so as his journey shall be lost, and to tarry at Berwick were not convenient, so I think this is not to depart so soon. The Ambassador saith, that the Duke his Master writeth vehemently to move the Queens Majestie about ayding of the Count Mountgomery, wherein her Majestie hath throughly answered him, that he is departed without any her ayd, directly and indirectly; and truly he departed with great mislking, in that all his French ships were taken as Pyrats, the men to the number of  imprisoned, and many died, some hanged, and all their prizes taken from them; so as you may avow that the C. had cause of no small offence. And if he have any favour without her Majs. kowledge, it is by some bargain made by Merchants of France, with the English Merchants, for money to be given for salt, &c. Hereof the Ambassador desireth
that you will inform the King, that his report may accord with the same. We do also stay the Lord Levingstone for like respect as we do Viracque. And thus I nd, not doubting but Mr-Secretary writeth of other common things. Yours assuredly, William Burleigh. Iames Fitz-morice the Rebel, with all his sequel, submitted himself to Sir Iohn Parrot in Ireland; so that all Munster is free from Rebellion. Here hth been a murther committed about Shooters-hill, somewhat to the reproof of this place; and herein I have used such care, as the party is taken, being one Brown an Irish man, who had served, and is put from my Lord of Oxfords seruice. To the Right Honourable Francis Walsingham Esq Ambassador Resident for her Majestie in France. SIr, now cometh your Successor so long desired: I doubt not, but both for his own comfort, that he may willingly enter into that charge, which for the Queens Majesties service, you will sufficiently instruct him how he shall best serve, and therein so deal with him: And if in conference you find any rawness and imperfection, you do not forbear, but like a Tutor, teach him to inform; for so I know he shall be greatly bound to you; and so it is necessary. Let him also understand, whom he may trust, and so to use them, that it good will and conscience be, they take no harm; wherein I have straitly charged him to be religious. Procure the Queen Mother to think well of him. I am very fearful that he shall do well for many causes, but for none more then to avoid the Queens Majesties displeasure, which I am assured of, for that I did chuse him to relieve you. If he should not content her Majestie in this ser∣vice, he hath required me, that you would give leave, and perswade, that your Secretary might continue with him a while. Now I end, because he is going. From London the first of April, 1572. Yours assuredly, William Burleigh.
By the QUEEN. To our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Francis Walsingham, our Am∣bassador Resident with our good Brother the French King. ELIZABETH R. TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well: Whereas you often made suit unto us to be revoked from that charge, albeit we could have been well pleased that you should have tarried there still, for the great sufficiency that we know in you, and the faithful and discreet handling, for our service; yet we have thought good, at your friends requests and desires for your re∣turn, to yield unto your suit: And therefore we let you wot, That seeing you are so desirous to return home▪ we have made choice of our trustie and well-beloved Valentine Dale, Doctor of the Law, and one of our Masters of the Requests extraordinarie, this bearer, to be your Successor there; and to that end have written our Letters to the King our good brother, and to the Queen Mother; Wherefore our pleasure is, That you do not onely repair with him unto them, with the delivery of our said Letters; but also, before your depar∣ture from thence, participate unto him all your instructions, and such other things as you shall think meet and expedient for him to know for the furtherance of our service: And also, as you can, bring him acquainted with those by whom he may have best understanding of that Court, and the affairs necessary for us to be known. And that you do leave with him such vessel, plate, and other furniture that you have of ours, taking his writing under his hand and seal, of the receit of the same for your discharge. These things done, we are pleased that you make your repair unto us with some convenient speed, as you shall think meet. Given under our Signet at our Mannor of Richmond, the nineteenth of March, 1572. in the fifteenth year of our Reign. Response faicte aux Messieurs les Ambassadeur de France 20 August, 1573. PRemierement que le Message qu'a este envyé d'icy a l'Amb. de la Royne resident en France, on a esté mal rapporté on mal entendu par le dict Ambassadeur. Car il ne s'accorde pas avec ce qu'en a esté faict dans les Lettres du Roy treschrestin escripts a son Ambassadeur. En ce seroyt vrayment une grande absurdité, si sa Majeste premierement a son Ambassadeur eust mandé dire, qu'il estoit impos∣sible que le mariage eust en effect, et puis apres incontinent eust demandé ou parlé d'une entreveue; vray est que par les premiers le dit Ambassadeur avoit charge de dire que pour la difference des aages sa Majeste trouve la chose fort difficile de'ac∣corder tel mariage; Et que pour raison de cés difficultés son entendement ne se pouvoit de faire de doubtes qu'on y trouvoit, si ne se pouvoit trouver quelque aide expedient pour recompense: Et ce fut la somme des premieres Lettres comme il pourroit apparoistre par la copie: Les secondes que suyvoyent les aide incontinent apres avoyent cecy en somme a l'Ambassadeur qu'il avoit en charge de dire que sa Majeste voyant la continuelle sollicitation du Roy et de la Royne mere du Roy en ce cas de marriage, Et mesmes plus fresches Lettre bayllees par l'Ambassadeur du dit Sr Roy environ le 23 Iuin a la maison de Monsieur Tresorier, trouve bon apres avoir escript sa premiere lettre de adjouster encores cecy a la seconde, a finde fair
apparoistre, l'esgard qu'elle avoit des asiduelles requestes du dit Sr. Roy. Cest quelle trouve deux principax empeschements, entre aultres, l'une la cause de la Religion se pourroit remedier par quelque conformit procedant du Duc mesme. Ainsi l'autre pourroit sembler estre difficile plust osten opinion qu'en substance. Et qu'anssi elle veoit pour le plus souvent que rien ne governe plu aux mariges ou doibt bien considerer comment une pourroit estre agreeable a l autre que de sa∣tisfaire leurs opinions par la veüe de l'un et l'autre & especialement en ce cas icy, considerant que ceulx que ont ve, le Duc n'osent affirmer s'il pourroit estre agreeable ou non a sa Majeste combien qu en plusieurs choses ils se prisent fort, & semblablement sa Majeste, y adjouste encores pour estre aussi declaré par son Ambassadeur que d'autant quelle pensoit cecy estre chose qu'on luy ac∣corderent pas facilement combien toutesfois qu'on l uy a faict personage d'aussi grand estat qu est le Duc D Alanon quelle le remectoit a la consideration, du dit Roy et Royne: dont elle luy donne charge de dire, qu'elle n'avoit pensé d'en faire mention si premierement n'eust appar ceu par les Lettres tant du dit Duc mesme, que de la dite Dame Royne mere escripts a l'Ambassadeur icy le desire que le dict Duc avoit de soy mesme de venir de pardea pou veoir & pour estre veude sa Ma∣jesté. Et en le fin sa Majest donne charge a son Ambassadeur de conclurre en ceste sorte. C'est s'il n'ust este pour le desire qu'elle a de proceder platement & overtement en cet affaire, en qu'elle se veoit tant provoquer par la grande affection du dit Sr Roy et Duc envers elle, elle se fut deporte d'en faire aucune mention, comme elle esperoit qu'on n'eu feroient aultre interpretation que bonne et que on ne soubonneroit que sa Majestè auroit aucun intention d'abuser le d. Duc. Et pourtant quant a l'entrevene sa Majeste le laisse a la consideration du Roy et de la Royne mere, & a l'amour & r'asis jugement lesquells elle scait tresbie qui ls ne ferieont rien que ne soit a l'honneur du dit Duc le frere & sils pour ce qui'llny semble chose qu'elle n'offeroit desirer de peur de quelque discontement que pourroit ensuiure si ces choses ne sortassent a la fin desirée, mesmement veu que la Royne par ces parolles and Ambassadeur en France sembloit grandement doubter, pour ce que les entreveues des Princes out eues quelque fois une mauvaise issue que quelque in convenient ne sui voit a la diminution de l'amitie mutuelle la queile, sa Maj. desire estre continue in plustost augmentée que diminuée. Au reste que touts les articles quant au marriage de Mons. le Duc d'Alanson mutatis mutandis forsque l'interpretation ou esclaircissement des doubtes sur l'article touchant la Religion l'es quelles seront remises a estre determinées par sa Majeste & l'dit Duc en l'entrevene. N Ous Francois de Burbon Pr: Daulphin de Auvergne de St. Iergean et du pais puysan pair de France, Marquis de Mazieres, Cont de Bar sur Seine et aizoile Baron de Mirebeau, Governeur et Lieutenant-General de sa Majeste, et balliages d'Orleans, Chartres, Blois et pais adiacens, Artus de Cosse Counte de Segond, Mares∣chal de France, Loys de Lusignan de St. Gelais Sr. de Lansac Chevalier Chr. de deux ordres du Roy, Counseillier en son Conseild▪ estat, & privè du Roy, Cap. de cènt homnes d'Armes de ses Ordonnances, Governeur et son Lieutenant-General au pais de Rouen et Eureux, Tannerguy le venuer Barthram de Salignac Sr de la Mothe Fenellon Chr'des dictes deux ordres et Conseillier s dicts Conseills d'estat et privè Michel de Chasteauneuf. Sr. de Mauvisire Chr'de l'ordre St. Michel Gen∣tilhomme de la Chambre du Roy Cap. de cinquante hommes d'armes de ses Or∣donnances Conseillier en son conseil privè Governeur de la ville & Chasteau de St. Disiers et son Ambassadeur Resident en ce Royaulme Barnabe Brisson, Sr. de Gra∣nele Conseillier du Roy en son dict Conseil prive et president en sa Cour de Parlia∣ment Claude Pynart Sr. de Carmailles Premier Baron de Va ois Conseillier du
Roy en son Conseil priv Secretaire d'estate & de ses Finances Pierre de Claise Sr. de Cournces et Marchiamont, Conseillier en son dict Conseil priv Chambellan Conseillier de Mon Sr. le Duc d'Anjou et d'Alanson son frere uniq et Iaques de Vray Sr. de Foulorte ausi Conseillier de Mon dict Sr. le Duc et Secretaire des fi∣nances, Attestons estre vray qu'au parauant que rediger en forme de contracte les articles y devant traictes entre les Srs. Commissaires et deputes de la ser. Royne d'Angleterre et le Sr. de symger ausi Commissaire de dicte tresillustre Duc d'Anjou le 24 jour de Novembre, 1579. pour le faict Icelle dame Royne a expressement de∣clairè et reservè, qu en virtu du dict contract elle n entendestre obligee & estrainte a l'accomplissement: et consummation du dict mariage jusques a ce que la dicte dame Royne & le dict tresillustre Duc se soient mutuellement esclaireis et satisfaicts d' aucunes, choses particulieres entre eux dout sa dicte ser. Majeste & sa dicte altess certifieront par escrit le dict Roy tres-christien de dans six sepmaines prochames et soubs ceste reservation susdicte et non autrement a esté le dict contract de mariage, signe et passe par le Srs. Guilliaume Cecil Sr. de Bur∣leigh grand Tresorier d'Angletterre Mre. Curateur de tous Pupilles et des Charges de la couronne d'Angleterre. Edoüard Conte de Lincoln Sr. de Clinton et grand Admiral d'Angletrre et Cap. General des armes de la Mer, d'icelle sere. Royne, Thomas Conte de Sussex Viscont de fitzwater Sr. d'Egremont et de Burnel Cap. de tous les gentilhommes pensionaires d'icelle sere. Royne Iusticier de toutes forrestes, parcs et chases de dela, la riviere de Trent, son Chambellan, Franois Conte de Bedford Sr. de Russel Rob. Conte de Leicester Sr. de Denbigh Chr. de l'ordre St. Michel grand Esquier de la dicte sere. Royne, tous Chr. de l'ordre de la Iar∣tiere d'icelle dame Royne, Christofer Hatton Chr. son Vice-chambellan et premier Cap. de ses gardes et Franois Walsingham ausi Chr. primier des deux princi∣paux Secretaires de la dicte sere. Royne et Chanchellier de susdict ordre de la Iar∣tiere Commissaires Commiss. et deputés par icelle dame Royne. En tesmoign de ce que dessus nous avons ensemblement signe ces presentes a Londres le 11 jour de Iuin l'an 1581. François Burbon Artus de Cosse. Loys de Lusignian. Tannergus le Veneur. Bertram de Fenelon. Michel de Chasteauneuf. Brissan. Pynart. Uray. W. Burleigh. Ed. Lincolne. Tho: Sussex. Fra: Bedford. Ro: Leicester. Chr. Hatton. Fra: Walsingham.
A Tres Christien Roy de France. ELIZABETH R. TRes-hault, &c. comme en la reservation faict sur le contraict de nostre mariage le xi jour de Iuin dernier passé il soit expressement declarè que ne serions obligèe ny estrainte en vertu du dict contraict a l'accomplissement on con∣summation du dict mariage si nous et Monsieur le Duc vostre frere ne vous don∣nious a entendre dedans six sepmaines prochemement en suivantes entier esclair∣cissement et satisfaction mutuelle sur quelques particularités; et ayons depuis pour satisfaire a nostre promesse depesche vers vous et le dict Sr. Duc, nostre ser∣viteur le Sr. de sommer fourni des Instructions bien amples pour traicter avec vous sur quelques points d'importance dout nous attendous plus prompte response pour selon icelle vous esclaircir sur les dites particularitez dedans le terme pre∣fix; mais d'autant que les choses que vous avez proposées tant a nostre Ambassadeur, qu'a nostre dict et serviteur sommer sont de plus grande consequence que de pouvoir estre, plemement considers dans si peu de temps, ayant deliberé de depescher bien ost par devers vous un personnage instruict a plein de nostre in∣tention et volunté quant aux dictes choses par vous proposses: nous n'avons ce∣pendant voulu obettre (a fin que ne recevant nostre response au temps prefix vous n'estimiez que nostre intention n'est de nous tem. au contraict) de vous tes∣moigner par la presente suivant le desir qu a nous avos de vous donnier entiere satisfaction et contentement de tous nous de portements, que sera la in.
Instructions for Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, her Majesties principal Secretary sent into France to the French King, and to Monsieur the Duke of Anjou 22. of July 1581. ELIZABETH R. FOr that you are throughly acquainted with all the Negotiations passed concerning the marriage desired by Mr. and do know the causes of the prolongation of the conclusion thereof, not to have proceeded of us without just grounds, there shall be less need to enlarge these instructions by writing, but to make rather a memorial for you of the matter in your own presence conclu∣ded for answer to such things as of late hath been delivered by the French King, to Sommers for which purpose we have made special choice of you for the bet∣ter satisfaction of the French King▪ And our meaning is, that you shall make the Duke acquainted with this your message, and to cause the French King to accept the same your action in good part. The matters propounded by the French King be these. 1 A request (upon a supposition made by the French King, that the marri∣age was accorded) that we would assign a day within which the marriage should be consummate; and in some speech he also named a day. 2 An offer that the marriage being promised and the day assigned, that the King would upon knowlenge thereof, enter with us into a League offensive and defensive, and ratifie the same; and cause it to be delivered at the instant of the consummation of the marriage. 3 A motion that a secret agreement might be made apart betwixt the King and us for the matters of Low-Countries. To these three you shall shew the Duke what we have resolved for answer to the King, whereof we have willed you to make him acquainted, and you shall move him by such Reasons as are both true and known to your self, how loath we are to deliver any thing to his misliking, if the necessity of the time and the matter did not force us thereto. Therefore to the first request of the French King, grounded upon the suppo∣sition that the marriage is accorded, you shall shew him how that it is otherwise to be understood, for that the whole Treaty indeed is suspended by an act accor∣ded by the Commissioners, whereof you can make him a particular declaration, and for the purpose you shall shew him the cause of our long prolongation of the time therein limited, which also we do give you authority by word in our ge∣neral Commission further to enlarge as you shall see cause. And to the request for assignation of a day for the marriage, you shall declare, that for divers considerations, we cannot finde it good either for Monsieur or for our selves to assent to the marriage with him as the case standeth, whereby he being already entred into an open war against the King of Spain, should by marri∣age bring us & our Realm also into a war, which in no respect our Realm and sub∣jects
can accept with the marriage. but the same would prove very ingrateful to our people▪ and ingender a misliking of us both, as you may well enlarge that point the rather considering it is seen how hardly many have been brought to allow of the marriage without any war. And therefore upon this point we nevertheless thus concluded, that though the marriage cannot be allowable with a war for those respects, yet considering how necessary it is for the Crown of France, as well as for ours, yea, for all Chri∣stendom, that the King of Spains greatness should be impeached, and this ac∣count of Monsieurs should be prosecuted in the Low-Countries, we shall be content (though we do not marry) to joyn with the French King to ayd Mon∣sieur with a reasonable portion, so as it may not be so overtly, as thereby to pr∣voke a war upon us and our Realm, and herewith you shall set forth the necessi∣ty of the continuance of Monsieurs actions now in hand, as if he will answer, that he will lean to our marriage, you shall answer that there cannot be so much profit either to himself, or to the French King and his Realm, or to us and our Realm by the marriage, as by the continuance of this action to the abating of the Spanish Kings greatness, which if it be not interrupted speedily, will so in∣counter both France and England, as neither the marriage, nor any conjuncti∣on of the forces of France and England can hereafter stay or remedy. And if it shall be objected by Monsieur, that the offer to ayd him secretly will serve him to no purpose, For that he knoweth that the King his brother will either not ayd him at all, or will not ayd him otherwise then secretly, as will not serve him to purpose, so as he must be forced to leave his enterprise, you shall still maintain our offer to be reasonable. But if you shall finde Monsieur so ear∣nest to mislike thereof, as you shall perceive him resolute to leave off the enter∣prize, except we will joyn with the King in such manner of ayd as his brother will be content, then you may after some pawsing say, that if upon conference with the French, it shall appear that he cannot be content with our secret ayd We would be content rather then the Dukes actions should utterly quaile to yield to joyn with the French King by League and Contract both to ayd him, as shall be thought reasonable betwixt the King and us. And also some other ways to im∣peach the King of Spains greatness, but if the Duke could be contented with our secret ayd, we think it should be no hinderance to him, and yet a great con∣tentation to us, for so we might avoid the offence of our people, and so you shall earnestly entreat the Duke to be content therewith. As to the other two points for making of a League offensive and defensive, and for a secret agreement for the matters of the Low-Countries, we shall be ready to make with the King his Brother, a League offensive and defensive, and for the matters of the Low-Countries, we will therein do as before is ex∣pressed, if the secret aiding may in no sort be accepted by the French King. And thus leaving to your discretion how to perswade Monsieur, that ths not assenting to the marriage, proceedeth not of lack of Love or Good-will towards him, but of meer necessity to avoid the just offence of our people, you shall use all good perswasions to temper his misliking thereof, with the assurance of the continuance of our love towards him in all his fortunes hereafter to fol∣low. And now when you shall return from Monsieur to the French King, you are for answering the first point, to shew our minde thereto with the like Argu∣ments and Reasons, as before is contained, in that you shall have said to Mon∣sieur, which need not here to be repeated in writing.
And if the French King shall not allow of our foremost offer for our secret aiding of Monsieur in his actions, but will refuse the same peremptorily, and so procure Monsieur to leave his enterprize for lack of our further yielding, then you shall yield to the second afore remembred, that we will rather then the en∣terprize should fail, and thereby the King of Spains greatness encrease, joyn with the King as is remembred. But except Monsieur shall object against the manner of our ayd in secret sort, as is before remembred, you shall not need to yield ours to offer to Monsieur that second degree, nor make any mention there∣of, for after that being opened, and the French King being therewith acqnainted before your access unto him, it shall be in vain to stand with the French King up∣on the offer of the first degree for a secret ayd; so as if you shall be urged by Monsieurs answers to fall to the second, to yield to an open ayd, then you may onely repeat the first to the King, and therewith to add, that if that manner of ayd shall neither content the French King nor Monsieur, then we will assent to joyn with the French King in such manner as shall be found reasonable for us both, and for the cause. And so our meaning is, that you shall if you can possi∣ble, in this sort put of the marriage with yielding to this latter open sort of aid∣ing, if the secret ayd shall not be allowed, and therewith you shall declare by this our Answer, the other two points for a League offensive and defensive, and for a secret accord for the Low Countries, to be in a sort answered. But for more particular instructions of you, how to proceed in these two latter matters, you shall have for them, both a Commission general for your self, and our Ambassador, and Sommers to treat therupon, and with the said Commission you shall have some other particular instructions, such as the short time may yield, And whensoever you shall enter to treat thereon, after knowledge had from you there shall be more particular matters called to remembrance and sent unto you. But now if you shall after all good Reasons used to perswade the staying of the marriage, with the offers to joyn with the French King, and both with aiding of his Brother, and if it be moved to you, or otherwise thought reasonable to be by you mentioned to joyn also in the ayding of Dn Anthonio pretending to be the King of Portugal, that notwithstanding this your proceeding, that the King will yield to none of these but with the marriage, as hitherto by his former Answers have appeared, he would not you should persist in setting forth the ne∣cessities of the Crown of France, both presently and for time to come, as also you shall confess the like for England, to begin timely to abate the King of Sp. greatness, and that though there had been never marriage spoken of; yea, that wheresoever Monsieur may marry in an other place, yet it shall prove a great error both in the Frinch King and us, to leave the King of Spain to encrease to such greatness, as hereafter neither the force of France, nor England, no nor a∣ny that may be confederate with them, shall be able to withstand any thing that the King of Spain shall attempt. And if these Reasons cannot prevail, you shall leave off, declaring your great grief that the forbearing of the marriage, grounded upon the evident mis∣liking of our subjects, should be the cause of the forbearing to do so great a good to Christendom, as the conjunction of the King and us might bring, though the matter took not place, and so you shall end and speedily advertise us of your proceedings.
Instructions for the treaty of a League offensive and defensive, betwixt us and the French King, and for other things depending thereupon. ELIZABETH R. WHen it shall appear upon your other treating with the K. according to such other instructions as you have, that it shalbe required and found conveni∣ent that there be a League made for a strict Amity between us and the French King and that the same shall be found good for us both, in respect of the King of Spains growing overgreat, to continue a peaceable neighbor; you shal require first that the Treaty made for a mutual defence betwixt the French Kings brother Charles the ninth and us, and which also hath been confirmed by a special clause in the Treaty, that shall now be newly made, and thereupon shall it be considered what other new Covenants that are not already contained in the former Trea∣ty, shall be made to make our Amity streighter against any that shall commit a∣ny hostile act by invasion of any of our Countries, which we now possess or have possessed any time these 20 yeers; and to that end you shall move an assent, that from henceforth we and the King shall, during our lives, be united in heart and minde, for confirmation of our honors, persons, states, dignities, king∣doms and dominions, to either of us belonging; so as from henceforth we and the King shall be against all persons friends to friends, and enemies to enemies, notwithstanding any former Leagues or Confederations with any other, or not∣withstanding any Councels, Perswasions, or Motions to be made to either of us by any Potentate or person spiritual or temporal, to the contrary of the tenour of this League. Item, You shall Covenant, that if any King, Potentate or other person shall offend or procure offence to us in our person, honor, dignity or estate; or shall take away or impeach and  any of our Kingdoms or Countries, the French King shall repute and accept the same offence as done to himself or his Countries, and shall in like manner with all his power impugn the same as though the offence were made to himself, and we also shall be bound in like sort to the French King, mutatis mutandis. Item, It shall be mutually covenanted, that all Traytors and manifest Rebels against either of us, shall be declared and used as enemies or Rebels of the other, and that no residence or traffique be suffered for any of them in the others Count∣tries. Item, It shall be covenanted that if any person shall invade as an enemy, the Countries of any other that upon signification thereof duely made, the Prince certifyed, shall declare the invader to be his enemy, and so shall continue in all manner of actions an enemy to the invader, and his Country and Subjects, until the invader shall have satisfied the Prince invaded, and that no satisfaction or composition, or accord shall be made by the Prince invaded without the assent and liking of the other Prince Confederate. Item, If for defence of either partie a greater supply of force shall be re∣quisite then is contained in the Treaty made with Charls the ninth, the Prince that shall have need to require a greater supply, shall signifie the same to the other not invaded, and the party not invaded, shall upon request yield all other succors that he can, at the reasonable charges of the party invaded that shall so re∣quire a further ayd. Item, It is good to convenant that neither of the Princes shall at any time hereafter give aid to any enemy of any other Prince with whom now they are in
peace thereby to provoke the other third Prince to make war or invasion for that cause of ayd given; but that before the ayd shall be given, the Prince meaning to give such ayd, shall first advertise the other confederate; and have his allowance thereof. In the word of ayding shall not be meant any other kind of ayd but such as shall make the enemy ayded, thereby able to use open hosti∣lity against the third Prince. To Sir Henry Cobham, and Mr. Sommers. AFter my very hearty commendations, for as much as her Maj. pleasure was that I should first make my repair to Monsieur, before I came to the Kings presence, and the state of my business standeth so, that I cannot well dispose of my journey, before I have had some conference with you touching the charge committed to me and you, I have therefore thought good to pray you to meet me at Clermont on Saterday at night where God willing I mean to be, how pain∣ful soever the travel may be to me, for that the necessity of her Majesties service so requireth, and so I leave you to God, Bulloign Iuly 27. 1581. Your assured loving friend, Fr. Walsingham. To the Rght Honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer. MY very good Lord, I arrived here this Thursday morning somewhat di∣stempered in body, as well for want of two nights sleep, as by reason of our posting to Dover, this violent travail, agreeing not very well with me who have now been used to long rest of body; and therefore I have been driven to stay here all this day to refresh my self, whereby I might be the better able to go forward with speed, meaning God willing, to be at Clermont, a place four Posts distance from Paris upon Saterday, where I have appointed Sir Henry Cobham, and Mr. Sommers to meet, and to the end I may before my going to Monsieur, receive some light and particular information from them of the present state of things here, for the better furtherance of this service, I am driven to make more haste in my journey, for that the term of the prolongation of the Reservation endeth upon Thursday next. Since my coming hither, I understand that the Ministers here were forbidden about six weeks past, the exercise of Religion, by Crevecoeur the Gunner Master, whereupon they have dispatched one to the King to be an humble suiter unto him in their name that they may be permitted to use their freedom and liberty in that behalf accordingly as by his Edicts and Procla∣mations it is granted unto them, which is all the news that I can as yet write unto your Lordship out of these parts. After I had finished these Letters I received the inclosed from Sir Henry Cobham by the which your Lordship may perceive that my coming putteth them in more hope then will be answered with effects according to their expectation, if the contents of the said Letters be true, a little egging one with a resolution to assent to an open assistance (though it were performed with a less sum) would set the two great ones a work, and keep them from uniting of them∣selves
against our Soveraign, a matter greatly or rather assuredly to be feared; and therefore in respect of a little charges not to be stuck at; the Instructions signed by her Majestie, do give me Authoritie (in case the King shall perempto∣rily insist upon assistance, in such sort as without the same he will refuse to en∣ter into the intended action against Spain) to yield hereunto: but her Maje∣sties own speech since the signing of the Instructions hath restrained me in that behalf. I would therefore be glad to know her Majesties pleasure therein, lest that if upon my denyal of yielding to an open assistance, there should ensue a breach of the Treaty, the blame hereafter might be laid on me, having warrant from her Majestie to yield therein, and so for the present having no other matter to impart to your Lordship, I humbly take my leave, Bulloign Iuly the 28 1581. Your Lordships to command Francis Walsingham. To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham. THe Queen mother in the absence of the King, being now at St. Ger∣mains (but ready to return) hath taken order in such sort as your Ho∣nour shall be lodged in Madame de Carmualles house which is by their Maje∣sties appointment furnished very honorably, as your servant this bearer hath seen. It seemeth the King is determined to chear you and all yours, according to the appointment they make, the care thereof is assigned to Monsieur La Mothe Fenellon, as likewise for the receiving of you, the which I have signifi∣de to Mr Burnham. But it seemeth they look not for your present repair hi∣ther, because Arnolde hath informed them you are by the Queens Majestie ap∣pointed to pass first unto Monsieur: Therefore (if it please you) methinks it is somewhat requisite you did send one afore, whereby I may assure them of your certain resolution therein: Their Majesties are most glad of your coming having received good hope of the Queens resolution for the ending of the great cause and Amitie which they long to understand. I have been informed the King revoketh his Ambassador leiger Monsieur Sangrade from the Spanish Court, leaving a private Gentleman to be Agent. The King hath monied Monsieur, and hath accorded to him a placet the which they inform me will be worth one hundred thousand Crowns and more. It is further said, the King shall give Commandment for to Attache and Arrest the three hundred thousand Crowns which were in a readiness in Lyons for to be transported through Sa∣voy into Flanders, for the use of the Prince of Parma. The Quen mother hunted the Buk yesterday at Bois de St. Vincent, and this day also at St. Maure the Woolf; Monsieur is this day at Provence five leagues besides Chasteau Thi∣ery. It is advertised that the Emperour doth by little & little amend of his disease, having been carried to his Garden to take the ayre, but no assurance of his full recovery. The Cardinal d▪Este is returned to Rome, having been met with the Duke of Sora, the Popes son. They do prepare ten Galleys at Naples, besides others at Genua to transport the Empress into Spain: Prospero Colonna is ap∣pointed General of the Men of War, which are levied in the Dutchies of Milan and Tuscan. There hath been a quarrel betwixt the Spaniards and Gen∣tlemen Millanoises. The King of Spain hath been received in Lisbona
and held there his estate called Cortes. There is a deprivation passed against the Bishop of Guarda for following the partie of Don Anthonio. The Ab∣bot of Bisegno Agent for the Catholike King at Rome, hath with the Cardi∣nal of Como sollicited the Pope for to intreat the French King to withdraw his brother from the enterprise of Flanders, so as the Pope is resolved to send two Legats to the French King, to continue the peace between the French King and the Catholike King. Onchibli is departed from Constantinople with twenty five Galleys towards Affrica. They advertise out of Spain, that the Corn doth fail them this Harvest, so as they doubt of famine, &c. Your Honours to Command, Henry Cobham. A son bon ami Mr. François de Walsingham. M Onsieur de Walsingham j'ay une extreme contentement quand la Royne m▪a voula tant favouriser de vous avoir choisy pour faire ce royage vers le Roy mon Seignieur et frere me faisant bien par cela cognoistre les effectes de ses bonnes voluntés, me comblant de tant d'obligations, que je ne m'en pouroy jamais retirer si ce n'est par le continuel desir et inviolable affection que je ay de luy faire service. Et ce suistres-aise de m'estre trouve y a propos que n'estant que fort peuesloigne de votre chemni vous me passies veoir sans perie de beaucoup de temps vous priant que se suit La Fere en Tartinois ou je seray aujourdhuy a cou∣cher et croyez que vous seres le tres-bien venu comme iceluy que tient l'un de pri∣miers bieux apres de celle que je honore et estime plus que Princesse que soit sus la terre et que tiens pour l'un de mes mieux amis. Vous attendant en bon devo∣tion de supplieray le Createur qu'il vous ayd Monsieur de Walsingham en sa tes Saincte et digne garde, a Chasteau Thiery le dernier jour de Iuliel 1581. Votre bien affectione ami François.
To the right honorable Sir Francis Walsingham. SIR, The sending of this away by Mr. Mills to you, moveth me to accompany him with a few lines. We here have nothing to write unto you about the Negotiation, but doe now from this day forward look to hear from you; whereupon I think her Majestie will have some matter to be occupied withall. VVe hear nothing of Monsieurs proceedings; but the Spanish Ambassador warneth that the Prince of Parma is so strong, and so bent to fight with Monsieur, as he pretendeth that at the least Monsieur will forbear to ad∣venture his own person. He did yesterday by her Majesties appointment, speak at Leicester House with my Lord of Ley and me, to expostulate for her Maje∣sties refusal to speak with him, requiring to know the cause; and being answer∣ed, That we doubted not but that he oftentimes had been made privy, that it was for that her Majestie had not received any Letters from the King Catho∣lique for her satisfaction in the case of Invasion in Holland, &c. He saith, that he never promised to procure Letters from the King, neither was he ever re∣quired of her Majesties behalf; but the Speeches were alwaies delivered to him, that her Majestie would not speak with him untill she might be satisfied of those things in the case of Holland; but saith it was not required that he should send to the King for any such satisfaction, and yet he did for his own part write to the King; and upon answer from the King, he did let her Majestie understand that the Collection of the Souldiers, the Arming and Victualing of the Ships, and men, were wholly by the directions of the Pope, whom he could not deny; and he had also cause to think that her Majestie meant not that he should pro∣cure Letters from the King, for that Mr. Wilks said that her Majestie would send a Gentleman to the King, or else write to him by the way of trade: And for confirmation hereof, he said that he heard that a kinsman of the Earl of Arun∣dels and Master of the  whom we took to be Tilney, was named to go in∣to Spain. By the way he saith that you told him in presence of the Councel at Nonsuch, that her Majestie had no League with the King of Spain, but the States of the Low Countries; I told him I was assured he mistook you; for you might say that the League, which was the greatest, was with the Emperor Charls, and so with the King of Spain, in respect of the Dutchy of Burgundy and the Low-Countries; but he flung away after his hot manner. Now to end these matters, for the discovery of a multitude of Popish sub∣jects, I think Mr. Beal writeth to you of a number of choice persons, who being at least but fined upon that que Dam noble wil yield a great sum of money. My Lord Grey and Tyrwick were about a Peace the 29 of July, finding my Lord Deputies forces ready to enter one way, and Sir Nicholas Malt, by ano∣ther way, offering to my Lord Deputy to abide his Order for the matters be∣tween Odonell and the whole Countrie he hath wasted, pretending to set upon Odonels son, begotten of Tirleghes wives daughter, which he had by Mac Con∣nel, by Ashton that came from Ireland, we secretly understand that the new Earl Arrig, with a great number, are determined to keep Darbique from his in∣tentions against the Religion, and the King doth secretly assent thereto; whe∣ther Ashton be deceived, time will prove. The King hath sent to Seffade 200 souldiers, to enable him to compel his people to answer to Justice upon de∣mand of England, and great promises are made in the Kings behalf to keep a∣mity with her Majestie. And thus, almost wearied, I end, expecting shortly to
hear of your progress in your Ambassage, which they there may enterprise a regress, or a recess. Her Majestie is in very good health, thanked be God. Greenwich, where I am tyed by your absence, and yet do little good, Au∣gst 6. 1581. Your assured friend, Will. Burleigh. To her Majestie, August 6. IT may please your most excellent Majestie, I have imparted in my Letters directed to my Lord Treasurer, the substance of that which passed in con∣ference, both with the Duke, and certain Commissioners appointed by him to conferr with me touching the said matters, which by your Highness order I was directed to communicate unto him. The day following, at such time as I took my leave of him, I had long conference with him, the principal points whereof I thought meet to impart to your Majesties self. At my access unto him, he took me aside into a place between the wall and his bed, and caused me to sit down by him, telling me that he was not now to confer with me as a brother of France, but as a servant to the Queen my Mi∣stress, with a confident servant of hers, and therefore would deal frankly and plainly with me. And so at the first he declared unto me that he was very sorry to understand, as well by my speeches, as by the report of the Com∣missioners appointed to conferr with me, that your Highness had taken so hard a resolution in a cause he had so long pursued, and whereof he hoped present∣ly to have received the fruits of his travel; that his affection was not so light or so loosly setled, as that he could resolve with himself to give over the matter, so neither could he believe but that I had brought some matter of more com∣fort unto him: Whereunto I replyed, that it was hard to give Law to af∣fection, and therefore did leave it to his own best judgement, to take such course therein as he thought meet. But as touching the having of any Com∣mission to deliver unto him any other matter then that I had already impart∣ed unto him; I did protest unto him I had not. Then he declared unto me, that seeing I had no other Commission, he would forbear any further dealing with me in that case; and so proceeded to let me understand how resolute I should find the King not to assent to League without Marriage; besides, he said he feared that this resolution of your Majesties, might make the King grow cold in the action he had taken upon him. I thereupon shewed him, that I hoped when the King should duely consider such reasons as I was directed to lay before him for the necessity of the League, being, as he was, a Prince of judgement, and assisted with no ill Councel, he would not reject so honoura∣ble and profitable an offer, unless it were to gratifie him, thinking that by standing upon the point of the marriage to be accompanied with the League, and otherwise not to take place, he should the rather draw your Majestie to marry, upon doubt of such perils as otherwise might fall upon your Estate. Whereupon he protested unto me, that he had dealt very effectually with the King sundry waies by his Ministers and friends, to induce him to proceed to the conclusion of the League, and could never draw him to yield thereunto; I then told him I feared I should hold
him a very cold advocate in that cause; notwithstanding I prayed him as one that professed to be so greatly devoted to your Majestie, to let me understand what were the principal causes that might move the King to forbear to proceed in the League, for that by knowledge of them aforehand, I should be the better able to Treat with the King, he then shewed me, that (be∣sides the factions of the Court, and the practises of such as were corrupt∣ed by Spain, who did propound sundry impediments.) There were two principal matters that were put into the Kings head, that wrought a stay in him in that behalf: The one, the doubt he had of your Majesties perseverance in the performing and due observation of the said League, fearing lest when he should be imbarqued, your Majestie would slip the Collar. The second, That some perswasions have been used towards him, that England and the Low-Counntreys making profession of one Religion, after that Spain and the Crown of France should be im∣barqued in a Warre, would become lookers on. To the first doubt I shewed him, that I heard his Highnesse would be respondent for your Majestie, that you would not take so dishonorable a course, as to abandon your associate without some special cause given. The other I said was very weak, for that no man of discourse or judgement, could think that England and the Low-Countreys, would minister unto France so just an occasion of offence, whereby France and Spain growing to some composition, might upon so just ground, take some dangerous re∣venge. He then did declare unto me, that the Court was divided into factions, and that such as were inclined unto Spain, did seek by all means to make the King jealous of your Majesties friendship: For removing whereof, he said he had traveled with his friends to the uttermost of his power, but that the nature of the King his brother was such, that what he had once conceived, he would not easily be removed from it, and therefore was to be left to be wrought in time, whereof he had some good experience, touching this his enterprise upon the Low-Countries; wherein though at some times he had found him favourable and forward enough to counte∣nance him in the action; yet soon after, through the perswasion of such as had affected Spain, he found him altered, in so much, that what could be drawn from him, was rather by force, then any good affection he seemed to bear to this enterprise, which difficulties notwithstanding, upon Declaration made by me, how evil it would come to passe for the affairs of the Low-Countreys, if the League between your Maje∣stie and his Brother should not goe forward, for that the better sort, and such as doe affect this League, would be discouraged, and the contrary part much enlarged He answered me, That he would doe any thing that might be for the Queens service. I delivered also to his Highness, the care that your Majestie hath of his safety, and therefore that you wished that he should not goe this Voyage in person, but commit the conduct of it to some other sufficient personage of quality, and meet for the enterprise; and moreover, that your Majestie could not but advise him to seek to be advised and assisted with good and sufficient Councellers fit for the ordering of so great an enterprise. After thanks rendred for your Majesties care of him, he said that the Noble men and Gentlemen which were com to accompany him in this enterprise, did it rather of affection they bear to his person, then to the cause, and therfore he could not but go in person with
them, especially seeing here is no one amongst them to whom the conduct of the action might be committed with the security of obedience due to him, and freedom of jealousie, as in a matter of so great consequence more to be desired. As for a sufficient Councel to be about him, it was his greatest care; and therefore he desired your Majestie would be a means to the King his bro∣ther, that he might have the Marshal of Cosse to attend upon him: Whereun∣to I answered, that your Majestie had been already mindfull thereof, and I would not fail to sollicite it at mine access unto the King. Du Uray returning to me (after the report that he and his associates appointed to confer with me, had made to conferr with his Highness) told me, that whereas they had perswaded him, seeing your Majesties resolution was signified, to forbear to prosecute it any further; they found his affection so setled, that he minded not so to give it over, and how that they perceived by him, that after he had once taken order for the matters of Cambray, he will make a voyage over to your Majestie, to lay down before you his own reasons himself, with this affection, notwithstan∣ding that if his reasons and perswasions shall not be found meet to take place, he will never hate where he once loved, but will for ever imbrace the amity of your Majestie and the Realm. Also your Majestie by these Letters written to my Lord Treasurer, shall understand what passed this day between Queen Mo∣ther and me at the time of my audience, which I thought meet to impart unto the Duke, who being then in bed; when I had finished with Queen Mother, I desired that I might have the honour as to speak with him at his bed-side, which it pleased him to assent unto; who after I had let him understand the sub∣stance of that which passed between his mother and me, praying his assistance to remove the impediments that I saw she did stand upon, which was to have the League accompanied with the marriage, for that it greatly imported the action he had in hand, that the League were presently proceeded in. To this he answered, That the matter of a League partained to his brother; the mat∣ter of marriage, saith he, is the only matter that concerneth me, which not∣withstanding the small hope I put him in, yet was he resolute not to give it over: And thereupon fell into very earnest request with me, that I would plainly let him know whether I had not some further matter to deliver, then that I had yet imparted unto him, touching the marriage, whereof when I assured him I had none to impart unto him, he did then declare unto me as he did before, that I should find the King very resolute, not to imbrace the League without the mar∣riage; I did then shew him, that I hoped that if he and his mother with that af∣fection that the cause it self did merit, did joyn together, they might so dispose the Kings mind before hand to give better ear to the League; then his High∣ness did put me in comfort, wherein I shewed him that I should hope he would deal the more effectually, if he could lay aside his affection, and look into the cause as a politique Prince ought to do, preferring the publique (especially his honour being so farr ingaged, as it was) before his private desires; but in the hu∣mor I found, now I shewed him that I greatly suspected the Kings resolution grew through his perswasion, wherewithall he was very merry, and did let me understand again, that it was very hard for a man upon the sudden to lay aside an affection which he had harbored in his breast so long a season. Touching this subject there passed many pleasant speeches from his Highness, which he delivered with a singular grace as any person that ever I knew. I pre∣sume the rather to write these particularities to your Majestie, for that by some speech that passed from him, I perceived I should do a thing very agreeable to him to acquaint your Majestie withall. Amidst these publique matters, I may not forget with all humility to signifie unto your Majestie how infinitely I think
my self bound unto you for the gracious usage of the she-Ethiopian, your com∣fortable Postscript in the Earl of Leicesters Letters, other your most gracious and favourable speeches given out publiquely since my departure, of the good opinion it pleaseth your most excellent Majestie to hold of your poor and un∣profitable servant, which though the undeserved favours cannot increase my wonted care, yet do they minister unto me a most singular comfort, by making my service less burthenous through your Highness gracious acceptation of the same. The Lord bless the rest of your Majesties years with that happiness of Government which hitherto through Gods goodness you have enjoyed, and confound those which wish the contrary. Your Majesties most humble Subject, Fran. Walsingham. To the right honorable my very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer. MY very good Lord, It may please your Lordship to advertise her Majestie, that on Wednesday last, being the 20 day of August, I arrived at the Castle of Fere in Tartinois, a house of Montmorencies, about the 11 in the mor∣ning, somewhat sooner then the Duke looked for me, through the negligence of the Gentleman whom he sent to visit me at Meaulx, whom I prayed to ad∣vertise the said Duke that I meant to be at the place above mentioned, the self∣same morning I arrived there, notwithstanding I found before my coming thi∣ther, a Lodging very well furnished, prepared for me, and order given for my Diet, and for the placing of my horses in the stable belonging to the said Castle; immediately upon my repair thither, the Duke sent his Chancellor Mr. le Presi∣dent Reyne, and Kingsey his Secretary, to excuse the Duke that there was sent no body to meet me. After that divers Gentlemen, as Farmangues, and o∣ther of quality came by his order to visit me, so that there lacked no good will in his Highness to make it appear that he was most ready to honour such as should be sent unto him from her Majestie. I doe the rather dwell upon the setting forth of the manner of the entertainment, lest perhaps some other might advertise that, forasmuch as there was no body sent to meet me by the way; the Ministers sent from thence be not received here with the like regard and care as they are there; I do assure your Lordship, that no man could have more care to excuse the omitting of the ceremony, in that there was none sent me by the way, then the Duke had: Besides, in this time his Highness is to be excused for omitting of ceremonies, being overcharged with affairs, having especially to direct an Army compounded of voluntaries; about three of the clock the same afternoon, I had access unto him, and after I had acquainted him with the points propounded by the King to her Majesties Ambassador, and Mr. Sommers, before I did let him understand what answer was made by her Majestie to the same, he shewed me that the King his brother was most resolute not to proceed in the amity untill it might appear what might be∣come of the marriage; and therefore he advised me to think how I might be able to satisfie him therein, for that otherwise he saw no likelihood that the other two points touching the League and the secret Treaty should take any effect: Wherein I replyed, that I doubted not but that the King his brother being a Prince of wisdom and judgement, would be satisfied with reason, where∣in I prayed his assistance, though for some respects I thought him a very unfit
advocate to plead in that cause, and thereupon declared unto him the causes that made her Majestie to forbear to assent to the marriage: Whereunto he an∣swered, That he hoped that his constant pursuit of the marriage so long a season, omitting no means that in his judgement might seem meet to advance the same (wherein he did appeal to the world his proceedings therein, being publiquely known) should not take so evil effect as now, when he most assuredly looked to reap the fruits of his travel, he should receive repulse to his own great disho∣nour, but more to his grief. And whereas her Majestie alleadged the War he was entred into for the re∣lief of the poor afflicted in Flanders, as a matter of very evil satisfaction to her Subjects, he said it was no new matter, but such as before had been propound∣ed, as he was before informed by her Majesties Commissioners at the time of the Treaty: And for that at that time it did breed no breach or stay of the Treaty, but that the same went forward, he hoped that would not now be alleadged for an impediment. Secondarily, He said that the pursuit of those Wars, considering how evil af∣fected the King of Spain was towards her, and the necessity that the poor affli∣cted in the Low-Countries had of present relief, in whose fortune her Majestie was interessed; it seemed strange unto him, that a thing so beneficial to her Majestie, should be a hinderance to the marriage. Thereto I replyed, That I thought it very necessary, before I answered the said points, to assure him that the allegation of the said impediment grew not for want of good will in her Majestie. For when she did with the eye and af∣fection of her natural body, look into his constant love born towards her, ac∣companied with many apparent effects, that did shew that it was not feigned, as the hazard he came in, passing the Seas, the imployment of sundry messen∣gers, especially men of that quality, as lately were sent over, and the goodness of his own nature, whereof her Majestie at his last being with her, grew to have so great a liking, as she rested greatly afflicted and perplexed in mind, be∣cause that in respect of those impediments that concerned her pollitique body (which did so greatly import her, as the alienation of her Subjects good wils from her, in case her Majestie should be accompanied with a War) she could not proceed as she did desire. Touching the two points, for the first, I shewed him, that though at the time of the Treaty, mention was made how ingratefull it would be to her Subjects, to have her marriage accompanied with a War, yet was it never otherwise conceived, neither by her Majestie, nor by the Councel, but that the charges of the War should be born by the King himself, and by the States of the Low-Countries, considering her Majestie was to reap no benefit by any such con∣quest as should be made, otherwise then such as did depend upon the issue of her body, which being a thing that was to grow from above, was doubtfull, and ministred no matter of present benefit in requital of the present charges: Be∣sides, it would seem strange that the first day of her marriage, the Treaty should be violated by the uniting of her Highness fortune with a husband, that con∣trary to the said Treaty, should throw her into a War which might minister fur∣ther cause of miscontentment, and breed an unnecessary and dangerous jealou∣sie, by carrying them into some doubt, that as the Treaty was broken in one point, so there would ensue some further breach thereof, a matter of very dan∣gerous consequence, considering that in the due observation thereof, consisted the preservation of their Liberties. Touching the second, I shewed him, that if the League offensive and defensive might take place, and the secret Treaty, that this enterprise for the relief might
very effectually go forward without the marriage: And therefore her Majestie did greatly marvel to see the King so resolute, as that without her marriage he would have no League, when it is apparent to the world, whatsoever become of the marriage, that it were most necessary that such a League should be made, as well for common defence, as for the preventing and staying of the over-greatness of Spain. In the end, after much debating to and fro, he shewed me that he was greatly grieved, considering the assured hope he had put on, that the marriage being a thing that he desired above any thing in the world; even now when he looked it should come to a full conclusion after so long a pursuit, so many messengers being employed, a Treaty through∣ly concluded by persons of quality, it should now grow from a con∣clusion, to a kind of dissolution, that he hoped I was come hither with matter of more comfort then he should receive thereby. Thereupon I prayed his Highness to look well into the cause, wherein if he could lay his own affection aside, I doubted not but he should very apparently see that her Majestie esteemed nothing more then the good will and love of her Subjects (the true strength and glory of a Prince) had great reason to resolve as she did, considering that the chief end of her marriage (which was to content her people) should be now performed with a farr contrary effect, which could be no less grievous to his Highness, if the marriage should proceed, having protested alwaies, as he hath done, that unless it might be with her Majesties contentment, and the good liking of her people, he would never desire it; and so concluded with him, that I hoped after he had well digested the matter, he should then see that her Majestie had just cause to grow to that conclusion which I had de∣livered unto him, and he no less cause to content himself withall: I prayed him that at my next access unto him, for that the place was so furnished with Gentlemen, and not that silence used that was fit, I might have audience in some private place, for that many times we could hardly, one hear the other, in respect of the noise. About half an hour after my departure from him, he sent his Chancellor the President Mr. de Preureaulx, and Combelles unto me, who did let me un∣derstand they were sent by his Highness to me, to confer with me about that which I propounded unto him in her Majesties name, letting me know from him, that the Duke found it very strange, that afte the matter of marriage had been drawn unto so great length, even now when he did look for an execution of that which was accorded by Treaty, there should be an impediment pro∣duced first by Mr. Sommers, and now by me, not new, but such as before the time of the Treaty, was thought upon, besides that her Majestie was not ig∣norant how Monsieur had long before intreated the cause of the Low-Coun∣tries, having from time to time made her privy to his proceedings therein, whereof she never made shew to have any misliking, especially as a mat∣ter tending to the hinderance of the marriage. Thereupon I did at length let him understand the causes why the same marriage hath depended so long in Treaty, the manner and course of proceeding with the Commissioners at the time of their being there, and how her Majestie seeing her marriage subject to so great difficulties, and thereby doubting great∣ly what issue the same would take, could hardly have been induced to have as∣sented to the coming of the Commissioners, but upon hope that if such dif∣ficulties as were by her to be propounded, accompanied with her Marriage could not be salved, the said Commissioners might then have
proceeded to the Treaty of a more streight League, that thereby their travels might not be fruitless. And in this behalf I did let them understand that her Majestie found her self grieved, that the Commissioners had not authority to treat of the League without marriage, especially that considering that not past four or five months before their coming over, there was some overture made by certain Commissioners deputed by the King to treat with her Majesties Am∣bassador resident, which she did look should have been prosecuted at the time of the repair of the said Commissioners, and lest the same should have been forgotten, or neglected, she did send one especially to the Ambassador resident, to require him in her Majesties name to advertise the King, how that in respect of the doubt she had what issue the Treaty of marriage might take, she found it necessary that they should have authority to treat of the said League, which falling out contrary to her expectation, made her proceed, for the desire she had to send the said Commissioners away contented, to the conclusion of the Treaty, lest otherwise they might have seemed to come hither in vain. And so much before the signing of the said Treaty, she did declare unto the Com∣missioners, so that thereby they might well perceive that this Treaty (besides the reservation) did not proceed in so clear a course, as they perhaps had been informed. And as for their objection, that her Majestie was acquainted with the action of that War, before that Monsieur did embrace that enterprise; I shewed them, that though she was acquainted with the enterprise, yet did she not think that ever she should have been urged (as lately she was) to be a parta∣ker of the charges of those Wars, which could not but breed a discontentment in her Subjects, who looked not into the pollitique cause that might move both Princes to concur in seeking to abate the King of Spains greatness, but would ascribe the cause to the marriage, which being accompanied with other discontentments, was not to be made more grievous by the charges that the Warrs of the Low-Countries (the marriage proceeding) was like to throw upon her Majestie. After this reply, they proceeded further, and did let me understand, that whereas the hope of this marriage hath drawn the King to yield further in the allowing of this said enterprise, then otherwise he would; So the Duke feared that the said King, upon knowledge of her Ma∣jesties resolution in the case of marriage, would grow cold therein: Besides, di∣vers others that were ready to assist him sundry waies, especially with Treasure, encouraged thereto by an assured hope of the marriage, they feared that now they would upon doubt thereof, draw backwards, whereby they did see the said Dukes cause very greatly perplexed upon this her Majesties resolution; and as for the offer of the League, seeing the King (as far as hitherto can be gathered) resolute not to proceed therein without marriage, they saw no great cause of hope to be relieved that way, and so concluded, that besides the hinderance that the said enterprise should receive by this her Majesties resolution, they did not see how their Monsieurs honour and her Majesties could be salved, without great touch to them both, the cause being so far proceeded in, as it was, all men be∣ing in expectation, that either the same should have taken place, or else break off upon some substantial matter, as might have yielded satisfaction to the world, whereby both their honours might have been free from such slanders as are like to be thrown abroad throughout all Europe. In answer of these points I let them understand for the first, That touching the Kings growing cold in the cause, I could not conceive how he, being a Prince of judgement, and assisted with wise Councel, seeing how perillous the King of Spains greatness would be to the Crown of France, could wax cold, in a cause that so greatly touched him, seeing the remedy offered, might be performed as
as well without marriage, as by marriage. And to inforce this matter, I did lay before them divers reasons to shew the perils might ensue, both to the Crown of France and England, if the said League should not take place; and also some other thing put privately in execution for the preventing there∣of: and therefore did let them understand that there was not so little an ac∣count to be made of her Majesties motion touching the League, as by them it seemed there was; for that heretofore upon like occasion, the Crown of France hath desired the association of the Crown of England; and therefore it would be thought strange, the same being now offered, it should be re∣fused, when never the like cause was offered to move them to embrace the same. And as touching other mens withdrawing of their promised assistance, especi∣ally of Treasure, I did let them understand, that as her Majestie by her Letters had offered to the said Duke, to assist him, as I supposed they were made ac∣quainted withall, with such means as were agreeable to her estate, so should he find her ready to perform the same; and as for the doubt conceived, that after so far proceeding, there could be no satisfaction yielded to the world, I did let them understand, that though they did not think the impediments al∣leadged by her Majestie, to be of sufficient force to yield satisfaction; yet I doubted not but that all wise men that do without passion, consider how ne∣cessary it is for all Princes to tender the conservation of their Subjects good wils towards them, seeing that by proceeding in this matter, the same should be put in hazard, for such causes as I had declared, both to the Duke and them, would upon understanding of the said causes, rest satisfied; and so in the end concluded with them, after well near three hours conference, that we were not now to look backward, and to call in question such errors as perhaps had been committed in the prosecuting of the cause, but to think of some such necessa∣ry way to be taken, as may best serve to further the Dukes honourable enter∣prise, and to knit the two Crowns in perfect amity. The day following I had a second audience, the substance whereof I have thought meet to impart unto her Majestie, with such Letters as I do presently send unto her, for that I know her Majestie doth look that I should reserve something to be imparted to her self. The Vice-Count of Turayne, a Gentleman very dear unto Monsieur for many respects, and one whose advice he doth use in matters of great trust, did let me understand the morning I departed, that now the matter of marriage seemed to stand in doubtfull tearms; they are in very great doubt this War which Monsieur doth now embrace, is in danger to quail, for two reasons; The one for that the King, by whom the action is to be countenanced, if any good suc∣cess be to be looked for in that, doubting lest her Majestie will draw her neck out of the Collar, after that he hath once broken with the King of Spain, where∣of he is very jealous, will undoubtedly leave Monsieur in the Briers, when he shall see so little hope in the marriage, which he only reputeth as the surest bond, for the inviolable observation of the intended association against the King of Spain. The other, for that divers who now offer to assist Monsieur, both with money, and otherwise, for the advancement of this enterprise, in hope that the marriage should have taken place, whereby he shall be able to satisfie them hereafter, seeing his principal support likely to fail him, by these means will also withdraw their helping hands from him, and then he shall be constrained with dishonour, and loss of his reputation, to relinquish the action. He did then let me understand, that hitherto he had received no help nor assistance from the King his brother, as by Sir Henry Cobham was advertised, and that his only sup∣port was procured to him by the Queen his mother, but the same so small, as it was not of any moment to the purpose of that he wanteth. And therefore
he prayed me to consider of the matter, as of a thing of great weight and im∣portance; and herein the Queen my Mistress (saith he) was her self not a little interessed, being likely, that if the Duke shall abandon the enterprise of the King of Spain, her professed enemy, having none to oppose themselves against him, he is likely, by mans judgement, very shortly to become an absolute Con∣queror, which, of what consequence it was likely to fall out for her Majestie, all men of judgement were able to look into, besides the danger of some enter∣prise likely to be set abroach for the revenging of civil troubles within this Realm, if the action go not forward, which will fall out very ill for those of the Religion, being at this present reduced to a very weak estate, by reason of their late rendring of their Towns of assurances. All which inconveniences were likely to ensue, without some present support from her Majestie, which he thought might be performed with the loan of 100000 Duckets, wherewith Monsieur should be able not only to relieve the Town of Cambray, but also to keep the field three months together; and yet notwithstanding his great want, and the weight and importance of the cause, cannot he be perswaded himself to become a suitor to her Majestie for such a supply, for that being fully perswaded to prosecute constantly the matter of the match, he thinketh this request would hinder his purpose therein, fearing lest he should therein give her Majestie occa∣sion to think that he sought the match to another end, then by him was meant. These speeches the Vice-Count delivered unto me, as if himself without Com∣mission (as he said) from Monsieur (though for my part I did not think but that it was done with his privity) requesting me very earnestly, I would effectually recommend the motion of the supplying of Monsieur with the said sum, for the setting forward of his enterprise, wherein he said the cause required present re∣solution, lest for lack of support, the enterprise should be given over; and there∣upon desired to know in what time that I hoped to have answer; I shewed him within ten daies, he did assure me that the Duke would accept in better part the loan of 100000 Duckets now, then if her Majestie should freely give him a mil∣lion at another time, so earnestly doth he embrace this enterprise of the Low-Countries; and therefore said he, to have his necessity relieved at this present, through her Majesties goodness, should bind the young Prince to remain conti∣nually at her devotion, and to do her alwaies what service he might. This in substance was the speech the Vice-Count delivered me, he seemed to be great∣ly perplexed that the enterprise should stand upon so doubtfull terms, conside∣ring what did depend thereon. The Chancellor and the rest of his Councel did very much doubt the issue of the matter, for lack of support, being otherwise furnished with such forces, as they doubt not shall be able to over-match the e∣nemy, so that by paying of them, they might be kept under discipline, which o∣therwise the army being compounded of voluntaries, they fear, will be subject to infinite and most dangerous disorders, her Majestie, I doubt not, considering how greatly the yielding of support, importeth her, will take some such like resoluti∣on therein, as the weight of the cause meriteth. Besides, if it so touch not her Majestie in surety as it doth, yet the Duke well deserving of her Highness (which is as great as ever any Prince did shew by effect) require some Princely consideration of this present necessity, especially her Majestie having by her late Letters, put him in comfort thereof, when any just occasion should be offered wherein to employ her, as well for the satisfaction of the Vice-Count, as that the cause it self requireth it. I pray your Lordship that I may receive speedy resolution herein. Having thus far proceeded in this Letter, being departed to a place called Carlay, about ten Leagues distant from Fere, I received the in∣closed from Queen Mother, by the which, as your Lordship may perceive, she
desired me, if I were not departed, or , to return back again: Whereupon I thought good (in hope tha by  I should be able to receive some such  as might lead me to judge what would be the issue of those things  committed to  charge) to  bearer. So according to her request▪ being returned hither yesterday, I had  yesternight to repair un∣to her this moning by eight of the ock, where at the time of my access, after I  made her acquainted with the substance of my chge, touching the Kings three Propositions propounded to her Majesties Ambassador, and Mr. and her Majesties several answers to the same, with such  did in∣duce her to resolve as she  he did then  unto me, that the  her son being very desirous to know her Majest  touching the (especially the Duke his brother being so  forth , as he was in the enterprise of the Low-, being  within eight  of the enemy, and the most part of his  assembled) though good she should repair hither during  my being here, to the end he might be informed what hope there was  be had of the marriage, without the  he saw that his brothers enterprise would throw him into a Warr, whereof  was to bear the only . Whereupon I did let her understand that the marriage, I could say no ore to her then that which I had  both unto her, and to the Duke her son. And as touching the doubt  he King and she conceived,  he should be  to bear the  of the Wars alone, I shewed , that if it pleased her to call to  the of∣fer that had been made by the Ambassador resident, and Mr. , as also renewed by me, both unto her, and to the Duke, both the King and she have cause to rest satisfied, for that the said League proceeded, and the other secret League, for the matter of the Low-Countries, there was such remedy offered, as  the King  she  have no ause to ; I did let her understand, that the question was. Whether it were  to take some course for the resisting of the King of Spains greatness.  being confessed, I shewed her, it was then fit to consider whether the same might not be done without marriage, seeing the said marriage  to be accompanied with so many difficulties, as there could be no present resolution taken  where∣unto she answered, that there could not be so great a  for the mainte∣nance of the association they were now to enter in by League as there was by marriage: For said she, the same  that moved the  to  to pro∣ceed to the conclusion of the , which is the misliking of the people, in respect of the  that the  bring withall, may also draw her to leave off the association, and some  that the Crown hath always car∣ied unto Spain. Whereupon  decared nto her,  it was hard to make sound friendship, which I thought might be performed best two waies, The one to shew how little cause she  to affect , the other to set down before her such reasons as might  the King and her, to believe that the proceeding, the same should be sincerely observed on her , unless there should be given some great cause by  contrary. For the first, I shewed her that the King of Spain,  long after that her Majestie did enter into the possession of the , being solicited in a kind of sort by her Majesties Ambassador sent  him to renew such Treaties as had passed be∣tween the House of , and the Crown of England, he could not be drawn to assen thereto, since which time, as he was unwilling to renew the said Treaties; so hath he not slackened to yeeld such fruites of enmitie against her Majestie, as were publiquely known to the world, as might appear by his Ministers dealing in furthering of
the marriage between the Duke of Norfolk, and the Queen of Scots, the pra∣ctising of the Rebellion in the North, his nourishing since that time, and main∣taining of those that were then the principal Rebels being retired out of En∣gland. And lastly, the attempt of Ireland, coloured with the Visor of the Popes Authority. These things being then considered, I did leave it unto her Majestie to judge what cause the Queen my Mistriss had to seek to reconcile her self, or to trust Spain. Touching the reasons that might induce them to think her Ma∣jestie would inviolably observe the intended league. First she was to under∣stand that the Amitie that we made most account of, was that which this Crown had with the house of Burgundy, and not with Spain; and therefore, those Countries being alienated from Spain, and now reduced by a composition be∣tween the Duke and the States of that Country, under the Government of her son, and traffique being there established, whereby there remaineth there com∣monly Goods appertaining to her Majesties subjects to the value neer of half a Million, I did leave that unto her Majestie to judge whether it were not a good caution for the performance of that which should be promised on her Majesties behalf. Secondarily, If that would not serve to remove the diffidence, then might there be Hostages, given interchangeably on both parties, whose pro∣mises her Majestie would not violate for the greatest kingdom in Europe: Last∣ly, I shewed her that I doubted not but that the Duke her son would become cautionary for the due observation of the same. I prayed her then, as I had laid before her such reasons as might induce them to stand more assured of the Queen my Mistresses performance of the said League, then it seemed they were, so I might (without offence) put the Queen my Mistress to stand in doubt of them: First, It was known that divers great personages of this Realm were more affected to the Amity of Spain then England, whom the world thought would omit no means that they might put in execution, to dissolve (or rather to hinder) before the Conclusion of the said Association. Second∣ly, Spain challengeth as of right (in respect of assistance given in the time of the Civil war, when the Count of Aremberg was sent into this Realm to that purpose) to have the Amitie of that Crown preferred before England. Last∣ly, The consent in Religion between Spain and France (which shall not lack a∣ny perswations that the Pope and other Catholike Princes can use to dissolve or hinder the intended Amitie) may give just cause to the Queen to be doubt∣ful of the performance on their behalfs of the said Association, then any reason that may be alleadged on the other side, Concerning the Queen my Mistris, I prayed her (that if the King and she did finde it necessary to abridge the King of Spains greatness, and could confidently enter into the intended Association) to consider that there were two occasions privately offered, that required speedy resolution. The one the assisting of Don Anthonio, the other the prosecuting of the enterprise in Flanders; for the first, I shewed her that the Queen my Mistriss had assented to the preparing of certain ships, with condition that the King her son would concur in the action, or that she might be assured by the intended League to be assisted in case Spain, in respect of the said support, should attempt any thing against her; Now forasmuch as the King and she seem to be resolute, not to enter into the League without marriage, I saw ap∣parently, that the enterprise (which was privately to be put in execution, or else would privately serve to no purpose.) would be quite overthrown. Touch∣ing the enterprise of Flanders (so honorably attempted by the Duke her son, tending so greatly to the benefit of this Crown, when the States shall see the said League not to take place, whereby it was not likely to be accompanied with success that otherwise it might be, the League going forword, it would be no less
discontentment to them, then encouragement to their enemies. Besides, I did let her understand that it behoved the Queen my Mistriss (if they did not em∣brace the League but upon such condition as she could not in reason agree unto, to take some other way for the establishing of her own estate, not doubting but that she would be as well able to withstand the malice of Spain as any other of her neighbours. To this after she had declared how earnestly the King her son did affect the marriage, considering he had no issue himself, and had but one on∣ly brother, upon whom and such issue as he should have, depended the continu∣ance of the house of Valois, she prayed me to consider whether the King had not just cause to insist upon the said marriage, and as for the League, she said she had no Commission to wade therein, but a matter that depended onely on the King; and therefore, because it required (for the reasons by me alleadged) ex∣pedition, she advised me to make haste towards him, I then prayed her, that for as much as I did understand, she did not mean to be at Paris in five or six days, she would dispose his minde by Letters, to imbrace the same; which she promised to perform accordingly. Touching the Companies that are to fol∣low the Duke, I can as yet deliver your Lordship no more, but this in generali∣ty. That he is to have six thousand footmen, and two thousand six hundred Lances, which as the report goeth, are sufficiently appointed, and in such good order as the like have not been seen this many yeers in France; Their meaning is to joyn with the States Forces that are now in Flanders, doubting nothing more then that the enemy will not encounter with them, but withdraw himself into his holds, I am promised a particular of all the Forces, as soon as it com∣eth to my hands; I will with the next dispatch send it to your Lordship. Your Lordships assured, Fr. Walsingham. To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham. SIr, your servant Bonham this bearer came hither yesterday, being Wednes∣day the ninth of this month about of the clock, at which time I was on the North side of the water, to have gone to Theobalds, but by good fortune, I had word of his arrival, so as I returned, being not gon from the water-side, her Majestie had two or three days before spoken of you, marvelling that she could not hear from you, I answered always, (as now it proved true) that the Letters or bearer should bring with them reasonable satisfaction; For I knew certainly, that you would be careful to delay no time of sending, I delivered to her Ma∣jestie your Letters directed to her, shewing her also that I had others directed to my self, but she said she would first read her own, first Monsieurs Letter, and next yours, & so she having done, asked me what you had written to me, for said she, I finde nothing in mine concerning the matters for which he went, then I told her I would read yours to her, But she using breath in speech, said she would have me make report thereof, which I said I could hardly do, because you had written at such length what had passed in Colloquie, first betwixt Monsieur and you; secondly, between certain of his Councel and you at several times: Lastly, between the Queen mother and you, and so in the end she was content to hear the whole Negociation, adding her self, that by your Letters to her, you had spoken to Monsieur, being in his bed after his
Mothers coming thither. She added also, that she perceived that Monsieur would come hither and receive his answer himself after his journey of Cam∣bray. Concerning the Negotiation, she saith, she would not have had you to have made direct mention of the league, but that incidently it should have fal∣len out upon their objection, that if her Majestie would not consent to the mar∣riage with the war, that then the war should cease. Then thereupon, she saith, you might have thereto answered, that in respect of the King of Spains greatness in growing, it were good that there were such a league made betwixt the French King and her. To this I answered, that your ordr in proceed∣ing was warranted to you, both by your instructions; and also, the same grounded upon the order of the French Kings answer to her Ambassador, which was in three points. The first, to know the day of her marriage, which being agreed unto, they would enter into a league offensive and defensive. And lastly, to a secret Treaty for the matters of the Low-Countrey. For orderly answer whereunto, you were instructed to that which you did; here∣with I think she was satisfied at your well-doing: But I found her touched with some fear, that this league and secret treaty should be very chargeable unto her. I told her, that there would be no great matter managed that was free from charge; and if she had no need of assistance to withstand her perils (which she knew, and so doth all the world besides, see it manifestly other∣wise) she needed not to have sent you at this time. Then also she spake of her ayd to Don Anthonio, doubting how to use the matter, both because the sea∣son of the year passeth away, and that she could not be assured what course the French King would take therein, without whose entring into the action, she would be loath to adventure any thing; and yet she added, that the French Ambassadour told her two days since, that the King his Master had willed him to thank her Majestie for the favours and supports that she gave to Don An∣thonio; but in the end, for the matter, she would stay until she should hear from you, what the French King will do therein. For the greatest important matter in the Letter expressed by the Viscount of Turayne, I dealt with her Ma∣jestie earnestly therein; and having made my Lord of Leicester first acquaint∣ed with your Letters, next my L. Chamberlain, and then Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, I required the assistance of the said two letters, as a matter most necessary for the French cause in hand, as that which being neglected, neither a league offen∣sive, nor yet hereafter any secret treaties could remedy. Whereunto she told me (as my Lord of Leicester said, she told him the like) that you had Com∣mission to satisfie Monsieurs need therein; but presently, upon seeking to perswade her, that words were no satisfaction, but that deeds must do it, and such a thing could not be perfected with words nor thoughts, no, nor in short time; she answered me, that you had warrant from her to yield to that which was required, when you had found the Kings disposition desperate to help his brother: For, quoth her Majestie, if he should any way open my good will herein to Monsieur, afore the French Kings mind were fully known, then the whole burthen should fall upon me; as for more proof, saith she, you may see by the speeches of Monsieurs Councellours, alledging, that Monsieur had mony lent him by divers, upon hope of the marriage, as though the marriage should serve for all this charge; and thereto her Majestie, with some sharpness of speech, added, that she knew and saw it now true, that the Queen Mother in counsel had before pronounced, that if the marriage could be concluded, the Queen of England should be put to the whole charges. This is the substance of that I can wring from her; for that she saith, until she hear from you of your Negotia∣on with the Kshe hath nothing here to  of. But she wished me to write to you
as before is mentioned; and she meaneth also to write some letters to Monsieur to give him some comfort, as I think, Marchemont had Letters, and (as I hear by report) the contents are a report of your dealings, and of Monsieurs resolute answers to you, that the King his brother (would in no sort consent to any thing without the marriage) and so they stand like good Chapmen, without falling in their bargain from the principal; but by this time you can best judge what will follow. The Queens Majestie asked me, whether if in no letter from you to me, you had recommended Monsieurs wisdom. I said, by no express speech. I marvel thereof (quoth she) for to me in this letter he doth greatly commend him, and so did by reading pronounce very great commendation of him by you, but I saw not the words written, I answered, that always you, above any other of her servants, had ever commended him most. I pray you remember to send s a Callender of Monsieurs Captains and Leaders, with the numbers likely of all sorts, and what his monethly pay may be in charge, and how he hath been furnished of money towards this leavy. I am sorry to see so large a time spent from the beginning of his preparations until this time, and yet I think far off to put in execution that which he pretendeth: I fear the Queen Mother finding the marriage desperate, will practice with the Duke of Parma to withdraw his siege, and that the Town may be relieved, and so Monsieurs Honour saved; and thereupon Monsieur may leave his general enterprize, wherewith the Spani∣ards ought to be contented; For thereby shall they have their wills in the Low-Countreys; and so also the Queen Mother may save her son free from gun-shot, and put up all her pretences, and live without offence to the King of Spain. Thus much of the French matters. From Ireland, I have not heard but once since you went,My Lord of Kildares man in the Tower, hath, by some fear of the Rack, confessed all to be true wherewith he was charged, which is to be kept awhile secret, until some persons may be apprehended. which was by a letter from Waterhouse, that the Lord Gray had adver∣tised them, they should send no victuals into Odonels Countrey, but onely to Carlinfoord: For when the Lord Gray came to the Black-water, Tirch. fled, break∣ing his two Castles, and sent my Lord Gray word, that he would be at peace with Odonel and all others, by his Lordships order: Where∣upon the Lord Gray sent Justice Dowdal to him, to treat hereupon, but more I have not heard. My Lord of Ormond findeth himself greatly grieved upon his discharge; not, as he saith, for his discharge, but that he hath been wronged, in not advertising how great prizes he hath done. In Scotland, the King pretend∣eth to keep Amity; yet by Ashton secretly I learn, that he will be wholly guided by her Majestie, whereof she conceiveth hope. I pray God she be not deceived therein; and hereby I fear her Majestie will be the flower to hearken to the assistance with France, and yet her Maj. uttereth not to me these Scotish matters, but I learn them otherwise. The Lord of Huntley is arived in Scot∣land, and offered to—Lord Ferihurst is fully restored, and both these well ac∣cepted with the King. We have gotten from Campian knowledge of all his pere∣grination in England, as in Yorkshire, Lancash. Denbigh, Northampton, War∣wick, Bedford, Buckingham, &c. hereof I am sure Mr. Beal will write unto you, who hath herein with Mr. Hamon taken great pains: We have sent for his hosts in all Countreys. And thus I end, doubting I shall weay you with reading, as I am almost with writing. This tenth of August, 1581. Your assured loving Friend, William Burleigh.
To the Right Honourable, and my very good Friend, Sir Francis Walsingham. SIr, after I had yesternight, being Thursday, written and sealed up my Let∣ters, I understand lately, that  hath informed her Ma∣jestie that Monsieur found himself greatly discontented with the manner of deal∣ing with him, in making the marriage so desperate, as it seemed to him you came of purpose to break it; and onely to sollicit the league with the K. upon which matter this forenoon her Majestie told me, that she misliketh of your manner of proceedings, as though you did not express the causes why she could con∣sent to no marriage, but abruptly shewed that she would not marry, and so forth∣with to deal with Monsieur for a league. To this I made answer, Madam, it is to be seen in Mr. Secretaries Letters to me, which I read to you, that he did so proceed to open your mind for forbearing to marry, as your self did determine with us all, and as he is warranted by your instructions; for, Madam, he did not say, that you would not marry with him, but that as the case standeth, he being entred into a war, you found it not good either for him or your self, to assent to the marriage; for so by your marriage, your Realm joyntly with your marriage should enter into a war; so as your speeches according to your instructions, were not absolute to deny the marriage, but to shew that the marriage could not con∣tent her subjects with a war joyned therewith; and so using as many reasons as I could, I ended, that I could not see that you had done any thing, but that I my self in your place would have done the same. And I did put her Majestie in re∣membrance, that all her resolutions (with us of her Councel) was, that you should so deal, as to acquit her of the marriage; and if there might be, a good amity made, and by a league betwixt France and this Realm, to abate the King of Spains greatness (vvhich I did object, required a present action) and to that end you should so proceed, as there might appear no hope of marriage: For as long as France could perceive any hope thereof, they would not assent to any league. To this her Majestie could not but assent; but finally, she changed her opini∣on, in saying, that if she should make a league, whereby a war might follow, she said, she had rather be at the charges of a war with the marriage, then without a marriage. But, saith she, let Walsingham know my minde to be this, that I would gladly enter into a league with the French King, onely with these con∣ditions, that if I were invaded, he should help me, and if he were inwaded, I would help him, and so to abate the King of Spains greatness. She said, she would concur with the French King to do that, by aiding of Monsieur; and also the King of Portugal underhand. Against which I objected, that although she might in some sort aid them both underhand, yet surely the French King could not aid his brother underhand. Whereupon she concluded, that if by ne∣cessity she must enter into an open war, she would rather choose to be at charge with a marriage, then without it. Finally, she said, she would write a few words to you her self; which I prayed her might not be discomfortable; and so she said, it should not be: But howsoever it be, use and practice your wisdom as long as you mean to do well, not to be your hurt. I have made my Lord of Leicester acquainted herewith, to whom, at the time of my writing, her Majestie had not imparted thus much; but when she shall, I think he will friendly answer for you, and so he hath promised me to do. Since the sealing up of my two letters, her Majestie sent me word by Mr. Killegrew, that concerning the motion made by Viscount Turayne, you should let Monsieur understand her Majesties intention therein according, that she did signifie to you her mind, without that you should
that you should name any sum in certainty, since the writing hereof she hath willed me that you should not offer that part above mentioned (for entring into an open war until she should hear from you first for she desireth most of all to have a League defensive and offensive without war (but upon first cause by the king of Spain) and to joyn in ayd secretly underhand. To the which if they will not assent without open ayding; then you shall so advertise, for as her minde now seemeth to be, she will rather marry with the war, then have the war without the marriage; Even now at the clo∣sing up of this Letter, her Majestie sent me this little Letter to you, and so I have directed it, wishing you not to be troubled therewith, Greenwich this 11 of August. Yours assured, W. Burleigh. To her Majestie August 10. IT may please your most excellent Majestie, the continuance of Gods goodness towards your Highness, hath not the least appeared in this reso∣lution that the King hath taken to joyn with you in streighter Amitie, be∣ing as your Majestie knoweth (considering the earnest Protestations that have been made here to the contrary, as a thing no way to be yielded un∣to, unless the same might be accompanied with marriage) a matter thought altogether impossible to be brought to pass; & so much the greater is this benefit to be esteemed in that they seem to be resolved to continue the prosecution of the Marriage, whereby your Majestie of necessity (if your state hereafter shall induce you hereunto) are left at your own choice to proceed therein, or to re∣linquish the same; as I doubt not but your Majestie will be thankful to God for this so great benefit, so I hope your Highness (for that this League can∣not be accompanied without charges) will prefer safety before Treasure, as∣suring your Majestie, that there shall want no care in me, or my associates to reduce the same charges to as tolerate a proportion as may be, I hope also your Majestie will have both gracious consideration, and speedy resolution touching the Viscount of Turaigns advise, for an offer to be made unto his Highness of present support of a hundred thousand Ducats, upon such reso∣solution as your Majestie shall take therein, we are to attend here either good or evil success of this Treatie, Monsieur Piac sent a Gentleman unto me, to let me understand how greatly he was grieved to hear, that a Prince of your Majesties vertues and worthiness (whose good opinion he did esteem before any worldly Treasure) should have entred into some sinister conceit of his devotion towards you, and to the end that his desire to cleer himself in that behalf, may the better appear unto your Majestie, he prayed me to conveigh unto your High∣ness this inclosed. The desire I have to dispatch this messenger with speed, maketh me to forbear to trouble your Majestie any further, be∣seeching God to continue his blessings towards you, whereby we your poor subjects may enjoy the continuance of that happy Government,
we have most happily lived under, during your Majesties Reign. Paris August 10. Your Majesties most humble Subject, F. Walsingham. To the Rght Honorable, and their very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer. OUr very good Lord, may it please your Lordship to let her Majestie un∣derstand, that upon Thursday the eleventh of this month in the after∣noon, at the time of our access unto the King, I the Secretary declared unto him her Majesties Answer to the three points, according to mine Instructi∣ons, with reasons and perswasions to make him like thereof; after the King had heard them very attentively, he answered to the first, That he was sorry to hear the Answer so far from his expectation, for that he trusted to be ful∣ly satisfyed therein to his contentment, as a thing he desired most in the world; and (for the singular affection he beareth to his brother) he rejoyced in it as much as in any good thing that might happen to himself, and thought his brother to be the happiest of all other, to match with a Prin∣cess of that Virtue; and that he himself having no children (and yet God might send him some) esteemed of his brother, as of his son and his heir; and that with his brother her Highness should marry himself, and all his means, wishing her Majestie would believe with what affection he imbraced that marriage; but that seeing her Majestie findeth now that difficultie, and amongst other the misliking of her Subjects to this marriage, he took it to be one of the Malheurs that happened to him; and that he cannot ex∣press the grief he hath carried ever since he hath heard of this alteration, by the Queen his mother, and that if his soul might be seen, his grief should well apear therein. But yet laid, that he trusted her Majestie would give him and his brother more comfort then this; and that her Highness would procure the good liking of her people therein, praying us all very earnestly to be a means, and to do good offices to her Majestie in that behalf. Many other speeches he uttered of great affection in this point, to have the marriage go forward: as to the other two points, for a League offensive and defensive, and for a private Treatie for the matters of the Low-Countries, he said, that though there were good Amitie and Intelligence already between her Majestie and him, yet he was most desirous to enter into a streighter Amitie with her Highness, for the better assurance of his good will towards her, and that he would in both these matters confer with the Queen his mother, and then would appoint some to come to us, to let us understand his further determina∣tion therein; adding again his former desire, that the first matter so well begun might not be thus ended; for he had a special confidence in her Majestie, that she will not suffer it so to do, and then prayed us all again particularly as he had done before: thereto I the Secretary said, that her Ma∣jestie should be speedily advertised of this his Answer and request, praying his Majestie, that because these other things required speedy resolution, and among
other the case of Don Anthonio, it would please him to deliver his pleasure so soon as might be, whereunto he consented. Then we went to the Queen his mother, being in her Chamber, where I the Secretary remembring unto her what had passed between her and me before, and how I had at this time proceeded with the King, and what answer his Majestie had made, I prayed her to procure the Kings resolution therein with speed, which she promised she would do; this was the effect of our Negotiation at this time; whereof we have thought meet to advertise her Majestie in the mean time; until we may further understand of the Kings Deputies, how other things will be answered and offered to be treated upon. And so we take our leave of your Lordship, from Paris this tenth of August 1581. Your Lordships to Command, Fr. Walsingham. Henry Cobham Iohn Sommers. To the Right Honorable my good friend Sir Francis Walsingham. SIR, Your servant Watson brought hither at dinner time this day, be∣ing Sunday the thirteenth, your Letters, that is your common Letter; dated the tenth from you; the ordinary Ambassador, and Master Sommers; containing your Negotiation with the French King, and your private Letter dated the eleventh, with another of your own to her Majestie, and one from Pinart as her Majestie informed me; by the Treaty with the King, it seem∣eth the King refuseth not to have a Treaty of streighter Amity, and yet he carpeth upon the marriage; by your Letter to her Majestie, as she tel∣leth me, you think there may be a Treaty without the marriage, but not without charge. And therein her Majestie saith, she had as good be as charge with a marriage, as without; and therefore, she hath again willed me to write unto you, That if Monsieurs action may be continu∣ed towards the Low-Countries, she can be content to be at some reason∣able charge by Contribution with the French King to maintain the same, so it be underhand, to bring her into no war, otherwise she will not you shall consent without making her privy, and having her answer, and for a Treaty offensive and defensive; she can also be content therewith, but not thereby directly to enter into a war; in this sort she hath willed me expresly to write unto you, not allowing any Argument to the contra∣ry, whereof I made divers; and those apparant necessary: for by these means the King of Spains greatness shall grow to such ripeness as hereaf∣ter no open force shall withstand it. And it is not likely that the French King will aide his brother which he cannot to any purpose do secretly, where her Majestie will do it but underhand; For the matter mentioned by the Viscount Turraign, both my Lord of Leicester and I have deal
very earnestly with her, and she hath answered my Lord of Leicester that she hath given a full order to you for the same, but by me she answereth that you know her meaning to be, that if the French King shall not ayd his Brother, she will not see him abandoned; But I desired to know how she would ayd him; and the Viscounts motion importeth both necessity and speed to be relieved, she answereth, that until she may hear from you, what the French King will do for his brother, she will answer no more particularly. This evening she willed me to advertise you that she is in great doubt that the Queen mother will induce Monsieur to leave the enterprise of Cambray, with an intention to compass the marriage, and then she saith, if the marriage shall not follow, Monsieur shall be dishonored, and the King of Spain shall pro∣sper; hereof she commanded me to write to you, that you should have there∣of good regard. In this sort I am commanded to write unto you, but in what sort you shall deal to remedy this inconvenience, neither by her Majestie can I direct you, nor of my self can I inform you; but I know you will do your best, as the place and time shall serve, and more cannot be required. Her Majestie would have Master Sommers to return, and so she willed me to signifie her pleasure; and yet I told her that he was in Commission, and might hardly be spared: but yet she commanded me so to write; if his being there cannot be spared, you may do well to write so, otherwise I do leave the matter to your consideration, I know it will greatly grieve you, not to have a good Answer to the matter for the Loan moved by the Viscount, but surely all means are used here to help, but none prevail as yet. The Letter written from Master Cobham the ninth of August, consisted on two points, very con∣trary; the first shewed the French Kings allowance to have Don Antho∣nies case furthered here; as also it was there. The second contained matter of great appearance, that Monsieur should be withdrawn from offending of Spain; and contrariwise, to marry, which two points cannot concur. Master Beal hath the ciphered Letter of Twyns to procure to be interpreted, but as yet it is not done, and so with my paper I end. From Greenwich the 13 of August 1581. Yours assured, William Burleigh
To the Right Honourable, and my very good Friend, Sir Francis Walsingham. SIR, since my writing yesternight, though the Letters be not gone, yet her Majestie by way of repetition hath willed me again to warn you, that you be not overtaken with this, that her Majestie doubteth that the Queen mother will withdraw Monsieur from the Low-Countries actions, meaning thereby to ob∣tain the marriage, which her Majestie cannot allow in any sort to have the action left; how you shall be able to order this, you must there seek the way. For ayding of Monsieur, these are her Majesties words, that if you finde the King not wil∣ling to support his brother, rather then the action shall fail, you shall say that her Majestie will not see him destitute, but the sum she will not name till she hear from you, we are desirous to hear how the King will deal to ayd Don Anthonio for her Majestie here is in such a suspence, as at this present, the journey stayeth; namely, because besides her 5000. l. there is demanded 2500. l. more, which she will not yield, and neither Drake nor Hawkins will go onward further: and up∣on some scruples, Mr. Bingham, York, Fenton, and Ward, do forbear, her Maje∣stie saith, you know some cause why Mr. York should not be trusted, She speak∣eth of a practisement by him in the Thames mouth, whereof she hath willed me to write to you, that you should call it to memory, I renewed my opinion that you could not spare Mr. Sommers, whereunto she answered, that if you could not, you should do as you thought best, although she said she would that he re∣turned. Greenwich this 13 of August. Yours assuredly, William Burleigh. NOs Franciscus Walsingham eques auratus, serenissimae Reginae Angliae pri∣marius Secretarius, ac praenobilis Ordinis Garterii Cancellarius: Henricus Cob∣ham Eques item auratus & ejusdem serenissimae Reginaeapud Christianissimum Regem Legatus residens, & Johannes Sommer Armiger, ejusdem serenissimae Re∣ginae Clericorum sigilli unus, Omnibus ad quos presentes litterae pervenerint, sa∣lutem. Cm pro authoritate nobis in hac parte data a serenissima Regina Angliae Domina nostra clementissima, reservationem eam, quae erat a sua Majestate in 12 dies rejecta, per literas suas ad Christianissimum Regem scriptas de data ix diei mensis Julii proxime praeteriti, propter quasdam causas maxime urgentes, prolongavimus in decem alios dies continue, post praefatos 12 dies fi∣nitos, sequentes: Testibus literis nostris ex opido Lusarci datis 31 dicti Mensis Julii proxime praeteriti quibus 10 diebu cum par nobis esse non queat, ad ea ex∣equenda quae a dicta serenissima Regina Domina nostra clementissima habemus in mandatis; neque voluntati suae Regiae quicquid injuriae facere, aut committere pro observantiae nostrae in eam officio debeamus. Nos supra nominati Ambassadores, Commissarii &, deputati dictae serenissimae Reginae suffi∣cienti ad id, praeter caetera, authoritate muniti, cupientes quantum in nobis est, incommodis quibuscumque praecavere, temporumque momenta sic
disponere, ut toti, tam serenissimae Reginae Angliae Dominae nostrae Clemen∣tissimae, quam Christianissimae Majestatis, voluntati, desiderioque fiat satis, praefatis 10 diebus alios 10 dies adjiciendos putamus & adjicimus, quibus pro parte dictae serinissimae Reginae dictam reservationem pro∣rogatam & continuatum esse cupimus, ita quod durante dicto termino dictarum x dierū post dictos x dies finitos tractatus ille cujus gratia dicta reservatio facta fuit pro parte dictae serenissimae Reginae, in suo robore permaneat sine ulla laesio∣ne aut diminutione quacunque. In cujus rei testimonium has litteras nostras manuum nostrarum subscriptione munivimus. Datae ex Urbe Parisiorum 12 Mensis Augusti 1581. Francis Walsingham Henry Cobham. Iohn Sommers. To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer. IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majestie that the next day after our Audience in the afternoon, there repaired by the Kings Commandment unto us Mr. Chivergni Villeguier, President Brissac la mothe Fenelon, Secretary Py∣nart, and Du Uray, where Mr. Chivergni in the name of the rest did declare unto us, that they were sent by the King to let us understand the great hope he conceived of me the Secretary, serving her Majestie in that place of trust, I should have brought her Highnesses full resolution for the proceeding in the marriage, considering how far forth the matter had been already proceeded in, the benefit that would have ensued thereby, as well for her Majesties own Realm, as for the knitting the two Crowns in an Amitie indissolluble, that now finding the matter to fall out otherwise, his Majestie was greatly grieved withal, for that he did not see how there could be any sound or perfect Amitie without marriage. To which speech, after I the Secretary had declared unto them at length, the manner of the proceeding in the prosecution of the marri∣age, and the Reasons that did move her Majestie to take that resolution as she did presently send me withal; We shewed them that we found it very strange, considering the speeches used to us the day before by the King, by the which he declared, that he was content that the Treatie of the League should pro∣ceed, without annexing thereto the condition of the marriage, that there should now fall out an alteration thereof; and therefore prayed them to ac∣quaint us with the reasons of the change, whereby we might advertise her Majestie thereof, who might think great lightness in us to give her an assurance of a thing proceeding from the Kings own moth, which afterward should not fill out so in effect, Upon which speech Du Uray made a very long discourse touching the earnestness of his Masters affection, the full assurance he made of the marriage, and the touch of credit that would grow unto him, if the same should not take effect. And did declare unto us, that the Duke his Master had given express commandment to be an humble suitor to the King, that he
would not proceed to the Treaty of the League, before assurance given, that the marriage should take place: thereupon the rest of the Commissioners in excuse of the King did declare, how that Du Uray had not delivered his charge unto his Majestie, until the morning following▪ in audience, who if he had understood before his brothers request in that behalf, could not have yielded that that Treatie should have been proceeded in without the marri∣age. Then I the Secretary shewed the Commissioners, how that I found Du Urays speech strange, for that the Duke himself at the time of my being with him, did promise that he would not oppose himself to any thing that her Majestie did desire, and so concluded, that though he could not be a furtherer of the League without marriage; yet would he not hinder the same. Then Pynart as he said by the Kings commandment, and his mothers, did let us understand, that whereas they did finde that the principal difficul∣tie; whereupon the stay of the marriage grew, proceeded through the en∣terprise, that Monsieur had in the Low-Countries, their Majesties being de∣sirous that the marriage should take place, had dispatched that afternoon Monsieur de Bellieure to the Prince of Parma, to procure that the said Prince might withdraw his siege fom Cambray, and that the Town might be left in a newtrality, as a member of the Empire; and further to perswade, that there might be a general abstinence of war for the space of five or six months in the which time there might be some composition treated between the King of Spain, and his Subjects. That the King and his Mother were in good hope that the same might be brought to pass, which they did the rather desire, to the end Monsieur might in the mean time go over into England, and finish that which had happily been begun. Upon this overture we did let them understand, that if there might be such a peace procured as might be accompanied with safety, none would be more glad of it then the Queen our mistress: Notwithstanding we did signifie unto them, that there were many apparent reasons to shew that the same was not likely to take place but to the great prejudice and peril of those of the Low-Countries; and therefore prayed them to call to remembrance how that her Majesty at the time of his Ministers being in England did protest unto them (at such time as they did let her understand that Monsieur should give over the enterprise of Flanders, for that they saw it was an impediment to the marriage) that she should be loth, considering how much it would touch him in honour, and how dangerous it would be for them of the Low-Countries in case he should give over the same, that her marriage should be accompanied with so dolorous effects. And as she did then protest upon the overture made to give over the enterprise, so we her ministers seeing the danger that might gow many wayes by the intended Treaty with the Prince of Parma, serving better for the suffering of the King of Spain to grow to his greatness, then for the relief of the poor afflicted in that Country, could not in reason, and our par∣ticular opinions, (having no Commission to deale therein) see any likeli∣hood that the same might take any good effect: And therefore prayed them, that unless they saw some other cause that might move them to take that course, they would forbe so to do. This matter did minister unto us argument for the space of two houres at the least; which for avoiding tediousness, we think meet to omit. And i the end grew to this conclusion with them, that either it would please them
that we might proceed in the said Treaty, or else that they would procure us audience, that we might understand from the Kings own mouth, the revocati∣on of that he had assented unto, letting them also understand, that we did mean presently to advertise her Majestie of this change, to the end that thereupon she might give order for the stay of the Ships prepared for Don Anthonio, being well assured that her Majestie upon this alteration, would forbear any further proceeding therein; which we did the rather to let them understand, for that it might provoke them to perswade the King to maintain his former resolution: Whereupon they withdrawing themselves apart, did afterwards let us understand, that they would make report unto the King of that which had passed between us; and in the mean time did earnestly pray us, that we would forbear to advertise her Majestie, as also not to disswade the going for∣ward of the support appointed for Don Anthonio; whereunto, after most earnest request made by them, we did assent, with condition, That we might receive answer by ten of the clock the next day, and therein we did the more willingly yield, for that they did put us in hope that we should re∣ceive answer from the King to our contentment. The next day Monsieur de la Mot, Buzar and Pinart came to us, and told us, that the rest of their Col∣leagues, and they had communicated with the King, the Negotiation passed the day before between them and us, and that they had remembred to his Majestie, his Speech delivered unto us, which we conceived to be this, That he was pleased to appoint some to Treat with us touching a  Ami∣ty to be had with her Majestie, seeing there were such difficulties that did ac∣company the marriage: That his Majestie answered, That the alteration grew upon two causes, the one of a motion made to him by me the Secreta∣ry, for a further prolongation of certain daies to conserve the validity of the reservation, the last prolongation being to expire within a day or two, which motion gave him hope that the marriage might take effect. The other upon a request made by Du. Uray, in the name of the Duke his brother, that the League in no case might be proceeded in without the Marriage; which the King, seeing the matter touched so greatly his brother in affection and ho∣nour, could not deny his request. And to the end he might understand his further mind therein, he thought good to send Pinart unto him out of hand, to acquaint him what had passed hitherto in the matter, since our last audi∣ence, upon whose return we should then understand the Kings further plea∣sure, praying us in the mean time to have patience, and to interpret the Kings answer touching the alteration, in good part, assuring us, that this delay would rather further then hinder the matter we sought. To these two allegations, I the Secretary did reply, That as for the first, concerning my motion for a further prolongation, the same grew only up∣on this, that understanding as well by Monsieur, as by the King himself, and Queen Mother, that their meaning was, that the pursuit of the Mar∣riage should be pursued still, in hope that her Majestie might in time remove by her wisdom, those difficulties, for the which she could not presently for divers important causes, proceed in the same. I thought good, for the more validity of the reservation, to propound a further prolongation there∣of, considering that the last was to expire within two or three daies, and therefore the King could take no just cause upon any motion, to revoke his former resolution. And as for the second, concerning a request of Du Urayes, made in the Duke his Masters name, for the stay of the said
Treaty, unless it might be accompanied with marriage. I alleadged, that it seem∣ed very unlikely, that at the Queen mothers being with the Duke, which was two daies after Du Uray was sent from the said Duke unto the King, he pro∣pounded no such request unto her for the stay of the Treaty; for if he had, it was likely she would have acquainted the King withall; and thereupon his Ma∣jestie would have framed his answer accordingly: Which we finding not to fall out so, cannot but greatly marvel at this change; whereunto they replyed, that though the Queen mother had indeed charged Du. Uray therewith, yet he in∣sisted still upon the same, as a matter he had received in commandment from the Duke his Master, and could not dispence with it without order from him. We then finding by them, that we could not prevail to induce them to assent to proceed to the Treaty, untill they heard from the Duke, thought good to forbear any further pressing of the matter, and to attend Mr. Pinarts return; and to the end we might know Monsieurs intent in that behalf, we thought good to send Mr. Sommers forthwith (as well to perswade with him to remove his im∣pediments, as also to acquaint him with such speeches as are given out here  an intended marriage with Spain, whereby we might as well ound him in the one, as in the other) In this conference we did let them understand of some cause we had to mistrust (especially upon this voyage of Bellieure) that they were loath to separate themselves from the amity of Spain, praying them therefore, that if they were so disposed, we might know the truth thereof, letting them understand hat the cause of our coming, was not to dissolve any amity they had with , or any other Prince, otherwise then should stand with the Kings honour, and his surety. Whereupon they made great protestations, that the King had great cause for sundry respects, to look into the King of Spains greatness, and therefore prayed us to lay distrust aside, not doubting, but in time the King would deal, we should see, very honourably; the cause whereof Pinart did assure us with most earnest protestations, as a man that was acquainted with the secrets and inwards of the Kings own soul. At the end of our conference upon the Speeches, I the Secretary, deliver∣ed unto them, how that her Majestie understanding of this alteration with the King, for entring into the association, would cause the preparations for Portugal to stay; Pinart desired very earnestly in Queen mothers name, that in no case they might stay, but be furthered with all convenient expedition, and that she would take it as a singular favour done to her self by her Majestie, in case she would go forward therewith, as she had begun, assuring us that there were at Bourdeaux, certain ships in a readiness likewise, to set forwards towards the Isles, to be imployed in this service. Your Honours to command, Francis Walsingham, Henry Cobham, Io. Sommers.
A Memorial for Mr. Sommers. FIrst you shall declare to the Duke, That whereas the King had yielded to proceed to the Treaty without marriage; the same resolution was altered by a request made by Du. Vray in his name, that it might not be proceed∣ed in without the said marriage; whereupon our Negotiation in that behalf, is stayed untill the King and the Queen his Mother shall by Secretary Pinart, understand his determination touching the continuance of the said stay by Du. Uray procured, that whereas I the Secretary, at the time of my being with him, did pray his Highness, considering the proceeding in the League, did require expedition, that it would please him to recommend the same un∣to he King. He did then declare unto me, that though he could not recom∣mend the same in respect of the doubt, and conceived that it might impeach the marriage, which was the matter he chiefly sought; yet considering he found by me, that it tended to the advancement of her Highness service, he would not impeach or hinder the same, we are therefore to pray his Highness it would please him, for the satisfaction of the Queen my Mistress (havng advertised her of his promise made in that behalf) to let us understand the cause of the alteration thereof, that it shall be meet to lay before him the benefit that may grow by the said League unto the enterprise that he hath in hand, by comforting his own party in the Low-Countries, by discomfor∣ting the adverse party, as also that it will serve to very good purpose, to re∣move the jealousnesse here within this Realme, and thereby to continue the present peace, whereby he may the better prosper in his present actions; that we doe not see how it may greatly hinder his intended pursuit of the Marriage, but will rather further the same, for that it will breed a good satisfaction in her Majesties Subjects, and to put them in hope to receive more fruit of the Marriage, when they shall see these two Crownes to be knit together in amity against their common Enemy the King of Spain. That we hearing of certain bruites given out at Paris, not by mean and base per∣sons, but by such as doe pretend to know how matters of importance de passe, how that there should be some overture made hy his Highness, of a marriage with Spain; which we for our parts can in no case beleeve, consi∣dering the earnest protestations that have been made by the King, his Mother, and himself, touching his intention, for the continuance of the pursuit of the Marriage, and therefore did think meet, in respect of the Honour that we think our selves bound to bear towards one that hath so well deserved of the Queen our Mistress, to acquaint him therewith, to the end we may receive from himself, some such matter as may yield satisfaction to her Majestie upon the hearing of the said bruit; That we esteem him to be a Prince of so great honour (so long as he shall pursue the Marriage with her Majestie) not to entertain any other. Besides, knowing how greatly those Marriages knit between persons in nearness of bloud, are condemned in the opinion of the world, being both against the Law of God and Nature, we cannot be perswaded that he, being a Prince of that integrity, and one that is guid∣ed by conscience in all his actions, can be drawn thereunto. That it is also given out, that in consideration of the said Marriage, the Prince of Parma
will be induced to withdraw his siege from Cambray, as also to yield to a surceasance of Arms with the States of the Low-Countries, for the space of five or six moneths, that in the mean time there may be some way found for the pacifying of those Countries, and the reducing of them to the obedience of the King of Spain, with the preservation of their Liberties: That we have cause to believe some part of this, for that at our conference here with the High-Commissioners, it was declared unto us, that Bellieure was sent unto the Prince of Parma, for that purpose, that if the same might be brought to pass for the surety of the States, none would be more glad of it then the Queen our Mistress, who hath desired nothing more then the repose of that Countrey, that herein we cannot but let him understand, how men of judge∣ment doe see this project is onely layed to stop the pretended course for the impeaching of the greatness of the King of Spain: For they that consider how greatly the States are alienated from the King of Spain, and how reso∣lutely the King is bent not to yield to them in matter of exercise of Reli∣gion; so no reason that ever there can grow any good by any such Treaty, unless it be unto the King of Spain. And therefore we, as those that wish him all honour, doe pray to God also, that it fall not out so, that some part of that project doe not tend to his dis∣advantage. August 14. Private Memorials for Mr. Sommers. YOu may, besides the Points contained in this Memorial, add such o∣ther things as you can call to remembrance, and shall think meet for the advancement of her Majesties service. If you shall find the Vice-Count of Traigne there, you shall doe well to impart our proceeding unto him, here with the King, and to pray his assistance (if he shall like to deal in the Cause) to remove the impediments, that the Treaty may proceed, considering the benefits that may ensue thereby, as well to the furtherance of the Dukes actions, as to remove the jealousies here within the Realm. You may also declare unto him, that touching the sum of money which he desired me to procure at her Majesties hands for the Dukes support, that her Majestie having been moved therein, is very wil∣ing, upon notice given, that he standeth in need thereof, being not other∣wise furnished by the King (as her Majestie hath been certainly informed that he was) to see him supplyed of some convenient summe. And there∣fore if it please the Duke to advertise me thereof, I will not faile to doe mine endeavour to procure that the same may be sent over with as convenient speed as may be. And in this behalf, if you shall perceive at your coming there, that the Duke is in no such necessity, or that the Prince of Parma will retire his For∣ces, whereby the victualing of the Towne of Cambray may be per∣formed: Then may you forbeare touching the offer of the mo∣ney. You may also declare unto the Vicecount, that by the Lettets sent of late out of England from Marchiamont, the D. may be put in more hope of the marriage, then I could put him in at my being there; and thereby he may perchance conceiue that
I did not proceed so far forth as I had Commission, in respect of some par∣ticular mislike I have of the marriage; you shall therefore pray him in my name, to use what perswasions he may, to remove any such opinion from the Duke, in whose good opinion I doe desire to remain, assuring him, that when the truth of my proceedings shall be known, it will be found that I have dealt sincerely, and accordingly, as I did protest to the Duke my self. And if you shall see any just occasion (in such conference as shall pass between you and the said Duke) to deliver any speech for my particular defence, I shall then pray you to deal with him therein, as in your good judgement and discretion shall be thought meet. Fr. Walsingham. To the right honorable my very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer. MY very good Lord, by the general Letter and Copy of that I writ unto her Majestie, your Lordship may conceive as much as we are able to decy∣pher of the causes of their alteration here with us; but the greatest cause of stay and hanging off for hearkening to our motion is a doubt, they conceive that her Majestie will not resolutely imbarque her self into any such certain pro∣portion of charges (as both this action of the Low-Countrys, and other char∣ges, which in time may be found necessary) will require: Spain and the Pope make great and large offers, which are not lightly hearkened unto: Now if we shall not (in our treating, be able to countervail them either with as good, or with some such certainty as may be to their liking, our conference will be to small purpose; and in my simple opinion, it were much better that we were re∣voked, then that further imployment of time and charges should be fruitlesly expended; and therefore I beseech your Lordship to be a mean to her Maje∣stie, that we may have some certainty set downn o us, which in our conference with them, we may deliver to them, and that we may particularly know to what sum, and for what time her Highness can be pleased to extend her aid, and whether in case it be demanded of us, and they will have it so concluded, she can be content to enter into open Warre against the King of Spain, or not; for in these two points chiefly, will all their treating consist, wherein if we shal not be able to resolve them, your Lordship can easily conceive what end our Negotiation will have: I am given to understand, that in case her Marriage shall not take place, then the King will enter into a League Defensive onely, adding to the Treaties already in force, such other matters as shall be thought necessary for common defence. I pray your Lordship therefore, that we may know her Majesties mind in this, and what shall be thought necessary meet to be added to the former Trea∣ties. And so I humbly take my leave of your Lordship. Paris the 13 of Au∣gust, 1581. Your Lordships, Fr. Walsingham.
To her Majestie, August 13. IT may please your most excellent Majestie, I know you cannot but find the Kings alteration of his former resolution very strange, and therefor would be glad to know the true cause of the change, wherein I would to God I could satisfie your Majestie of, with truth, to think that the same proceed∣ed of two causes alleadged by the King, whereof we have in our general Let∣ter unto the Lord Treasurer, made mention, I have many reasons to lead me to be of contrary opinion, and have rather just cause to think that the ground of the change grew upon advertisements received from thence, being put in hope, that either your Majestie (they insisting still upon the League with mar∣riage) will yield thereto, or else in respect of the doubts they are put in, that the marriage not taking place, your Majestie will not go so resolutely forward in the prosecution of the Warr against Spain (in case it should be found so ex∣pedient) to enter into a publique and open Warr: If your Majestie have con∣quered the diffculty in your own nature, as also other difficulties of Estate, touching the marriage, and shall be disposed to proceed to the effectuating thereof, then we your poor Ministers here, do hope that we shall not receive that disgrace, as that your resolution therein shall rather be delivered by others, then by us: On the other side, if that your Majestie shall not be disposed to enter into an open action against Spain with this Crown, in respect of the charges, then were it good that any further proceeding therein were forborn, to give them occasion by the entertaining thereof, to think that your Majestie dallieth with them (both in marriage and League) cannot but greatly exaspe∣rate them against you; how your Majestie shall be able alone to bear the malice of Spain, France, and Scotland (for such a concurrency against you, is to be looked for) I doe not see otherwise then to depend upon Gods good∣ness. The consideration of this matter doth minister necessary questions in State, The one, Whether it were not better for your Majestie to joyn with France a∣gainst Spain, or to have them both with Scotland against you; The other, Whe∣ther it were not better to convey the Wars out of your own Realm, by the in∣tended association with this Crown, or to have this Crown, with the rest of the evil affected neighbours, to assail you within your own Realm. The solu∣tion is very easie; for as in cure of a natural body, being diseased, it were evil advice o councel the application of inward medicines, when outward will serve; so were it less dangerous to attend a Warr at home, the inward corruption be∣ing throughly looked into, when that the same (by some provident course, by your Majestie taken) may be put off; the only difficulty resteth only upon charges, which if the likelihood were, would grow greater then your Estate or Crown might bear, then were it reason for your Majestie to forbear the same, for that Ultra posse non est esse, and to stand upon your own defence: But if the charges may be reduced into such a convenient proportion as the Crown may bear, then were it very hard that treasure should be preferred before safe∣ty. I beseech your Majestie, that (without offence) I may tell you, that your loathnesse to spend even then, when it concerneth your safety, is publiquely delivered out here. We find also the doubt thereof, by the Commissioners particular and private speeches with us, to be a principal impediment, why the King here is loath to joyn in association with your Highness. For the love
of God, good Madam, look into your own estate; and think that there can grow no perill so great, as to have a War break out in your own Realm, consi∣dering what number of evill Subjects you have; and therefore your Majesty cannot redeem the perill that is like to grow thereby at too dear a price. I hope your Majesty will bear with my boldness, and interpret th same to proceed of a care I have of your Highness preservation in that happy estate you have lived in these Three and twenty last years, which I pray God to continue your Ma∣jesty in, double those years. According to your Majesties commandment, I moved the King for the Marshall de Coss to attend upon Monsieur in the Voy∣age (the rather at your Highness request) he would see his Brother assisted not only with the said Marshall, but also with divers others, whose counsell and ad∣vice in those martiall Affairs he doubted not should serve greatly to the furthe∣rance of his directions. And thus craving pardon for my length in writing, I humbly beseech the Almighty so to bless your Majesty with the prosperous Raign of many years, as that your Enemies may have cause to envie your hap∣piness, and your faithfull Servants and Subjects cause to rejoyce and render unto him therefore their humble thanks. And so, &c. Your Majesties humble Subject, and faithfull Servant, Francis Walsingham. To the right Honourable my good Friend Sir Francis Walsingham. SO often as I have opportunity I write to you, & now perceiving Mr. Vicecham∣berlaine sendeth this bearer to his Nephew at Paris, I thought it not good to let him passe without my letter we doe now rather howerly then daily look to hear from you, what passed between the persons deputed by the King, to treate with you after the speech with the King the ninth of this month. I hope you have received my Letters sent by Walton your servant, and therefore I think it not needful to repeat the whole contents thereof, but her M. suspendeth all resolute answers, till she hear from you, In no wise she would have the enterprise of the Low Countries lost, but she will not particularly warrant you to offer aid. She alledgeth that now the matter is so farr gone, the King will not abandon it; Her Majesty feareth that the Queen mother will contrarily withdraw the Duke her Son from it, and then will say, That the Queen must marry with him, because she alledgeth no impediment but misliking of her people, to have a Husband beginning a Warr. Her Majesty also is very cold in the cause of Don An∣thonio, alledging that she liked it but by opportunity of her Councell; and now that all things are ready, as ships, Victuals, Men, &c. the charges whereof cometh to 12000 pound, she hath been moved to impart two thousand pound more as a thing needfull for the full furniture of this Voyage, wherewith she is greatly offended with Mr Hawkins and Drake, that the charges are grown so great, above that was said to her, when the five thousand pound was demanded of her.
They, for Answer, say, That the number of ships is increased, by a ship dearly provided by Mr Bingham, without their knowledge; hereupon her Majesty not content to give one penny more, they were willed to abate the number, and consequently the charge to rest at 12000 pound; but they say all provisions are ready, and answer given as they cannot possibly. In the end Drake and Hawkins will make shift for 2000 pound, and her Majesty so answered, yet will not suffer them to depart, untill she be well assured from you, that the French will aid Don Anthonio, for she feareth to be left alone. She also is informed that the Fleets from the West-Indies arrived in Spain the 27 of July, and also that the Island of Terceras is rendred to the K. of Spain: All these things (though these adver∣tisements are not very certain) do marvailously stay her Majesty from assenting to their departure, and yet she loseth all the charges spent in vain, the poor King utterly lost; and therefore her Answer yesterday was, that the voyage should continue in readiness, but not depart untill this Evening, before which time she looked to he from you. I wrote, how upon some jealouse conceived, and up∣on some Articles presented to my Lord of Leicester, by Bingham, Fenton, and York, they, with their own good wills are discharged; but Mr Bingham and Fenton are promised all their charges. Thus imagining that I should have some Letter from you, before these will be at the Sea-side, I end; and yet I could not omit to write. Since your departure we never heard from my Lord De∣puty till even now, that Mr Carew of Anthony is come, by whom we under∣stand that my L. hath honourably reduced Tirghley to peace, and Commissioners assigned to hear the difference between him and Odonnell; my L. Deputy is Um∣pire. Tirghley pretendeth all obedience, alledging that the southern Rebels have sollicited him to Rebell, but he would never assent thereto. Greenwich the Eighteenth of August. Your assured Friend, W: Burghley. To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham. SInce the closing of my Letter writen within this hour, her Majesty hearing of Mr Vice-Chamberlains, mans going, sent for me, and willed me to let you know, That she marvaileth she heareth nothing of your moving the King for aid for his Brother, which she saith is a principall matter she willed you to doe. And she saith, considering Monsieur and his friends will doubt of your good to the Marriage, you shall by earnest dealing with the King for assisting , qualifie their other doubt. I told her Majesty,  own know∣ledge you seemed to favour the Marriage, no  your going, in respect thereby to strengthen her against the King  Spain, more then I could per∣ceive her Majesty for her own part willing to have it furthered. And besides, that your self objected, That to divert you from this service, that your Message being to procure a League and no marriage, you said the former Opinion con∣ceived of your unwillingness to the Marriage, should be by Monsieur and his Friends supposed the cause or instrument of the breach of the marriage.
To conclude, I find her Majestie in words, more inclined to the marriage, then at your departure. But how long this inclination will continue, I know not. Greenwich, August 17. Yours assuredly, W. Burghley. To the honorable Sir Francis Walsingham. SIR, Because this Bearer, your servant, is by you commanded to come with∣out delay, I cannot by him, send any thing of moment, for that your Let∣ters came not before this forenoon by Iohn Wils, by reason of contrary winds, as he saith, that kept him two daies from England; and all this day, since her Majestie received your Letters, my Lord Chamberlain, and my Lord of Lei∣cester, by a former appointment, were at Westminster to examin the Lord Vaux; Sir Thomas Tresham, and Mr. Griffin, of which three, the first two are close-prisoners in the Fleet, who deny Campians being with them, but they will take no oath; the other confesseth plainly and simply. By this occasion her Majestie forbeareth, without advice, to make any censure of your Letters, or to give me any charge what to write to you. She saith, untill she shall hear what Mr. Bellieure shall do with the Prince of Parma, and Pinart, and Mr. Som∣mers with Monsieur, she cannot guess what will be the event. She denieth that any one here, had any cause to give comfort to the marriage. But truly, I think some have had such a conceit, and whether they have sent it over since, I know not; you shall do well to write to her Majestie, or to me, of the state and proceedings of Monsieur with his Army, for she findeth fault therewith. August 18. Yours assuredly, W, Burleigh. Postscript. I pray you in my name, to thank Sir Henry Cobham for his Letters to me, excusing me for not writing for want of leasure and matter. To her Majestie, August 16. 1581. MOst gracious Soveraigne, The particular Letter it pleased your High∣ness of your Princely favour, to voughsafe to write unto me, did mini∣ster unto me two singular comforts, The one, that your mislike conceived of my dealing with the Duke, is in part quallified. The other, for that it hath pleased your Majestie to lay open unto me your disposition touching the charge committed unto me, whereby I may use the same as a load-star, the beter to direct my course. Touching the first, I hope, when your Majestie shall be throughly
informed of my proceedings, you shall find that I swerved not from your instru∣ctions I received, nor yet had cause that indiscretion might lead me to take ano∣ther course. The principal cause why I was sent over, as I conceive it, and as I trust your Majestie can call it to remembrance, was to procure a streighter degree of amity between the King and you, without marriage, and yet to car∣ry my self in the procuring thereof, as might not altogether break off the mat∣ter of marriage; yet the success of my travel fell out so, through Gods good∣ness, as I did assuredly, not without good ground, make account that the amity would have taken place, had it not been crossed by some practice (as your Ma∣jestie may perceive by some former advertisements) not yet discovered; and yet both the King, his Mother, and Monsieur, resolute to continue their former determination for the prosecutiou of the marriage, which if I had made the case so desperate as I perceive your Majestie hath been informed, then surely would they not have continued their disposition to follow the matter: I was sundry times pressed, both by them and their Ministers, to yield a resolute answer, whe∣ther I had power to say that your Majestie would not marry. Whereunto I answered, as I was directed, that I had no such authority, otherwise then to lay before them the impediments that made your Majestie doubtfull to proceed in the marriage, which was to have the same accompanied with a Warr. This then being true (as the effects do shew) I hope your Majestie in the goodness of your own Princely nature and uprightness, in your judgement will rest satis∣fied: For otherwise, If , or any other like Minister imployed, shall be con∣demned unheard▪ it cannot but minister great cause of grief and discouragement. Touching the other benefit received by your Majesties particular Letter, by which you have so farr forth opened your self, as if you shall of necessity be thrown into a Warr, you find it more agreeable with your surety, to have it accompanied with marriage, then without. I cannot but let your Majestie understand, as I declared to you before my de∣parture, that if your Majestie shall be content to yield to marriage, I am fully perswaded that the King will be induced to covenant with you, that you shall be discharged of such burthen as the  may cast upon you, which is the only matter that we have presently to deal in, considering, that now your Majestie hath so far forth opened your self to Monsienr Marchiamont, as to let him un∣derstand, that if the impediment of the charges that the Warr may cast upon you, may be removed, your Highness seeth no cause why the marriage should not proceed: For this thing being known to their Majesties, all hope to pro∣cure the League without marriage, is excluded. I beseech your Majestie there∣fore, we may receive your speedy direction in this case, as also what other thing you would have annexed unto the marriage, besides the removing of the impe∣diments above mentioned. And so with all humbleness do beseech God of his great and infinite good∣ness, to bless all your Maesties proceedings with that happy success as may be to your Highness particular content, and the comfort of your best affected Subjects. Your Highness poor Subject and Servant, Francis Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer. MY very good Lord, finding in a Letter written to me by Monsieur Mar∣chiamont (whereof I send your Lordship a copy) that her Majestie hath so farr forth opened her self, as that she hath signified unto him, That so the burthen of the charges that the War may cast upon her, be born by the King, she seeth no impediment why she should not proceed to the marriage. I see our Treaty of League without marriage utterly overthrown: so that now there resteth nothing for us to doe here, but to perswade the King to take upon him the burthen of the Warr, as the only impediment in the marriage; and there∣fore we are to pray your Lordship to procure her Majesties Warrant under her own Hand, in plain and clear termes to proceed therein: And if there shall be any thing besides, that her Majestie shall desire to have annexed to her marriage, that is not contained in the former Contract; then we beseech your Lordship, that we may understand her Majesties further pleasure therein: for untill such time as we shall hear from her Majestie, we have nothing to doe here, the League without marriage being utterly broken off. Your Honours to command, Fra: Walsingham. To the Right Honourable, and his very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer. MY very good Lord, I have cause  think my self infinitely bound to your Lordship for your honorable standing for my defence, touching my pro∣ceedings here, which my Lord of Leicester hath testified unto me that you Lordship hath performed in most friendly sort. If her Majestie upon this new resolution taken with Marchiamont, be not resolved to marry, then is she en∣tred into a very dangerous course: For as in mine other Letter I have written to your Lordship all hope of League is taken away, which as your Lordship my perceive by former advertisements was in a very great forwardness to have taken effect, whereof I had never doubt: so that it might have pleased her Majestie to have kept a consonant course there. In like sort, as your Lordship can well remember was Sir Francis Bryans Negotiation crossed at Rome. I cannot but pray to God so to bless her Majesties resolution to marry, with that good effect that may be to her own comfort, and the benefit of her Realm. Your Lordships, Fr. Walsingham.
To the Right Honourable Sir Francis Walsingham. SIr, I thank you for acquainting me with that you write to her Majestie, whereof you sent me a copy, but until this afternoon I had it not; where∣as the original from your self was delivered to her Majestie, the delay (as Mr. Mills told me) of the delivery grew, for that your Cousin had not time to de∣liver it yesterday to Mr. Mills, who also was absent. But having now read it, I see you have great cause why her Majestie should be well content with your actions, in all occurring with the course appointed you; and lo now this even∣ing, without using any token of sight of your letters, I repeated to her Maje∣stie, that the course you held to procure the League, without marriage, was specially committed to you to obtain, against which it was certain, that Monsieur for his particular (and all his Ministers for his sake) would spurn, and so in do∣ing your duty, you were subject to their misliking. Hereupon I found he to assent to that I said. But she added, that she wished that Monsier might have been perswaded thereto. I answered, that she her self should not be able to perswade him to content himself, and much less her Ministers. This afternoon, finding her Majestie unwilling to send the Fleet to the Azores, whereby charge should grow without profit, it was motioned, that in the mean time that her Majestie should be assured of the French Kings actions to concur with hers, two or three of the ships, with a Bark, should forthwith repair to the Tercera with some Captains, Souldiers, Powder and Munition to comfort the slanders to stand fast, and to direct to be furnished for the defence of the Island, until more forces might come; a matter, as my Lord of Leicester saith, Don nthonio desireth. Whereupon this evening, Sir Francis Drake and Hwkins are gone to him, and so I think the ships shall away to morrow, if it alter not. By the next you shall know, though the French King to our Ambassador there, and by his own said, that he would aid Don Anthonio, yet these being but words changeably by a Prince, if now he shall reveal to you his minde, it is reason∣able to say, that though it will require some longer time to contract a treaty hereupon; yet if it please him to write a letter to her Majestie, to assure her that he will joyn with her in aiding Don Anthonio, and if for her action, the King of Spain shall offer offence to her Majestie or her subjects, he shall repute the quarrel his own joyntly with her, in defence of her, and offence of the King of Spain, such a writing may animate her Majestie to that, which I think other∣wise she will not resolve. Her Majestie mneth to send the Lord Howard to. Monsieur to visit him. Yours assuredly, William Brleigh.
To Mr Secretary. SIR, when I had made up your Packet, being come late this Evening, about the many matters spoken of in one of my Letters: The ueens Maje∣stie sent Mr Mldmay to inform me to wite as followeth. This day the French Ambassador, with the Fr: Portuguese Consul Perdon, were with her Majestie with Letters from the Qu. mother, of great earnestness to her Majestie to aide Don Anthonio (by that name, but not by that of the K. Anthony) whereof the Fr: Ambassador made reason for the Q. mothers pretence) but from the French King her Majestie had no Letter; Thereupon her Majestie is scrupulous, doubt∣ing to give occasion of a Warr to be born by her self alone, and the more She doubteth, finding the Fr: King so precise in his Brothers cause. We finde in a Letter of Tuyns here decyphered, that the King sent Gondy to him with ample Commission to carry away the 300000 Crowns, wherewith the Prince of Parma became so lusty: Her Majestie would have you decypher in this matter of Por∣tugal. Tis day Don or King Anthonio hath pressed the Q. Majestie to have restitution of his Diamond, and by Mr Weldmore he would have sent to my Lady for it; but I mean my Ladies answer shall be, that it was left with her by you, and that without your commandment she may not deliver it, except such money be paid as she knoweth you have borrowed upon it. Her Majestie will not have it detained for her 000 l. which I see she could be content to lose, so he were satisfied. Surely Mr Secretary the cause hath been but lightly condu∣cted, and many things overcharged. For I have seen a Note of yours, amount∣ing not much above 3000 l. and it is brought almost to 14000 l. and the King Anthony regardeth nothing therein done, but remitteth his payment to the Island, or rather to the pay of the King of Spa: Indies; yet we here do what we can to content him. I hear that the Count Vimioso will be here within these two dayes; he is altogether French, and will seek to draw this King into France, where his life I fear will be vendible. From my House the 24 night of August, at eleven of the Clock. Your assured Friend, W: Burghley. To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham. SIR, where by my last Letters I made doubt unto you of the going forth of the Ships in the Voyage intended, as before your going over you were ac∣quainted with; yet now at the last her Majestie is resolved that 4. onely shall goe forth under the charge of William Hawkins, wherof the Primrose is the chiefest. And least occasion should fall out of service by Land, Capt. Norris is appointed for that purpose. It is thought meet, that such Victuals as were provided for te other Ships, and cannot well be kept, should forthwith be uttered and sold. Nevertheless, the ships to be in a readiness upon a short warning, as further shall be advertised from you of the French Kings resolution. Her Majestie seemeth resolutely bent not to exceed 5000 l. whereby your charge is the greater, which I have assayed to qualifie, as if it had been my own case. And thus constrained to be shorter then I would otherwise, for the dispatch of this Bearer, &c. Green∣wich late in the night, August 24. 1581. William Burleigh.
To the Lord Treasurer. IT may please your Lordship, after the long stay from proceeding in our Ne∣gotiation, upon such reasons as in our former letters we have advertised. Du Vray came unto us on Friday, to acquaint us with such answer as he had received from the Duke his Master, touching the furtherance of the league desired. The sum of the speeches that he delivered unto us being this, That the Duke was contented that the treaty should go forward, as a thing found necessary by her Majestie, so that it might be no prejudice to the marriage. And for that the Duke his Master rested assured of her Majestie, that she had no such meaning, as by the one to prejudice the other, he did let us understand, that by the said Dukes order, he had imparted so much unto the King; and that he thought upon the return of Monsieur Pynart, who was looked for that evening, we should know the Kings further pleasure touching our proceeding. This report of Du Vray we thought good not to advertise before the  Mr. Sommers from the D by whom we did look to be throughly  of the truth; who re∣turning this last night, delivered as much to us from  Duke, as your Lordship may perceive by his reports set down in writing sent down herewith. This day la Mot and Pynart sent unto us, to let us understand, that the King meaneth to morrow in the morning to confer with his Councel about the cause we are come for, praying us to excuse the delay, that the King (by reason of letters from the Duke his brother, and others from the Duke du Main) was so entertained, as he had no leisure to consult touchig our said cause. As for the manner of our proceeding in the Treaty with the French King or his Ministers, we mean to ob∣serve the course prescribed by her Majestie, as well contained in our Instructi∣ons, as also in your Lordships letters of the 13 of this present. And as touch∣ing the contents of the said letters, whereas her Highness conceiveth by a let∣ter written by me the Secretary the 10 of this present, that a treaty, without drawing her Majestie into charges, will not be effected, which causeth her High∣ness to put on a resolution, that it is as good for her to be at charge with a mar∣riage, as without. In which behalf, for that the one seemeth to us to depend upon the other, and both of them doubtful, we neither receive perfect directi∣on for the marriage, nor for the charges without the marriage; especially what sum her Majestie can be content to yield unto, in case the contribution shall be accorded to be done underhand. We humbly pray your Lordship, that we may speedily have her Majesties resolution herein; for that otherwise the treaty will be drawn into great length, both to her Majesties and the Kings charge here; besides that, we know that it will breed some misliking, and will be found strange, that we should have authoity to deal in general terms onely, without entring in∣to particularities, but must be driven to send over for resolution in such points as might well be considered of before hand, we are the rather moved to pray your Lordship to move her Majestie in these points, for that we are given to un∣derstand, they mean to grow here to deliberation in Counsel, whether it shall be fitter for Monsieur to continue the prosecution of his action in the Low-Countreys; or else having discharged his promise, by releeving of Cambray, to give over further proceeding therein. In the debating whereof, such as are af∣fected to Spin (as we are informed) mean to lay before the King such reasons as may induce him to think it not fit to concur with his brother in assisting him in his action, in respect of the great charges which the following thereof wil re∣quire. Besides, divers other inconveniences that may accompany a war against such a Potent Prince as the King of Spain. Others, that consider the danger
that may grow to this Crown, if his greatness be not impeached, do mean on the other side, to perswade him to joyn with her Majestie upon the present oc∣casions given, for the abating of the said greatness. Now to the end the King may stand assured how her Majestie will proceed in that behalf, it is meant that we shall be effectually dealt withal, both for the manner of the attempt, and al∣so for the charges; wherein, if we shall not be able to yield sufficient satisfacti∣on, it is to be doubted that the resolution will fall out that Monsieur shall be persvvaded to give over the enterprize, whereunto, without support, and by the great offers likely to be made unto him, he shall be of necessity forced to yield and run some such course as shall not be good for her Majesties safety. Thus much we have thought good to impart unto your Lordship, referring the same to her Majesties consideration, praying your Lordship to procure her speedy re∣solution, which may be without alteration, or else it shall be thought here that all our doings are but dalliances. Paris 21 of August. Francis Walsingham. Henry Cobham. I. Sommers. To the Lord Treasurer. MY very good Lord, your letter of the 17 sent hy Mr. Vice-Chamber∣lains man. I have received the contents, vvhereof I mean to send by the next. Sorry I am to see her Majesty so apt to take offence against me, which falleth not out contrary to my expectation, and therefore I did protest unto her, after it had pleased her to make choice of me to employ me this way, that I should repute it a greater favour to be committed unto the Tower, unless her Majesty may grow more certain in her Resolutions there: Instead of Amity, I fear her Highness shall receive enmity, and we her Ministers here be greatly dis∣comforted, having no certain direction what to follow. The Kings charges here are great for my Diet, amounting to One hundred pound per diem: And the charges of his Ambassador that he last sent over, stood him in well near 60000 Crownes, now in the end of it prove neither Marriage nor honourable Amity, he may besides the dishonor, think his charges hardly employed. To think that the Amity (such as may bring surety) will be compassed, we here see no reason so to conceive. Now her Majesty finding it more for her surety to have the charges accompanied with marriage then without, I pray your Lord∣ship that we may have warrant to proceed accordingly, and then by experience her Highness shall not finde that any particular passion beareth that sway with me, as I finde She conceiveth it doth. Whereas her Majesty would have me to signifie my knowledg touching Mr Gilbert York, surely for mine own part, I cannot but report well of the Gentleman, and therefore her Majesty hath re∣ceived information some other way: The Marshall de Coss is greatly condem∣ned here, for that he did not accompany the Duke: he required at the Kings hands a Warrant, not contenting himself with a verball commandment. The King answered him, That he might as well without Warrant accompany his Brother in this Voyage, as to take a Pension of him of 12000 Francks yearly, which no Marshall of France ought to doe. Besides this pension, he hath in Abbies and other benefits bestowed on him, by the Duke (as I am informed)
15000 Francks. The rest of the Marshals Monsieur doth not desire. And so, &c. August 21. Your Honours to command, Francis Walsingham, To Mr Secretary. SIR, when I had imparted to her Majestie all the Letters brought hither this 24. from your self alone, and from Sir Henry Cobham with you, and Mr Sommers; and also the contents of Mr Sommers Negotiation with Monsieur, of all which particularities nothing did or could content her Majestie, more then that Monsieur was entred into Cmbray, according to his honour∣able intention and promise; so as her Majestie rejoyceth greatly with this his fruits of so great an enterprize. And whereas by Mr. Sommers report of the Dukes own mouth, as also by that you have sought to understand, that he is not relieved by the King in this his action, being so chargeable unto him, so as if he have not some present relief otherwise, then as the Duke himself hath told Mr. Sommers, he shall be forced to desist from any further action in the Low-Countreys. As also you by your Letters do signifie, that you fear it will be so concluded by the French King and his special Spanish Councel, that some peace may be made, and Monsieurs honour saved by the revictualling of Cambray, and so his promise being therein acquitted, he may retire and disperse his forces: Upon consideration whereof her Majestie findeth it strange, that Mr. Sommers gave no more comfortable words to Monsieur, upon the declaration of his re∣quest of, and from her Majestie, in such earnest sort as Mr. Sommers himself doh report it: But said, he had no Commission to deal in that matter, but that he would not fail to report his Highness request faithfully to her Ambassadour, whereas contrariwise you Mr. Secretary did in a Post-script of your letter of the 17 of August, write to me, that Mr Sommers, who was then with the Duke, had Commission to offer him support in case he should see his necessity great, or not likely to be otherwise supplyed: so as her Majestie aith, that either Mr. Sommers was greatly to blame not to utter such speeches to Monsieur, or else he had not instruction from you so to do; which to be done by him, or otherwise her Majestie saith plainly, you knew her mind and pleasure. So that she is greatly grieved, that for lack of comfort given him, he may in the mean time be forced to hearken to some other sinister perswasions for some patched peace. Where∣fore, as it may be possible, her Majestie hath willed me with all haste to send this pacquet to you, to will you without any delay to give Monsieur knowledge, that her Majestie hath regard of his cause, and hath at this present instant hour at noon, of the 24 of this moneth, when she heard of Mr. Sommers his motion made to him, given order, that assoon as money can be told, and how that by th advice of Marchiamont it may be safely sent, he shall have a support from her Majestie to continue his action, and not to give it over, being so honourably begun, and now so fortunately entred, by his entry into Cambray for want of support; and so I assure you, Sir, for your satisfaction, I am commanded by her Majestie to cause a support to be ready for this purpose, to the value of thousand pound. As for your other matters, concerning your proceeding in a treaty for a league, her Majestie hath willed me to repeat that
which you have had knowledge of, both by your intructions, and otherwise, since that now the Treaty of the marriage remaineth in suspence, and that the King will be contented to Treat of the rest; you are to consider, that the first matter is to Treat of the general League offensive and defensive, whereby if the King of Spain should offend either her or the King, the other should not only aid the party offended, but also offend the offender, wherein there is no cause to speak particularly to what quantity or sum her Majesty for her part, or the King for his part, should be contributory, as it seemeth to her Majestie, by your Letters you require to have a particular resolution. But for contribution of any sums of money, that is to be treated of with the King upon a secret Treaty apart, in which sort it shall be thought convenient both for the French King, for the abating of the over-greatness of Spain, in what sort Monsieur in the Low-Countries should be supported, and also in what sort and manner the King and her Maestie might aid Don Anthonio to recover his Kingdom of Por∣tugal. And of this secret Treaty you have especial instruction to deal with the King, which would be accelerated, and not delayed, as it hath been by the French, upon a continual pretence to have a resolute answer for the marriage, which now being by Monsieurs consent put in uspence, o as the other Trea∣tys may proceed. It is now then time that this latter Treaty were dealt in, as well for the necessity of Monsieurs actions, to be continued and maintained, as the aiding of Don Anthonio, whilst the Island of Terceras being of most mo∣ment, doth, as you hear, continue for the said King Anth. And whereas you would have her Majstie now aforehand answer you what sum of money, or other aid she shall offer to these several ctions, she willeth me to write, that it is impossibe, or at least inconvenient for her to name any thing in certainty; untill she shall hear from you further knowledge of these things following. Fist for aiding of Monsieur, what shall be his enterprises, of what month∣ly charges, and with what numbers, and then how much thereof may be pro∣bably paid by the States, according to the compact they made with Monsieur; and then what probably himself may of his own contribute. And lastly for supply of that which shall be wanting, what the French King will yield, who in reason, both for his brother, and for respect that the Countries, to be acquir∣ed unto hs brother, are to remain to the Crown of Faance, ought to yield a treble support, and the rather also for that his charges and his Civil Warrs are now at an end, the rather by the means of the travail of the Duke his brother, in the procuring of the last Peace; and these parts being by you well conside∣red and debated, so as you may see reason to lead you to think these computa∣tions probable, then her Majestie shall finde ground to consider how farr she may proceed to contribute, which presently  can neither limit nor ghesse. But because you think the lack of your knowledge to answer hereunto, and the expence of time to send to her for Answer, will seem unto them there, strange: You may assure them, that when her ajestie shall understand the circumstance of the matters, she will yield speedy Answer, and give a reasona∣ble contentation, according to her interest therein, which cannot nor ought not to be so chargeable as percase will be demanded of her; for that herein her Crown shall receive no benefit. Therefore to conclude the like considera∣tion would be had of the state how Don Anthonio may be relieved, wherein there hath been no delay of her part, otherwise then that she would be well assured, that for yielding Reief unto him (which both the French King and Queen Mother have often sollicited) she might not receive offence of the King of Spain, but that the French King would joyn therein, which her Majestie
as well for the charges, as to withstand the offence: And yet in both their matters you must remember, that her Majestie never yielded to proceed other∣wise, then that by secret Treaty she and the King, both might accord thereup∣on to do all underhand, as it might be; and if any offence should be attempt∣ed against either of them for the same, then by vertue of the general League, they should mutually aide one another. And if there shall be any motion made to you to have any open Warr made joyntly by both the Princes, for the abatement of the King of Spain: You may well answer, that you have no Commission for the same; and yet you shall advertise her Majestie how, and by whom, the same shall be mentioned unto you, that she may bet∣ter consider thereof, for great incertainties may happen thereof, if her Maje∣stie should fall into open Warr, upon hope of a mutual aide of the French King, except there were some greater bond by other means then by Treaties and Leagues by writing, her Majestie might percase lack such aid in time, as were convenient and needfull for her. And therefore I think that true, that in one of your Letters you doe conceive of her Majesties meaning, that if her Majestie should be forced to joyne with the French King in an open Warr, it were better to be assured by marriage of the Prince, to joyn with her, then to depend upon the incertainty of the French King alone, having no bond but a Treaty upon words and writing. After her Majestie had read hitherto, she willed me to reitterate more large∣ly, two reasons to you, why her aides ought not to be such as percase will be demanded, The one, for that she hath no party interest in Monsieurs actions, as France shall have. The other, for that Queen Mother hath an interest for Portugal, and not her Majestie. I need not to add these, but to obey her commandments, as I have done in all my Letters. Greenwich, August 24. at night. W. Burleigh. H Enry par la grace de Dieu Roy de France & de Pologne, a tou ceux que pre∣sentes lettres verront salut. Comme nostre tres chere & tres amie soeur & cousine la Royne d'Angleterre ait comis & deputè aulcuns ses Comissionaires & Ambassadeurs pour traictes avec le nostres de quelques points & articles qui restent, & desirent pour le commun bien de nous noz royaulmes & subjects plus ample expression et augmentation des traictes faits entre noz Commissaires & les siens, pour lier et estraindre plus que jamas une parfaicte et sincere amitie entre nous et la dite dame Royne, et aussi de certains articles concernants le traicte de mariage conclu entre les uns et les autres de nos dits Commissionaires l'onzieine jour de Iuin dernier pass, et parcillement pour continuer selon qu' il sera a propos la reservation faicte par forme de sxet et cation, avant que de signer le traict de mariage, scavoir faisons que nous desirans commetre de nostre part des premiers et plus dignes de nostre consill et autres bons personages a nous se fealles pour traicter des choses susdites. Avec les Commissaires et Ambassadeurs de nostre bonne soeur et cosine a plain, confians des personnes de nous amés et feaulx, le sig. Vicount de Cheuergny Messire Philippes Hrault Conseillier en nostre con∣seil d'estat et privé grade de noz seaulx et Chancellier de noz deaux ordres. René de Villequier Chevalier diceulx deux ordres Conseillier en noz dicts con∣seills, Cap. de cent. hommes d'armes, de noz Ordonnances, premier gentilhomme de nostre chambre, Governeur & nostre Lieuten. General a Paris et a L. Isle de France. Monsieur Pompone de Bellieure aussi Conseillier en noz con∣seills, Barnabe Brisson, et Barthram de Salignac &c. Claude Pinart, &c.
et Iaques Du Uray, &c. et ultres a ce no mouvans nous les avons commis et de∣putes, commettons et deputons et leuravons (et au cinq, quatre au trois d'entre eulx, en l'absence ou empeschement des autres) donnè et donnons plan pouvoir, puissance auctorité commission et mandement speciall de traicter pour nous et en nostre nom des choses et affaires susdites et chacun d'iceulx avec les dits Commissaires deputes de la part de la Royne d'Angleterre nostre bonne soeur, et pour cest effect faire passer accordr et conclurre tous les articles et traictesque besoin sera et faire en cest ndroict et tout ce que en depend, ce que nous fercons et faire pouvions si presents en personne y srions jaois qu'il y eust chose que requist mandement plus special qu'il n est contenu en cas des presentes, par lesquelles nous promettons en bonne foy et parolle du Roy avoir agreable tenir firme et stable tout ce que sera faict con∣tenue et accordè par nosdits Commissaires és choses susdies et en chacun d' icelles, sans jamais y contreueinr ny souffrir y estre contrevenu en aulcun maniere; Mais les agreer et approuver par nos lettres patentes comme sera tenue de parte nostre bonne soeur et cosine la Royne d'Angleterre. E'n tesmoing de quoy nous avons faict mettre nostre seel a cedites presentes. Donne a Paris l'an de grace 1581. et de nostre regne le 8. le 23. d'Aoust. Pinart. HENRY R. A Messieurs de Walsingham, Cobham, et Sommers. M Essieurs de W. C. et S. Ambass. de l Royne d'Angleterre Madame ma bon∣ue soeur et cousine. I'ay veu l'escrit que m'aves faict presenter signe de vos mains le jour de hier, pour la prolongation encore de vingt jours de contènue en la contre lettre faicte accordèe et signèe en Angleterre par mes Commissaires et dep∣putes et cex de madite bonne soeur en passant le contract de mariage d'entre elle et mon frere le duc d'Anjou, la quelle prolongation desdites vingt jours I'accorde volontiers et ay bien agreable. A Paris le 23. jour d'Aoust, 1581. Pinart. HENRY R. Memoire des poincts qui furent accordés en la conference entre les Commissaires du Roy tres-christien et ceulx de la seren. Royne d'Angleterre 27. d'Aoust. P rimierement que le traicte fait au temps de nostre frere de bonne memoire le Roy Charles 9. sera confirmé, avec addition de quelques articles pour le re∣mede de depredations. Que le traicte offensive sera seulement pour la conservation d'estats sans nom∣mer aulcun personne. Que si un aultre prince aura assaily l un des confederés, l'autre l'admonester a de se deporter de l'entre prince, et de faire reparation de touts qu'il aura faict, et en cas de refus le dit prince confederè denoncera la guerre a celuy qui aura assailly.
Memoirè des poincts que furent proposeès mais non accordèes. P Remierement si apres la denunciation de la guetre les princes confederes doibvent assaillir, le premier assayllant avec leurs forces conioincts ou a part si avec les forces conioinctes, avec quel nombre on le dobt faire? de quelles sor∣tes de gens? de pied ou de cheval? pour combien de temps. On les dobt entre∣tenir et au dispens de qui cela doibt faire, si c'est avcles forces separes le nom∣bre des forces qu'il fauldra emploier, quel nombre par mer, et quel nombre par ter∣re? ou si tous par mer ou tous par terre, et pour combien de temps on les entre tien∣dra. Ascavoir si les forces de quelles on an est d'accord pour la defensive ne sem∣bleroyent sustisantes pour secourir le prince confederè qui sera assailly ne pourra li∣brement faire choix ou du secours du dit nombre d'hommes, ou d une somme d'ar∣gent qui puisse pour en souldoyer un parei nombre. Les Comissaires deputes pour la S er. Royne de Angleterre, n'ayant reeu aulcuns instructions touchant les particularits qui se povoyent presenter sur ce traicté, par se qu'on a trouveè chose dfficile de les leur donner, jusque a ce qu'intention du Roy fut entirement cognu, respondent a ce qui leurfut hier propos selement, conforme a ce qui leur semble raisonable, jusques a ce qu'ils auront sur ce reeu plus ample mandement de sa Maj. N'ntendants sustraindre ou obliger aulcu∣nement a la conclusion du contenu en la dite re sponce. Responce sur les dites propositions. Q Uant au premier point, il leur semble, que d autant que la traicte est couché en termes gneralles sans specifier aulcune personne, il sera pour tant l'avise de rien conclurre quant au particularité des forces qui se doibuent employer conjointe∣ment. Car devant qu'on puisse considerer le nombre et la qualit des forces que seront necessaires, avec plusieurs aultres circumstances, il fauldra savoir de quel∣le puissance. L'enemy est, ou il viendra mieulx a propos d'employer les dites forces, A raison de quoy il sera bien difficile de se resoudre en cest endroict. Ains s'en faul∣dra remettre a ce qu'on ordonneron les princes confederés mesmes, apre que l'uva∣sion aura este faicte. Quant aux forces que seront employeès a part, il fault consi∣derer si les forces dont on est desia d'avord pour la defesive, ne soffiront pour estre furnis ou prince confedere durant l'espace de quatre mois avec condition que si lles sont employeés aupres l expiration du dit temps ce sera aux despens du Pr. confede∣ré qui sera assailly. Quant a fournir une somme d'argent au lieu de forces come le Pr. qui sera assail∣ly le vouldra demander, les dits Srs. Commissaires en advertiront sa Maj. pour en savoir son intention, et neantmoins il leur semble que sa Maj. s'accordera plus tost de donner secours a'hommes que d'argent a fin que ses subjects se puissent excerier au faict de la guerre. Ils sont aussi d'opinion, que quant aux forces que sa Majestté fornira, il se∣roit bien a propos de les emploier par mer, d'autant qu'ils pourront endommager bien commodement l'enemy tant par discent sur terrè, qu'aultrement, et fault ioy considerer qui sile prince-confederé se vouldra servir desdites forces apres le temps ici limité, ce sera a ses propres despens pour le temps dout on sera d'accord. Avec condition qu'en certains mois de l'anne qui sont mal
propres pour la navigation, sa Maj. pourra a sa voulonté choisir siselle vouldra qu'ou les employe ou bien le rappeller. Et se doibt aussi entendre que les dites navies sendant qu'ils seront au service du prince confedere, qui les demandera, ne passeront les bornes de lamer, oc ean, et seront accomodées de porte; victuailles et aultre choses necessaires selon qu'on en sera d'accord. DEFENSIVE. NO aid to be given to any Invader. Mutual defence (at the expence of the party requiring aid) against any Invader whatsoever. In what sort aid is to be yielded. VVithin two moneths after the aid desired by Letters. For defence by land, 6000 footmen to be landed in France, or more, so they shall be thought meet. In defence by sea  ships throughly furnished with all things necessary, with 1200 souldiers, and victualled for two months. The aid is to be kept as long as the party requiring shall stand in need of them, and do pay them. Liberty to buy Powder, Shot, &c. in the others Countries and Dominions, Summons to be made for Arrest made by any Prince, of English Merchants, and goods, and the Summons not obeyed, to proceed to counter Arrests. Offensive and Defensive. Upon any invasion made by any third Prince, the Confederates are mutually to proclaim the said King invadent, enemy. After Proclamation, they are to invade him. The Invasion is to be made in such and such places, &c. and likewise by sea. The Invasion agreed upon, it is to be made at either of the Confederates expences. The Invasion is to be made with such and such numbers. The Invasion made by one, is not to be left off, nor any Truce, or Peace, or Treaty of Peace to be made or hearkened unto, without the privity and con∣sent of the other. For mutual defence, the order agreed upon and set down in the last Treaty, shall stand of full force and power. Free passage to be given through either of their Countries, to the Prince that is by consent appointed to invade the enemy. A Note of such things as are to be resolved by her Majestie touching the League offensive. 1. WHat other things her Majesties pleasure is should be added to the said League, then by us hath been remembred, contained in the Copies now sent.
2. Whether her Majestie can yield to the support of the 6000 men named in the Treaty defensive for the space of four moneths, at her charges; and if we be by the Commissioners pressed to assent that her Majestie shall bear the charges any longer time then four months, how farr forth she will yield in that case; and if they shall require greater numbers then are above specified, then to what numbers we shall yield, and for how long time to be continued at her Majesties charges. 3. If in case the said Commissioners not content with our answer, shall insist still upon joynt Forces to be yielded to the Princes Confederates, as by them was propounded; we desire to know how far forth we shall yield there∣in, and whether her Majestie in that behalf will be content to contribute a third or fourth part. either in men or money, and whether it shall not be meet to have the said joynt forces to be limitted by a certain number, as also to a time in which they shall be imployed. A Note of such things as are to be resolved by her Majestie touching the secret League. 1. WHat summ of money her Majestie will be content to contribute, and in what sort openly or secretly. 2. To what summ we shall press the King to yield unto in pro∣portion of that summ which her Majestie shall be pleased to supply, whether double or trebble, more then her Highness shall be content to contribute. 3. How long her Majestie will be pleased to contribute the said summ, and upon what considerations, whether by way of loan, or otherwise; and if by way of loan, what caution she will require, and whether it were not meet to covenant with him to procure the bonds of the States ad majorem cautelam, within some convenient time, for the repayment of the same. 4. Whether her Majestie could not best like that this secret Treaty between the King and her, should pass only by mutual promise contained in privat Letters under their own hands. To the Lord Treasurer. IT may please your Lordship to advertise her Majestie, that as by our last Letters to you of the 21 of this present, we advertised of the Kings and Monsieurs consents, that a League should be treated of without speaking of the marriage. So the same day Messieurs, Villquier, la Mott, Bellieur, Brisson, Pinart, and Du. Uray, coming to us from the King, said, that his Majestie desi∣ring much the Queens Majesties amity, and to have the same augmented by Treaties by marriage, and by all other good means; and finding some impe∣diments in the matter of the marriage, he had sent them to confer with us about such other means as might best serve to encrease the amity: And so after divers speeches used to them again, to signifie his H. reciproque inclination in that behalf,
We entred into talk of League defensive, remembring the last made at Bloys in King Charles his time, which they said, if we found not to be suffi∣cient, it should be altered or enlarged: And that they thought it good for both the Realms to add an Article to it, to meet with dissentions and dis∣orders committed on the Sea; whereof they had heard very many. Some∣what they also said touching a Staple to be established at Roan, as is menti∣oned in the said Treaty; but after they had heard good reasons, which moved against the occasion of that Article, they said little to it, but earnestly de∣sired that other for the maintenance of good intelligence, and sure Trade between the Realms and Subjects. Then something was also propounded for a League offensive; where it was also remembred, that there were two kinds of Leagues offensive, the one where two Princes or more doe com∣bine themselves against another Prince by name, the other in general terms, for conservation of Estates. And for as much as France and Eng∣land were at this time in amity with all Princes, that League for conservati∣on of Estates, was thought but to be Treated of, and argued, and so no Prince could have just cause to be openly offended therewith. And so without further entring into particularities untill our next meeting, they departed. On Wednesday the twentithird, they came again, and having shewed their Commission, it was propounded, That for a League offensive, they said it was to be first accorded, that either Princes should be friend to friends, and enemy to enemies, after invasion made upon either of them. And for a second it was propounded, That if either of the Princes Con∣federate should be assaled, the Prince assailed, should be bound thereof to advertise the other Prince his Confederate, who should send streight to the Prince that hath assailed, to warne him to cease his Invasion, and to repaire forthwith the wrongs done, or else in case of refusal, that the said Prince Confederate will denounce Warre to him that did assaile, as he shall doe in∣deed, if the Invader will not retire and repaire the wrongs within seven weeks. This motion being found indifferent for both parts, I the Secretary deliver∣ed to them certain other Notes taken out of other Treaties, which they said they would answer at our next meeting. Your Lordship doth herewith re∣ceive the copy thereof. Here it was propounded by them, That if either of the Princes Confederate should be invaded by another Prince, and that the Prince invaded shall re∣quire his Confederate to declare open Warr, and to enter into open acts of hostility with him against the Invader, as bound by League (after due admo∣nition and summons made) who shall bear the charge of the For∣ces of the Prince required, whether shall he bear them alone, or the Prince requiring to bear a portion thereof, according to his quality and greatness. These things being very considerable, we deferred to answer them untill our next meeting, and so did provide to answer, as your Lordship shall see by notes sent herewith. Beseeching your Lordship to procure her Majesties resolution and answer to us, and that by her Highness direction and warrant, these, and other points that shall be thought meet, may be resolved upon, to be agreed unto here, to come to an end, without unnecessary spending of time and char∣ges. The next day, the 24. whilst we looked for them according to appoint∣ment, they sent us word, that upon occasion of Letters which the King had received that day from his Ambassador in England, the King had deferred their coming untill the next day, and then they came and said, VVe might
well remember, that from the beginning of this Negotiation, and long be∣fore, the King desired nothing more then the marriage, which would bring with it all other good things, for Leagues and streight bonds of amity, such as her Majestie would desire, and that since their being with us, his Majestie had received Letters from his Ambassador Mr. Mannisiere on the 24. and ano∣ther the 25. dated the 22. of this month, by the which he gave the King very great hope of the marriage, upon speeches proceeding from her Majestie in a long conference had of late with her Highness; whereupon the King had com∣manded them to tell us, that seeing that matter was now in so good terms, he thought good to stay further proceeding in the Treaty of a League. But to end first that which was first begun, and in such forwardness, which was the Marriage, and that they thought we should have commandment from her Ma∣jestie very shortly in this behalf; whereunto it was answered unto them, that though we heard nothing thereof from her Majestie, yet we would believe what they had said, as written to the King from his Ambassador, and that un∣till we might understand her Majesties pleasure herein; we thought that this Negotiation for a League might well proceed, to bring it to some good point, and to win so much time, seeing the King had consented and desired to have such a League with her Majestie; Mr. de Chevereny said, that the time would not be so long ere we should receive her Majesties pleasure, and that they could not proceed any further in the Treaty, seeing this was the Kings pleasure. Then it was said by Pinart, that the Ambassador had then written (as so spoken by her Highness to him) that she had rather marry a mean Gentleman of France, then go now from that which was so farr proceeded in between her Highness and Monsieur. Thus we being put off from our Negotiation, and at a stay, knew not how to proceed any further in any thing, untill we may understand her Ma∣jesties pleasure, which we beseech you to procure to be sent unto us in some cer∣tainty, that an orderly and honourable course may be holden to grow to an end. At this time Pinart (as so commanded, he said by the Queen Mother) did very specially recommend to her Majesties consideration, the estate of poor Don Anthonio, and to remember the great charges he hath been at in providing shipping in England, to be sent and to joyn with the French Kings ships under Captain Carles, who he assured they had advertisement, was gon to the sea seven daies ago, thinking to meet with Don Anthonio's ships (rigged in England) at a Cape which he could not name. And that unless the same depart not out of hand, all the charge will be lost, and that the King shall be fain to venture his ships alone, if no other aid joyn with them. He shewed there an advertise∣ment came that day from the Isle of Tercera, that the French have landed there, taken the Isle, and certain ships, and put to the Sword 800 Spaniards, among whom were they whose names were here in a scedule, and that he thinketh they are gon to meet with the rest of the Spanish Fleet. And thus, &c. Paris, the 27 of August. Fr. Walsingham. Henry Cobham Iohn Sommers.
To the Lord Treasurer. MY very good Lord, I send your Lordship here inclosed, the last Arti∣cle contained in mine instructions for the League, which we have for∣borne to adde to those heads of a League, which we exhibited to the Com∣missioners, for that we find it somewhat darke, and therefore doe pray your Lordships explanation therein: For as we conceive of it, it will re∣strain the French King from aiding of the Duke his brother, which I think is not meant, considering her Majesties promise to assist the Duke in the action. I beseech your Lordship that we may have speedy resolution by way of Post, or otherwise, as by your Lordship shall be thought meet, to such things as we send your Lordship by this dispatch. After I had proceeded thus far in my Letter, thinking that our conference with the Kings Commissioners, would have bred some good accord touching the most parts of those points which were by us propounded unto them. Up∣on the hope the King is put in by Letters lately come from his Ambassador resident there, our further conference is staid, as your Lordship may per∣ceive by our general Letters, which if it be not so throughly resolved on as the Ambassador conceiveth, and as he hath reported to the King his Master (whereof we her Majesties Ministers here stand in doubt, having no confir∣mation thereof) Then surely this report will doe a great deal of harm many waies, and ministers to the persons named in mine other Letters, matters of strange discourse. Besides, we that serve here, cannot but be infinitely grieved, to see the weighty cause we have in hand, subject to so many inter∣ruptions, especially of the alteration of proceeding upon occasion given from thence. It were well her Majestie did capitulate with the Ambassador in these great matters, not to advertise any thing without first making her privy thereunto, as also that upon any such resolution taken with him, we here might be acquain∣ted withall, to the end there might be concurrency with us. Touching her Ma∣jesties pleasure for the return of Mr. Sommers, I hope when her Majestie shall consider the weightiness of the cause we deal in, and the number and sufficiency of the persons we are matched withall, her Highness shall see more cause to send some other well chosen Civilians to assist us, then to withdraw him from us. Upon the perusing of a Letter that the Ambassador resident wrote unto me, much to the same effect he had written to the King, I thought good to send to Pinart, to acquaint him with the contents of the said Letter, which (as I gave order to be declared unto him) caried no other substance, but a report of such speeches as her Majestie had delivered to the said Ambassador the same evening that he waited on her Majestie when she road abroad to take the aire, wherein her Majestie did rather lay open unto him how she stood af∣fected to the marriage, then delivered him any resolution, and that it was so, it might well appear hereby, for that her Highness doth not use to give her resolution in any matter of importance, without the privity of her Councel, and acquainting her Ambassador on this side therewith, to the end there may be a concurrency between her Majesties Ministers, and the King, which being otherwise in this case, I could not but rest doubtfull of the substance of the report.
And therefore was desirous if it might stand with the Kings pleasure (consider∣ing the great charges his Majesties is at with us, and the time that passeth away fruitlesly) the Treaty might go on until we might receive further matter from her Majesty. To this Pinart answered, that he thought the request reasonable, for that it was grounded upon great probability, and would therefore the next morning move the King in the matter, requiring in the mean season, that as much might be delivered to some other of the Commissioners, as had been to him, especially to Chivergni Villequire, which was offered to be done by the messen∣ger I sent; but they being in conference with the Queen mother, and therefore for that time not to be dealt withal at his motion, it was delivered to Bellieure, (whom they found in the utter Chamber of Queen mother) who in like sort found the message and request teasonable; and concluded with Pinart, that the next morning the King shall be moved in it; when Pinart delivered this answer to my messenger, he told him withal, that the King upon the receit of this let∣ter from his Ambassador, had put on a resolution not to proceed in any League offensive, unless the marriage were first fully accorded, and that being done, he would make a Treaty offensive, not onely against one Prince, but against all whatsoever. With this I thought good to acquaint your Lordship notwith∣standing I finde them full of alterations, to the end that in case the King should dwell in this resolution, I might receive her Majesties pleasure for my return▪ humbly praying your Lordship to use the matter so, that it may be no cause of stay in her Majestie with this dispatch. For my own opinion, I think that the King will stay in this resolution until he may hear from his brother, to whom Du Uray this day hath dispatched a pacquet, the 26 of August. Francis Walsingham. To the Lord Treasurer. MY very good Lord, whereas I perceive by your letters of the seventeenth of this present, that her Majestie doth marvail that she heareth nothing of my moving of the King to assist his brother; it may please your Lordship, there∣fore to let her Highness understand, that at the time of my first access (unto the King) I did very effectually recommend the same in general terms unto him, and did receive from him assurance that he would have care of his brother, as in honor and in nature he was bound, thinking at the time of our conference, when we should enter into the dealing for the secret Treaty, the time would then have served most aptly to have furthered the same in a more particular sort, which being stayed, as your Lordship knoweth by a request made by Du Uray in the Duke his Masters name, and being given to understand by good means, that the King protested, that unless he had been assured that the marri∣age would have taken place, he would never have suffered his brother to have proceeded so far in the enterprise of the Low-Countries. I thought it out of time to use any perswasion in furtherance of the assistance to be given to the said Duke, unless I might have had some Authority to assure him of the mar∣riage. Besides, If he should have demanded as it is probable he would, what support her Majesty would have yielded for the good will she professeth to
bear towards his said brother, I was restrained to put him in any comfort there∣of, by her Majesties special direction for that, as your Lordship knoweth her pleasure was, I should make no offer of support unto the Duke, unless I were assured that the King would not ayd him; as also for that her Majesty did con∣ceive that if the said King should know that his brother should be supported by her, he would then forbear to yield any relief. The case then standeth thus, as I was neither able to assure him of the marri∣age, without the which, as it seemed, he was altogether unwilling to im∣bark himself any way, nor acquaint him with her Majesties determinations to as∣sist his said brother, whereby to have provoked him to have concurred with her Majesty, being restrained as your Lordship seeth by her Majesty, for the reasons above mentioned, to make any offer of assistance in her Highnesses behalf. I hope her Majesty, upon due consideration thereof will rest satisfied: it is a great grief to any minister that shall be imployed in any matter of that weight, as those that are committed to any charge to have no certain directions. I would to God her Highness would resolve one way or other touching the matter of her marriage, the uncertain course that is now held in that behalf; besides, that it doth offend the Prince here, and discredit her servants that deal therein, especi∣ally being perswaded as they are, that I have more authority then I have, doth mi∣nister unto the Secretaries of forraign Princes matters of discourse, greatly to her Majesties dishonor, and extreme grief of us here that are acquainted withal, as that when her Majesty is pressed to marry, then she seemeth to affect a League and when a League is yielded unto, then she liketh better of a marriage. And when thereupon she is moved to assent to marriage, then she hath recourse to the League, when the motion for the League, or any request is made for mony, then her Majesty returneth to marriage, as these things are delivered out here in discourse among the said Secretaries; so are they all so conveyed and distributed into other Conrts through Europe, whereof her enemies will make their pro∣fit to throw her into the hatred of all the world; it shall be therefore most ne∣cessary for your Lordship and the rest of the Councel, whose advice she doth use in this cause to move her Majesty earnestly to grow to some earnest resoluti∣on in that behalf, as a thing that doth import her greatly, both in honor and safety, Paris August 20. Francis Walsingham.
Au Duc d'Anjou. M On seigneur, ayant tout a ceste heure receu lettres de la part de sa Maj. par lesquelles suis adverty que sa dite Maj. a accordée de fournir a vostre altesse la somme de 100000 escus, n'ay voulu laisser l'opportunité d'en advertir icelle en toute diligence, en estant pour ma part bien joyeula, ne desirant chose plus au monde, que de faire tres humbles services a s'on Altesse, et esperant que ce bon fondement, que sa Majestè a mais, se combler á d'aultres fruicts a vostre souhait. Au reste il plaira a vstre Altesse d'estre adverti, que par le moyen d'icelle estant les commissaires de la Maj. tres-christiens. Et nous au∣tres entres bien avant au traicte des l'amitie perpetuelle que sa Maj desire veoir establie entre ces deux couronnes comme chose fort a propos et duisantè a l'advan∣cement des affaires que vostre A. a presentement en main, et y ayant travaillé en sorte qu'estions bien prés a couronner l'ouurages, tout soudain le 25 de se present mois par le commandement du Roy le dict traicté se rompt, et demeure en suspens a l'occasion de quelque advertisement, que par ses lettres l'un va donner Monsieur de la Muanissiere, comme si la Maj. de la Royne ma maistresse auroit conclus en∣tre elle et luy de donner vostre A sans plus de remises promesse reale, de mariage, entendant proceder si rondement et de bonne foy, que la consummation ne demeu∣reroit gueres a paracheuer, dont peu le estre que Mr. Du Uray a desia adverty. V. A. Chose que nous sembloit bien estrange n'en ayant receu mot de la part de sa Maj. comme n'en avons encores per ses dernieres qui furent escriptes deux jours. Apres celles de son ministre ne se veult en oultre eslargir en l endroit du dit traite, premier que voir le dit mariage tout touchè et arrestteé de sorte, que demeurons maintenant oysifs, et demeurerons si nonque V. A. sera servir de faire cest honneur a la Royne nostre Maistresse et a nous ses ministres et vostres trs∣humbles servit eurs si bien que de moyenner envers la Maj. tres-christienela pro∣cedure du dit traicte, comme chose bien duisante a l advancement du dit mariage, et ne pouvant en sorte du monde l'empescher ou retarder. Que sera la fin en apres avoir tres-humblement supplié V. A. vouloir donner foy et credit a ce porteur en quelques particularitez qu'a icelle il dira de ma part et l'avoir aussi tres-humblement ceusti a icelle ls mains. Ie prie le creator vous avoir et tousjors tenir. Mon signeur en sa tres-saincte et tres-digne garde Escrit a Paris ce 27 jour d'Aoust par moy vostre fidele serviteur Francis Walsingham.
To the Lord Treasurer. MY very good Lord, the contents of your Letter written unto me the 24 of this present, and received the 26. I conceive to consist principally in the points following. First, that her Majesties pleasure is, that speedy knowledge should be given to Monsieur, of the regard her Highness hath of his cause, and of the support it pleaseth her to yield him, to which points is added the dislike she conceiveth, that at Mr. Sommers being with Monsieur, and understanding the necessity he stood in, he had no direction to make him a more comfortable Answer. Secondarily, That in the Treaty of a general League offensive, there is no cause to speak particularly in what quality or sum her Majestie should be contri∣butary. Lastly, That in the secret Treatie, no offer should be made in her Highnesses behalf, before the particularites of the forces that shall be imployed, and of the charges (that Mousieur himself, the King and States will be at) be delivered and set down unto us for Answer, whereunto it may please your Lordship to under∣stand, that immediately upon the receit of the Letters, as soon as I could dis∣patch the messenger, I sent to Monsieur to acquaint him with her Majesties good meaning towards him, and by what means, and with what expedition it should be made over unto him, and as touching the dislike for that the Answer unto the Duke was not more uncomfortable. It may please your Lordship to in∣form her Majestie, that at the time of the sending of Mr. Sommers unto his Highness, because I could not be throughly informed (according to the directi∣ons received from her Majestie) how far the King meant to inlarge himself to∣wards him, and finding also in all former letters received from thence, I was willed not to be over forward in promising of assistance, without good intelli∣gence first had of the Kings intention in that behalf, and being not ignorant what conceits her Majestie hath taken of my service since my being in these parts. It made me to deal the more warily in the Commission I gave Mr. Sommers, and yet was it not such (as your Lordship may perceive by the inclosed Copy) but that the Duke might take comfort thereby. Besides, your Lordship can be a witness with me, how upon the motion made to me by the Viscount Turaign, touching the necessity the Duke stood in, how earnestly I dealt for private support to be yielded him, so as if by occasion of want he should have been constrained to have given over the enterprise, or had carried it otherwise then her Majestie would, I were not to be charged with. Secondarily, Whereas in a general League offensive, it is thought that there needeth no particular Contribution to be spoken of. Your Lordship may see by our last dispatch, that such a motion is already made unto us, and that thing thought needful, having besides the presidents of all former Leagues offensive, thought it will be long before the Contributions shall be imployed; yea, hap∣pily never. And therefore seeing it is material for their satisfaction, and a matter of no new president, we could do no less but desire to know her Majesties plea∣sure therein, which we hope to receive by the next dispatch. Lastly, For the particularties of the secret Treaty, our opinion is, that a cer∣tain proportion set down, such as her Majestie can be content, were very neces∣sary, and greatly for the furtherance of the service intended, whereby in our Treatie with them, we might frame our course the better in seeking to be in∣formed of their several Contributions. For to stay the resolution whereof,
until the certain numbers be set down, wherewith the service of the Low-Coun∣tries shall be prosecuted (which is a matter very hard, and found by experience, that it never holdeth in any certainty) will draw the Treaty into an unnecessary length. Besides, We are perswaded that it will be much more chargeable for her Ma∣jesty, in case she should capitulate with them to furnish them either with men or mony, according to such proportions as they shall set down; for that there can∣not but grow some variance for the numbers of men, and for the time of service wherein they shall be imployed; whereby her Majestie shall be driven to pay for greater numbers, and for longer time of employment, then in Reason and Equity she ought. And herein experience doth teach us, that in former Leagues of Association, there hath risen always great controversies about the above named Circumstan∣stes. For the avoiding whereof, it were necessary some certain Contribution were set down, and without yielding Contribution, it will be but in vain to en∣ter into any speech of the League, though for the Reasons contained in your Lordships letter, it ought not to be great, considering that besides the benefit that this Crown doth receive to have the King of Spain kept under, they are like to eceive some particular benefit otherways, which if it be true, as Du U∣ray informeth me, the same also being confirmed by President Neve and Secre∣tary Qinsey at my being at La Fere, the benefit is only to redound unto Mon∣sieur in the state that he is now; for when he shall come to be King of France (if that (for default of issue in the King) should happen) they of the Low-Countries have capitulated with him, that they may be at their own choice to choose their Soveraign. But herein such direction as it shall please her Majesty to giv us, we will fol∣low, putting your Lordship onely in minde, that the longer tract of time it shall receive, the more subject shall it be to practises: Whereby upon great offers to be made, they may be drawn to run some other course. And therefore the more expedition is used, the better success it is likely to take. And as touching the Argument which her Majesties pleasure is, we should use to induce them to think that she ought not to be burdened with any great charges touching the matter of Portugal, considering the Queen mothers pretence, we will not fail when we shall have to deal therewith, to proceed accordingly, though I am per∣swaded that the said Queens pretence is used but for a colour to justifie such assi∣stance as they shall give, rather then in hope of any benefit they look to receive thereby, otherwise then that the King of Spains greatness shall be abated. And so &c. Paris this 28 of August 1581. Fr. Walsingham.
To Master Secretary. SIR, Since the departure of Iohn the Currier hence, this is done: Mr. Sommers is ordered to ride to Monsieur, he hath secretly to carry with him so many pistolets as come to—And there is just as much more to be pro∣vided, which is here hard to be gotten. My Lord of Leicester moved Palla Vicine to procure it by exchange at Paris, which he took upon him; but when I was curious how he would do it, he answered me, that every Crown would cost me four pence at the least, and yet he could not so answer it; but for a small sum; and secondly, for the time, he could not answer me, but that he must pass it forth to Antwerpe, and then to Paris; he also was moved to ride to Paris him∣self, but the charge thereof must be layed to the former, so as the sum would be slenderly pinched with such abatements. Hereupon I stayed proceeding with him, and have for the first half made means here, and have gotten Paul Swallore, Alderman Martins man to take charge of packing, the wait is more then two spare horses can carry, and now I am resolved to divide it into four portions, and to commit to four the several portions to be carried upon a Pil∣lion; and so they may pass in post, whereas otherwise being charged upon two horses, they could not ride post with it, I am now to pray you to advertise me what you can do there, to have the rest paid there, if the like sum shall be paid here with security by Exchange, and what the charge will be, or else whether you think the same were not best to be sent in specie thither to Monsieur himself, which I think the best; seeing therein are two inconveniences, danger by sea, to pass for La Motts knowledge, and by Land by false brethren, or Spaignoilists; for I fear such secresie will not be kept of the next, as I trust hitherto in this. I have such crooked dealing here with Lopez, for that the King urgeth the speedy delivery of the Jewel without satisfaction for your charge, as I think Mr. Mills will advertise you, the Queens Majestie for her part, is content to stand to cur∣tesie, or to loss, for the 5000. l. From Scotland we hear commonly evil, that the King shall acknowledge to have by evil counsel of his subjects, usurped the Crown; and therefore he will resign it to his Mother, and she to grant it back to be possessed joyntly. We hear also that the Earl of Arraign is fully bent to make a Band of the Protestant Nobility to the contrary hereof. I think my Lord of Leicester will write hereof to you, for he hath dealt here in very wisely by means of Robert Ashton, that was my Lady of Lenox servant at this time. I have paid this bearer Philips 20. l. in name of his travel. Greenwich the 27 August. 1581. W. Burleigh.
To the Lord Treasurer. MY very good Lord, Finding by the inclosed, that the Duke desireth that all expedition may be used in the transportation of the mony, I thought it very necessary to send away this messenger with all speed, whom I did imploy in this journey towards him. And therefore found it expedient to send him unto you, to the end he might make report both of the state of his Camp, and of the present enterprise he hath in hand. If your Lordship mark the Letter well, you shall finde it written with ve∣ry great judgement, and in most thankful sort. If this young Prince con∣tinue the course he hath begun, there are few or none that promise greater things in our days then he. The pain he taketh, as this bearer can shew you, is intollerable, and his pa∣tience (having to deal with so strange and nquiet humors as serve under him) is admirable. It offendeth the better sort here to see such Treasure spent here in preparati∣ons of Masks and other vanities, and this poor Prince forced unless he were o∣therwise relieved, to give over an enterprise so many ways profitable to this Crown. Amongst other things I gave this bearer (in his Instructions) charge to know the Dukes pleasure, whether I should make the King and his mother privy to the Loan, and in what sort I should deliver it unto them. In answer whereof, he hath willed him to let me understand, that he referreth the same to her Majesties best consideration; for mine own particular opinion, considering that the matter cannot be kept secret, I think it meet they should be both made acquainted withal, for that it might nourish or rather increase in the King a jealousie, already conceived of some inward intelligence, not to the best purpose between her Majesty and the Duke. Besides, it would serve to very good purpose to remove the opinion that both he and his mother have conceived that her Majesties friendship consisteth altogether in words, who hitherto hath shewed more friendly and better effects then they thought both nature and policy ought to lead them, to deal otherwise then they do. This day I had long speech with Queen mother, both about tha Portugal causes, as also about our stay of the proceeding in the Treaty, for the first, I do finde by her that the King will attempt nothing by way of Oc∣currency with her Majesty without the marriage, and as for our further pro∣ceeding in the Treaty; I also learn by her that he is resolute to stay until he hear from his Ambassador: hereof I will enlarge unto your Lordship more at length by the next, the conclusion of her speeches were an earnest recommendation of the marriage, without the which she said she saw there could be no sound friend∣ship; she also renewed her former request touching the support to be yielded to Don Anthonio letting me understand that the four ships were departed from Bur∣deaux with six hundred men at the least; and therefore prayed me most effectu∣ally to recommend the same to her Majesty. Whereas I perceive by your Letter of the one and twentieth, sent by the Lady Marquesses brother, that her Majesty is offended, for that she is not more particularly informed of the state of both Armies; I shall desire your Lord∣ship to be an humble suitor in my behalf unto her Majesty, that it will please her Highness to conceive better of my service here, then I perceive she doth.
And as for the fault her Majestie findeth, there lacketh no care in me, nor in the Ambassador resident here, to seek by all the means we may, to get knowledge, of the particularities she desireth to be informed of. But we finde here so great uncertainties, as if we should advertise what we hear, we should revoke one day what we hear another; and therefore are loath to inform until we can attain to some certain knowledge of the true state of things, and where her Ma∣jesty conceiveth that we may be informed of the Dukes ministers here, I finde them not hitherto so throughly instructed, or at the least not willing to impart their knowledge to us, as I perceive her Majesty is perswaded they are. And therefore as this bearer can shew you, I have prayed the Duke to give order that by his Ministers here we may be informed from time to time of his pro∣ceedings, which he hath promised shall be performed. I am privately given to understand that our Treaty shall stay any further proceeding until her Majesties full resolution to the marriage be known. And therefore I pray your Lord∣ship to procure her Majesties direction, in case it fall out so, what course we shall hold. Paris 27 August. Francis Walsingham To Master Secretary. SIR, I am sorry heartily at this time I cannot procure you any such resolute Answer as I desire, and know the causes do require; I will not write to you of the incertainties here, as I take patience here in solliciting, so you must in the lack of that were meet for you, the Letters that have been writ to you in com∣mon, have been altered twice, and yet scantly goe with allowance; but that her Majesty hath since commanded me to add these things as well to the Letters, as to the Answers of the two papers for the two Leagues. For the general League her Majesty will not be bound to any number certain, but will aid ac∣cording to the form of an Article in the Treaty of Cambray, which form she hath chosen upon this ground: She commanded me to press all the Treaties, I could, both with the Emperor and French King, and to repeat to her the diver∣sity of ayds, which I did, and though the greater number contained with number certain, some at the cost of the Prince invaded, and some, but yet few, at the costs of the confederate not invaded, with reference to his power, and with charge of his Conscience; her Majesty very earnestly took hold thereof, and so she would have you proceed; and though the example I sent you be out of the Treaty between the Emperor and King Henry the eight, yet you shall finde in the Treaties between H. the 8. and Francis the French King, Anno 1525. made by the L: Bogect of France, a like Article of uncertain ayd; and in like manner, you shall finde the like in the Treaty Anno 1546. between H. 8. and Francis the French King. And so her Majesty being not by us here, to be perswaded otherwise, you are to accept her Answer as she will have it. After also that she hath directed an uncertain Answer to the Articles of the pri∣vate or secret League which I do send you, as I conceived her minde, and as her self did read them; yet she commanded me to write unto you, that she knew not why she should be at any certain charge, either for Monsieur or D Antho∣nio. For as for Monsieurs Actions, she would therein give such support as she should please without coertion.
But yet she added this thereto, That if by that her answer she should think that Monsieur for lack of support should leave his actions in the Low-Coun∣treys, she will yield to ayd him, though presently she will not declare to what quantitie. And for supporting of Don Anthonio, she knoweth not why she should be bound to any certain charge, considering the Queen Mother, how she hath in other sort favoured Don Anthonio, then percase his Mi∣nisters will report. For she did cause such preparations to be made for him as amounteth to thirteen thousand pound English (you may turn it in speech to above forty thousand Crowns, and all this charge lost by lack of good answer from the King. For his conjunction with her Majestie in this ayd, and that her Majestie nevertheless did offer to the said Don Anthonio the price of any five of six good ships, but he would not accept them. And in them he had bought and hired certain ships and barks, to the number of eight, which he doth now mind to send away; and likewise he himself desireth pass-port for himself to depart, which her Majestie doth yield unto; and to tell your self truly, he is solicited hereto by the French Ambassador, I pray God he may find good dealing there, that he be not sold there away. Her Majestie would have you to have regard to the defence of her in any thing that may be there cast abroad on the said Don Anthonio's behalf: So as you must answer for her Majestie therein, that the lack of the intended voyage hath not grown by her means, Thus full warily must I yield, for in these unpleasant mat∣ers I am weary of a small working, I hope her Majestie will be better dis∣posed to give you some further authority, or else surely, I could wish you at home. Greenwich the second of September, 1581. Postscript. I pray you heartily excuse me to my Lord Ambassador there, that I write not now privately to him, nor yet to Mr. Sommers, whose excuse is well al∣lowed of W. Burleigh. To Master Secretary, Sir Henry Cobham, and Mr. Sommers. AFter my hearty commendations: upon the receipt of your Letters of the 26 of August, written from you there joyntly, I did impat the same to her Majestie, and to my Lords of the Councel that are here. And for that one of the most special matters in your letter concerneth the stay of your proceeding forward in the Treaty already begun, for a League offen∣sive betwixt her Majestie and the French King, which is alledged on the Kings part to have grown by report of his Ambassador here in his Let∣ters to the King, as is mentioned in your Letters, her Majestie denying, that she used any speech either with the Ambassador or any other tending to
that purpose, whereof your letters make mention she thought good to send for the Ambassador, and to charge him therewith; and so she did yesterday in the afternoon; whereupon he shewed forth the Copy of his letter to the King, which also I did see wherein her Majestie findeth no such matter as proceeding by any speech of hers, to move him to write, as it is reported to you she should: And so he doth also deny, that he hath written in any like sort to the K. but as I do ga∣ther by his letter, he uttered his own opinion to have Mr. continue constant i the matter of marriage, thinking that thereby he might prevail, because in speeches with her Majestie, he found her very careful of him, and of his estate, and very sorry that he should adventure his person in such sort, as it appeareth he shall in the Low-Countreys; and so with many other like speeches of his own conceit, without affirmation of any such thing to proceed from her Majestie, as hath been alledged there to you to be written by him, he doth confess that his own principal desire is to have the marriage take place, but doth not affirm any thing certain of her Majesties speech delivered unto him, to move him to give any assurance by his writing to the King, or to Monsieur, neither yet to move them to despair thereof: And to this end, her Majestie hath required him to certifie the King how he hath been herewith by her Majestie charged, and in what sort he hath answered for discharge of her Majestie; so as hereupon her Majestie hopeth, that the King will give order to his Commissioners to continue the Treaty begun with you, which her Majestie would have you earnestly to press forward, as a matter profitable as well for the French King, and his Countreys, as for her Majestie, and not to interpret the proceeding therein, to tend to the breaking off the marriage, which you can tell upon what terms and just causes, her Majestie hath suspended, being therein not sa∣tisfied with any direct answer from the French King, to clear the doubts and dif∣ficulties committed to the charge of you Master Secretary, to deliver both to the French King and Monsieur. Now concerning your several articles sent, contained in your papers: First, of the general articles propounded: Se∣condly, of so many as you have already accorded; and, Thirdly, of certain points not fully answered by you, but reserved until you might receive some further direction from her Majestie for the same, you shall understand, that all these your writings have been here perused by such of the Councel as are present, and re∣port thereof here at the Court made to her Majestie, with their several opinions, which shall most properly appear by marginal notes in every of the same; and if so be it shall chance, that you cannot obtain of the French King that his Com∣missioners, and you her Majesties Commissioners, shall proceed in the Treaty for a league, as you did begin; and as the French did twice yield thereunto, that is, at your first coming to him from Monsieur; and secondly, after that, by Pynart for the King, and you Master Sommers for her Majesties part, re∣turned from Monsieur with his contentation, that the Treaty might pass, so as nothing thereby might be prejudicial to the cause of the marriage. Then you may say to the King▪ That your abode there is but superfluous, and more chargeable for the said King, then serviceable, and therefore you shall desire him to license you to return, which you may say, will be by such as mislike of the good amity between her Majestie and the King, be interpreted to the worst, and will give them more comfort then were convenient at this time. And if notwithstanding, this allegation and reason yielded, they will not pro∣ceed in the Treaty, her Majesties pleasure is, that you shall return; and so also, shall Master Sommers, except you your selves see any cause proba∣ble for your abode, until you may advertise us, and know our pleasure. Her Majestie commanded me to write to you, that it is greatly misliked,
is greatly misliked, that you have not more particularly and more earnestly moved the French King to give supprt to the Duke his brother, in a cause so honourable for the honour of France, and the Crown thereof. And her Maje∣stie understandeth, that the King himself may think you, as her Majecties Mi∣nisters, careless herein of Monsieurs well doing. And as I have heretofore written to you hereof, so did I impart to her Majestie your answer that you had moved to the King at your first coming thither, and of the French Kings an∣swer. But her Majestie thinketh, you might have solicited such a matter, both more earnestly, and more often. And so now I do notifie unto you her Maje∣sties opinion at this time, concerning the cause of Don Anthonio King of Por∣tugal. You shall declare either to the French King, or Queen Mother, if they shall give you any cause to speak thereof, that there hath been no lack nor de∣fault in her Majestie, that he hath not been in other sort relieved: For, as your self knoweth, before your departure it was by us agreed, what support he should have had of ships, and men, and munition, according to his own desire and demand. And to that end, great sums of money have been laid out, as therein you have a part of the burthen, and accordingly the ships and men, with victual and munition, was ready two moneths past; and as you also know, it was by the King Don Anthonio agreed, that he would not press us to grant him this support, thereby to provoke the King of Spain to some hostility against our subjects trading in his Countreys, except the French King should joyn with us in this action, and thereof give us assurance. Whereupon Don An∣thonio sent himself a Count of his, and other Messengers, to sollicite the same to the French King; but so the matter hath fallen out, that we never could have any perfect answer from the King; whereby we might be assured, that he would joyn with us in this support. But his Ambassadour here hath said, that the King his Master especially thanketh us for our courtesies and reliefs to∣wards Don Anthonio his Kinsman, and exhorted us to proceed, and he said, there should be ships of▪ France for his ayd. And in like sort the Queen Mo∣ther required our Ambassador there, to advertise us the like disposition in her; but all this time we had no direct answer of assurance, that the King would give him support. Whereupon, with very great charges, the preparations of the ships and men in wages, and in expence of victuals, hath continued almost two whole moneths; and thereby the said Don Anthonio hath lost the whole op∣portunity of the time of the year, over-slipping the recovery of the good Isle Madera, and of other Isles of the Azores, saving Terceras, which by Gods goodness was preserved by the Islanders, and indeed not by any aid of the force of the French men: For in very deed, at the time of the repulse of the Spa∣niard, which was on St. Iames day, there were no French men there, but one∣ly An. Scabiny had been there before, and was gone Westward, as was sup∣posed▪ to make some profit of the straglers of the Italian fleet; for otherwise, he was not able to incounter the Fleet it self, nor yet to offer fight with the Kings Armado, sent under Pedro de Valdes; besides this, by this delay, for lack of good answer from thence, this King Anthonio doubteth of the constancy of a great number of his subjects in Portugal, who secretly hoped upon his sup∣port; and so now in the end, though we could have no answer from thence, whereby her Majestie might be build with assurance of the French Kings con∣junction to adventure the King of Spains offence, yet she did offer to the King nthonio the service of certain good Vessels, well armed, victualled and furnished with men and munition largely, to repair now in the latter end of August. But the King prudently (considering, that the time was past for this year, to recover any more Isles then he hath already; and that such
as hold for him could not be by the enmity assailed from henceforth, until the next year) did not accept our offer, but finding the default of answer from the French King, to have been the cause of our stay, he meant onely to send away a few ships which himself had bought and armed here; for the which her Maje∣stie hath already yielded him a pass-port. When you shall again deal with the King to have care of his Brother now entred into the Low-Countreys, whose actions, for the honour of that Crown, are to be maintained; you may shew him that we think he was not well counselled by such as moved him to yield to * Tanis the King of Spains Agent, that 300000 or 400000 Crowns were by his special license carried from Lyons to the Prince of Parma, which if the King had stayed but one moneth or twenty days to give license as he did to Tanis, there had manifestly followed in the Prince of Parma's Army such a disaster, as is notoriously known, before the coming of that money; that the said Army was ready, for want of pay, to have broken, and especially all the Almaignes had revolted to the service of Monsieur le Duc, which by the ayd of that money was altered, to the disadvantage of the Duke his Brother. And you may say to the King, that by considering of this, her Majestie doubteth, that there are some in credit with him, that regard not in their counsels, what should be the means to stay the greatness of the King of Spain, which causeth her Majestie to be more doubtful how she shal deal in any action tending to stay the said great∣ness, except she might evidently see some more appearance of the French Kings determination to the same end, which in this cause of his Brothers actions in the Low-Countreys, both ought and might best appear by some honourable good support, to be given to the Duke his Brother. Greenwich the second of Sept. 1581. Will. Burleigh. To Mr. Secretary. SIR, notwithstanding your later letters of the 28 of August, importing many reasons to move her Majestie to give some better answers in particularities; yet her Majestie reading them, and being reasoned withal, will admit no other answer then was directed by the letters written, though not sealed up before your last. What may further move her Majestie hereafter, I know not, but I see it common to great and small, not to think of adversity in time of prosperity, and so adversity cometh with double peril. At this present Don Antonio is come to take his leave of her Majestie; he will press to have his jewel, and so that you may be satisfied, I agree to it, and so sometimes doth her Majestie; but in conclusion, he would have the jewel answer for all the losses, which of the 13000 l. I think will be about 3600 l. whereof 170 l. is desperate imprest, and wages and victuals spent, the rest falleth out in the resail of the victuals. I appoint Mr. Mills to be in commission about this dissolution and sail, who will better satisfie you then I can. And so, &c. Septemb. 2. William Burleigh.
The Article onely enlarged in words. I Tem, it is good to covenant, That neither of the Princes now confederated, shall at any time hereafter the conclusion of this Treaty, give open aid to any enemy of any third Prince with whom at the conclusion of this league they are in peace, thereby manifestly to provoke the other third Prince for such aid so given; to make war or invasion against the Prince that shall give such aid, for that cause of aid given; but that before the aid shall be so openly given, the Prince meaning to give such aid, should first advertise by his letters the other Confe∣derate, and have his allowance thereof in writing. In which word of aiding, shall not be meant any other kind of ayd, but such open aid as shall make the enemy aided thereby able by such aid to use open hostility, and to make war against the third Prince. Will: Burleigh. Her Majestie doth not mislike of this Article, but yet she can be content it be forborn. The Queens Majestie commanded me to set down a case upon the Article herewith: I Tem, to covenant with the French King, that he shall not give open ayd to any enemy of the King of Spain, thereby to provoke him to make war up∣on the said French King, but that he shall first advertise her Majestie thereof, and have her allowance, otherwise her Majestie shall not be bound to aid the French King, or to make war upon the King of Spain. In like manner the Queen of England shall not, &c. Ut supra, mutatis mutandis. An Answer of such things as are desired by her Majesties Commissioners to be re∣solved, touching the League offensive, consisting in three points. To the first: AT this time here is no other thing remembred necessary to be add∣ed. To the second, Her Majestie thinketh it better for you to offer a covenant, such as you shall find contained in a treaty betwixt Henry the eighth, and Charls the fifth, 1522. in the second Article; the sum whereof is, That if any Prince or other person should offend the Emperor Charls in his Person, Dignitie or States, or shall take any thing from the said Emperour, in that case he shall repute the same offence or wrong as done to himself, and shall repell the same with all his power, and shall yield at his own charges aids convenient to withstand the same, and to the reciprock the Emperour was bound; but for tempering these words which are in the Article, Totis virbus & potentia sua propulsabit, her Majestie would have these kind of words added, Prout commodo id fieri possit, habita ratione temporis & loci, ac etiam faultatis suae; and the cause that moveth her Majestie to have
rather such an Article of a general resistance, then a particular Covenant for num∣bers of men or money, is even as your selves made you answer to the first: For until the manner of the Prince Invader be known, and thereby consideration had what manner of ayd defensive shall be needful to withstand the same invasi∣on, or to revenge it, the resolution cannot be particularly set down what num∣bers shall be requisite. But if the French Commissioners shall mislike of such a kind of Article; you may say, the like hath been between Henry the eighth and Charls the fifth; and yet if that will not satisfie, it may be further cove∣nanted, That upon notification of the invasion, and of the greatness thereof by the Prince invaded, the Prince not invaded, shall give such ayd at his expence, as reason shall move him, and therein, as in former treaties, hath been expressed as in the fourth Article of the Treaty of Cambray, Anno 1529. The Copy whereof is now sent unto you. Articulus 4 defensionis & auxilii Cameraci, Anno 1529. 30 Augusti. ITem conclusum, concordatum, & conventum est, quod pro tuitione con∣servatione & defensione personarum praedictarum, illustrissimorum, prin∣cipum regnorumque Angliae, & Hisp. ac patriarum terrarū, Dominiorum, Castro∣rum, Civitatum, Villarum, & Territoriarum Hibern. Calisiae, Flandriae, Hollandiae, Zelandiae, Hannoniae, Artesiae, Limburgi, Lucemburgi, Namurci, Frisiae pa∣triarum Transisulaniae, Trajecti, & Machliniae, contra invasores perturbatores, hostes agressores quoscunque; dicti illustrissimi ac potentissimi reges contra eos Principes ac Potentates, quocunque consanguinitatis aut affinitatis vinculo con∣nectantur, & quacunque dignitate, five spirituali five temporali praefulgeant, vel alios quoscunque, cujuscunque status, gradus aut conditionis essent, qui regne praedicta, terras, Dominia, civitates, Castra, Territoria, villas, oppida, & lo∣ca quaecunque praedicta ad alterum praedictorum illustrissimorum Principum, eo quo praedicitur modo, pertineant five spectent, impugnare aut invadere nitantur, aut moliantur, seu bellum aut guerram faere, aut movere praesumpserint, aut attemptaverint: se invicem mutuis auxilliis militaribus gentium, armorum, tam equitum quam peditnm, ac navium, armatorum{que} una cum machinis & instru∣mentis bellicis atque etiam auxiliis comeatuum, curruum, plaustrorum, jumento∣rum armorum, caeterarumque rerum ad bellum seu defensionem necessiarum, ad expensam principis open requierentis & interpellantis, quoties opus & necesse fuerit, adjuvabunt. In quorum auxiliorum praestatione, quantum ad mutuum attinet, militum & navium, armatorum ac instrumentorum, ac machinarum belli∣carum, caeterorumque praedictorum habenda erit ratio facultatis illius partis quae ad defend. & praestand. opem requiretur five interpellabitur, ut scilt. ad ampli∣us subditorum & auxiliorum non astringatur, aut teneatur praestare quam tunc commode facere poterit, consideratis temporibus & locorum opportunitate re∣rum{que} suarum statu, ex jure principis conscientiae sic interpellati, onerabitur: quan∣tum vero ad impensas & stipendia militum aut navium armatarum attinet, Illa taxabuntur & moderabuntur habito respectu ad forum victualium quod in par∣tibus illis, ubi milites praedicti degent aut militabunt, & naves excercebuntur tunc temporis, continget; secundum locorum & temporum sterilitatem & uber∣tatem. Qui quidem milites & naves armatae, ei, cui sic competunt, fideliter servi∣ent quam diu eos duxerit & retinendos putaverit, iisdemque stipendia, ut prefer∣ur, fideliter perioluerit. To the third, This is answ Hic articulus fuit expressis verbis repetitus & confirma∣tus in tractatu dilucidationes Anno 154. per Epis. Winton. Epis. Westm. & Ed. Carum militem.
An Answer to those things are that desired by her Majesties Commissioners to be resolved touching the secret League, consisting in four points. To the first, HEr Majestie for answer hereunto saith, That she cannot resolve upon any particularities, concerning the said first three Articles, until it shall be understood upon what points this secret league shall be made, nor until it shall be enformed, according to my late writing, what may be thought, what will be the monethly charge of Monsieurs actions, and how the same may be born by Contribution of the States of the Low-Countreys, according to their com∣pact with Monsieur; and thereupon also, what shall be further thought necessa∣ry for a supply of the said charges, and how the same may be answered by Mon∣sieurs own expences, and how much his brother the French King will yield un∣to; to whom, for the honour to the Crown of France, this case doth specially belong: And when her Majestie shall understand from you some probable estimation hereof, she may then, having your advice, also resolve of such pro∣portion as shall be meet for her to yield, To the fourth. Her Majestie liketh best to have this Treaty secretly handled, for sundry re∣spects, which will hardly be kept secret, if all the free Commissioners that now treat with you, should treat also of this secret league. Postscript. Her Majestie would have the latter answer to the fourth forborn; and for the former to the third, her Majestie delivered to me a speech, altering from that answer, as I have particularly written to you Master Secretary the 2 of September. W. Burleigh.
TO HER MAJESTIE. IT may please your most excellent Majestie, The Laws of Ethiopia, my na∣tive soil, are very severe against those, that condemn a person unheard; but most sharp against such as judge amiss of those that sit in Princely Chair, as gods here on earth. To tell your Majestie what others conceive upon the late stay of our proceedings here (as by the Letter it pleased your Majestie to vouch∣safe to write unto me, it seemeth you conceive) who cannot think that such effects should grow of naked and weak causes) I hope is not to condemn, when I either look into your Majesties own Princely judgement, who for your own Highness-sake, ought to have care to preserve your Ministers credit; or con∣sider mine own duty, which teacheth me not to condemn those that I am bound to defend, I should then be worthy of the most sharp punishment that either the Ethiopian or Draco's Laws can yield, if I should wittingly, by wrong sup∣posal grow to so hard a censure, as to think that your Majestie should prefer in matter of trust, a stranger before a servant, that in loyalty will give place neither to subject nor stranger. I cannot deny, but I have been infinitely grieved to see the desire I have had to do your Majestie some acceptable service (in the present charge committed unto me) so greatly crossed. But I will leave to touch my particular, though I have as great cause as any man that ever served in the place, I now unworthily supply, being at home subject to sundry strange jealousies, and in forreign service, to displeasure, though I dare make the greatest enemy I have the censurer of mine actions and proceedings in such forreign actions as have been committed unto me. If either ambition or riches were the end of my strife, my grief would be the less. But now to the publique, wherein if any thing shall escape my pen, that may breed of∣fence, I most heartily beseech your Majestie to ascribe it to love, which can never bring forth evil effects, though sometimes it may be subject to sharp censures. And first, for your Majesties Marriage: if your Majestie mean to remember, that by the delay your Honours useth therein, you lose the be∣nefit of time, which (if years be considered) is not the least to be weighed; if you mean it not, then assure your self it is one of the worst remedies you can use (howsoever your Majestie conceiveth it, that it may serve your turn) And as for the league we were in hand withal, if the King would have assent∣ed that the same should have proceeded in general terms, according to such direction as we have lately received from your Majestie, I am for sundry causes led to think, that it would have proved unprofitable; as generally I know that there is a president to confirm the same; but if in that time a King of Scots, pre∣tending a title to the Crown of England, was like by matching with Spain, to have wrought that peril towards your Majesties father, as he is to∣wards you, he would not then have stood upon generality, as your Ma∣jestie doth now. For in diseased bodies, there is not alwaies like use of medi∣cines; sometimes when your Majestie doth behold in what doubtful terms you stand with Forreign Princes, then you do wish with great affection, that opportunities offered had not been slipped. But when they are offered to you (if they be accompanied with charges) they are altogether neglected. Common experience teacheth, that is as hard in a pollitique body, to prevent
any mischief without char ges, as in a natural body diseased, to cure the same without pain. Remember, I humbly beseech your Majestie, the respect of charges hath lost Scotland; and I would to God I had no cause to think that it might put your Highness in peril of the loss of England; I see it, and they stick not to say it, that the only cause that moveth them here, not to weigh your Majesties friendship, is for that they see your Majestie doth fly charges o∣therwise then by doing somewhat underhand: It is strange, considering in what state your Majestie standeth, that in all the directions that we have now recei∣ved, we have special charge not to yield to any thing that may be accompanied with charges. The general Leagùe must be without any certain charges. The particular League with a voluntary, and no certain charge, as also, that that is to be attempted in favour of Don Anthonio; the best is, that if they were (as they are not) inclined to deal in any of these points, then they were like to re∣ceive but small comfort for any thing that we have direction to assent unto. Heretofore your Majesties predicessors, in matters of peril, did never look in∣to the charges, when their Treasure was neither so great as your Majesties is, nor Subjects so wealthy, nor so willing to contribute. A person that is diseas∣ed, if he look only upon the medicine, without regard of the pain he sustain∣eth, cannot in reason and nature, but abhor the same; if therefore no peril, why then it is in vain to be at any charges; but if there be peril, it is hard that charges should be preferred before peril; I pray God the abatement of the charges towards that Noble man that hath the custody of the bosom-serpent, hath not lessened his care in keeping of her. To think that in a man of his birth and quality, after twelve years travel in charge of such weight, to have an abatement of allowance, and no recompence otherwise made, should not work discontentment no man that hath reason, can so judge: and therefore, to have so special a charge committed to a person discontented, every body seeth it standeth no way with pollicy, what dangerous effects this loose keeping hath bred (the taking away of Morton, the alienation of the King, and a general revolt in Religion, intended only by her charges) doth shew. And therefore nothing being done to help the same, is a manifest argument, that the peril that is like to grow thereby, is so fatal, as it can no way be prevented. If this sparing and improvident course be held still, the mischief, approaching being so apparent as they are, I conclude therefore, having spoken in heat of duty, with∣out offence to your Majestie, that no one that serveth in place of a Councel∣ler, that either weigheth his own credit, or carrieth that sound affection to your Majestie as he ought to do, that would not wish himself in the farthest part of Ethiopia, rather then enjoy the fairest Palace in England. The Lord God therefore direct your Majesties heart to take that way of councel that may be most for your honour and safety. September 2. F. Walsingham.
To the Lord Treasurer. MY very good Lord, the day following my conference with Queen Mother, La Mot repaired unto me, sent from her to give me thanks for the speech I had used towards her the day before, and prayed me that I would further some good and speedy resolution of the marriage: He did acknowledge in talk that passed between us touching my Negotiation with the said Queen, that that point which I touched concerning the employment of Monsieur in the Low-Countries, for the avoiding of the devision that might grow between the two brethren, is a matter, that those that wish well unto the King, and de∣sire the continuance of the repose of that Realm, had great care of, which was not the least cause that moved them greatly to desire the marriage, which not taking place, they saw his employment in the Low-Countries very necessary; letting me understand, that they found it strange that they heard nothing of of any intelligence that passed between the Prince of Orange and the Duke, greatly, to the end that the said Duke might be known of the people of the Low-Countries, he might be drawn to make his residence at Antwerp, some of the inward places of the Countrie. I see it a general opinion among wisest sort here, considering the general evil satisfaction that the people have of the present government, that it will be very hard to maintain good concord between the two brethren, in case the Duke should reside here within the Realm. And it is most assured, that the affection that the Nobility here do bear to Monsieur (which hath appeared by his late Army, compounded of vo∣luntaries, the same consisting principally of Noblemen and Gentl.) hath great∣ly increased the Kings jealousie towards him, and hath not been the least hinde∣rance of that support, that otherwise the said King might have been drawn to have given. The Duke of Guise is of late crept into a very inward credit with the said King, which ought to move her Majestie to be more carefull of the matters of Scotland, for that there are daily consultations in the Dukes house, especially since advertisements are come hither out of Scotland, that the King doth submit himself to any such direction as his mother shall give him, even so far forth as the yielding up of the Government to her, if she shall think it meet. Douglass attendeth some answer from her; touching some things that he hath not long since sent unto her, upon the return whereof they are to grow to a through resolution for the causes of that Realm: I find confirmed by divers, that a general hope is conceived of alteration of Religion in that Realm, ere a year come about, in furtherance whereof, they promise to themselves great support, both from the Pope and Spain. And yet have we neither power to provide Scotland, nor to prevent that the greatness of Spain may no way hurt us; yea, rather such as have been perswaders both in the one and the other, have reaped, instead of thanks, displeasure. Paris, September 3. Fr. Walsingham.
The substance of the Speeches that passed privatly between Queen Mo∣ther and me the Secretary in her Garden at the Teilliers the third of August 1581. 1. THe principal matters I dealt in with her Majestie in this conference was, first to shew her whereon the stay of the ships in England, prepared for Portugal, proceeded. 2. The causes that moved her Majestie to conceive that the King was not so forward now in seeking to prevent the Spanish greatness, as by former over∣tures he seemed to be. 3. That it was strange that the Duke her son dealing in a cause so many waies, profitable for the Realm, and honourable for himself, should be so coldly as∣sisted as he was. 4. And lastly, I prayed her that she would be a mean to the King, that we might proceed in the Treaty, considering the stay thereof grew upon no such cause as ought to hinder so profitable a matter for both Crowns. For the first, after I had let her understand how willing her Majestie would have been to have satisfied her request contained in her last Letter delivered by Mannesiere, touching the said preparations; I did acquaint her with the whole course of the proceeding in that cause, and did shew unto her, that Don An∣thonio had no cause (as it seemed she was informed) to find himself agrieved with her Majestie, neither for the stay of the ships, nor for any charges that he had been at about the same; for touching the stay that grew from hence, he had rather cause to mislike with the King her son, then with the Queen my Mistress, for that the same aid was promised conditionally, so that the said King would concur in the action, which he refusing to do otherwise then in a naked sort, by recommending the same to her Majestie, it appeareth manifestly that the stay hath grown from hence; and as for the charges, I shewed her, that where∣as it was given out that he should sustain 100000l. loss at the least, I was well assured that it would not amount to much above 10000l. To this she replyed, That the King had already made appear unto the world, how ready he was to assist Don Anthonio, by sending of 500 men the last year to Vienna, and by the 500 men sent this Spring to the Isle Tercera, and of late by the four ships dispatched from Burdeaux under Captain Carlo to the said Isles, which saith she doth shew manifestly how willing the King is to assist him, though he would be loath to enter into any such open action as might tend to the violation of the Treaties between him and the King of Spain, without he were assured that the marriage would take place. Thereunto I replyed, that the King might deal therein with much better colour, and less danger then the Queen my Mi∣stress, for the first, in respect of her pretence to the Crown of Portugal; for the second, for that the Subjects of this Crown have not so much goods in Spain, as her Majesties have; besides, they might otherwise be relieved, for that the King of Spain his Subjects, both Spaniards and Portugals, have great store of goods here. Notwithstanding these Arguments, she insisted still upon an earnest request, that it would please the Queen to be content to suffer the ships to proceed in their voyage. Then I asked her whether she could assure her Majestie, that if any such
arrest should happen to the King for the indempnity, for her Subjects would do the like here, as also otherwise to concur with her in common defence, in case the King of Spain should attempt any thing against her. For (said I) if her Majestie without some assurance, should be thrown into Warr with the King of Spain, and have her Subjects goods arrested, and after should com∣plain unto you of the same, and desire the Kings aide, you might with good reason answer her, That you did not otherwise recommend the cause unto her, then by referring to her good judgement, to do therein as might be without the prejudice of her self, or of her estate; and so concluded with her, that unless it would please the King by some particular Letter of his, to assure the Queen, that in case any such inconvenience might happen, he would repute it done to himself, and jovn with her in common defence, if any such thing should be attempted against her. Whereunto she answered, That if the marriage might take place, the King would very willingly assent thereto, or any other thing her Majestie could desire; but otherwise she thought he could very hardly be brought to yield thereunto. I did then shew her, that for some difficulties the marriage was accom∣panied withall, it was thought meet by the King, the Duke, and her own assent, that it should be suspended for a time, and in the mean time the Trea∣ty might be proceeded in, which might yield a mutual assurance of com∣mon defence to both Crowns. For (said I) if this mischief which is like to en∣sue, the Spanish greatness, should not receive present remedy, it may grow uncurable, and therefore to have it depend upon the marriage, which in respect of the difficulties, cannot so easily grow to a present resolution. It seemeth that the proceeding in this case may be compared to a Phisitian, that being moved to yield some present remedy to a dangerous disease that can a∣bide no delay of time, deferreth the same untill he may receive some druggs out of India, or some other far part. To this she said, the fault was in her Majestie, for that the matter depen∣ding only upon her assent, all other things being agreed on, the remedy might easily be put in execution. And so fell into some long speech, both of the desire she had that the same might take, the great benefits that might grow thereby, both to her Majesties own Realm and person, as also to all Europe, and the full assurance that the Duke her son did make (considering how farrforth her Majestie had proceeded therein) that she would not now frustrate the assu∣red hope that he had received of the effectuating of that he had desired above any thing in the world. And because (said she) there dependeth so many good things upon the conclusion thereof, the King my son hath thought good by his Ambassador, to press her Majestie to some present resolution therein. After I had put her in remembrence of such difficulties as I had laid before her in former speech, to shew that the marriage could not receive present reso∣lution: I did also let her understand, that it was a thing that was to grow from above, and had his hour appointed, before the which it could not take place; and therefore the same being uncertain, might perhaps receive later resolution then the disease required, and that therefore in the mean time, other remedies might be well enough proceeded in, which could breed no hinde∣rance in the Marriage, and were most necessary, whatsoever become of the same. Then I proceeded to the second point, shewing that the Queen my Mistriss did of late note a great coldness in the King touching the overture made for the impeaching of the King of Spains greatness, and that the Reasons that moved her so to do, were these. First that the last yeer both her son and she upon the death
of the late King of Portugal, did declare unto her Majesties Ambassador Resi∣dent here, how necessary it was both for themselves and her Majesty, to have an eye to the King of Spains greatness, and to that purpose did require that the said Ambassador might have Commission to treat with such as they should ap∣point in that behalf, which being assented unto, and thereupon a conference fol∣lowing and overtures made to that purpose, the conclusion was referred to be treated of by such Commissioners as should be sent by the King from hence thither, at the time of whose repair, her Majesty did look that there would have been some proceeding therein, which falling out otherwise, was found very strange. Secondly, that daintiness that the King did make to concur with her Majesty in this matter of Portugal, and the sundry impediments that the Duke hath received in this occasion of the Low Countries, instead of furtherance (being the principal means to abate the King of Spains greatness) And lastly, the permission made to the King of Spains Ministers for the passage of certain money to be conveighed through this Realm to the Prince of Parma: These things I told her, did give her Majesty just cause to think that the King had no disposition to break with Spain, in seeking to impeach his greatness, and there∣fore prayed her she would deal plainly with the Queen my Mistris, letting her understand what her intention was in that behalf: For said I, the Queen my So∣veraign is a Princess that desireth to live in repose, and to maintain good Amity with the Princes her neighbours, and had not waded so far in this behalf, but on∣ly upon the Kings motion. And therefore if the King doth now see no such danger to grow by the King of Spains greatness, as before it seemed he did, her Majesty I know would forbear any further dealing in that behalf, who being fur∣nished with ships for her defence by sea, and her subjects being well armed by land, and carrying the earnest love and affection towards her, they do in respect of the happy government they have enjoyed under her Highness, should I doubt not but be able to withstand the King of Spains malice, in case he should attempt any thing against her. Besides, I did let her understand, that whereas it was pub∣likely given out here, that her Majestie was greatly weakned by the alteration in Scotland, and the taking away of the Earl Morton, as also that there were of her own Realm persons of great quality alienated from her, in respect of Reli∣gion. For the first, that divers of those in Scotland, that for some particular quarrels that they had with Morton, were glad to concur with those that sought to make him away, yet are so affected to the Amity of England in respect of Religion, as when any thing should be attempted against her Majestie, Morton himself would not have been more ready to oppose himself against any such at∣tempts then they will be. And as for the great personages that though I did assure my self that none of them carried so evil meaning as to attempt any thing against her Majesty, but rather would be content to hazard their lives as duty commanded them, yet if they were so evil disposed, the subjects of the Realm being generally so well affected to her Majesty as they are, and grown to that judgement now, as they affect not the persons of those great ones, as in former times they have done, but do rather look into the cause then behold the persons they should not be able to draw in great numbers after them to the execution of any undutiful action. To this (after she had heard me attentively) she replyed that at the time of the conference between the Kings deputies and her Maje∣sties Ambass. Resident, then they did as it were assure themselves that themarri∣age should take place; no other impediments being then alleadged but the trou∣bles of this Realm, which by the mediation of the D. were in good way of speedy composition, and in hope thereof they were willing to have taken any course that her Majesty should have thought good, and do still continue in the same pur∣pose
and minde, so as the same might take place, without the which she said she did not see how the King her son should be throughly backed, in case he should enter into any action against the King of Spain, for that there might be many perswasions and devises used to dissolve such Treaties as should onely consist of Ink and Paper. And as for the enterprise of Portugal, she said that if the King of Spain might be kept from the possession of the Isle of Tercera (which might keep him as well from enjoying such benefits as might grow out of the conquest depending upon the said Crown, as also from the Indies in his own possession) Portugal would rather be a burthen to him then otherwise. And as for the Dukes enterprise, she said that the King her son (this Realm being greatly weakned by civil wars) was loath to enter into a war with the King of Spain, unless he might be assuredly well backed, which no way they could make account of without the marriage; whereupon she took occasion to shew that it would be a very ho∣norable course for the King and the Queens Majesty to seek by way of media∣tion to compound the troubles between the king and his subjects, and the Low-Countries, whereto if the king should not assent, then might the two Crowns with more honor concur in the action, by seeking to restore them to their liber∣ties, whereunto I replyed that the Queen my Mistress had made it apparant to the world that she had sundry ways sought (when the time served more aptly then now) to bring it to pass. But for the present, whosoever doth consider to what extreme degrees of alienation from the King, the said subjects of the Low Countries are grown unto, having beaten down his Arms, and renounced his Government, how impossible it is to draw the Prince of Orange any ways to trust the King, or the King to be reconciled unto him, in respect of a book written by the said Prince, wherein the Kings honor is greatly touched, shall see no reason to hope for any reconciliation, and that the Authors of that device do propound the same but for a delay to serve the King of Spains turn. To this she replied nothing, and did also let pass the permission given to the King of Spains Ministers for passing of mony without saying any thing to it, whereon I forbear to press, for that I was informed that the same was done without her pri∣vity, to the other points of her reply, I did onely touch two things, the one that at the time of our Conference between the Ambassadors and the Deputies there was no mention made of marriage, and so I shewed her that this impedi∣ment hath been found out but of late, the other that I marvel, seeing she her self did confess that it did greatly import to keep the King of Spain from the Island of Tercera: that the King her son made so great difficulty in so necessa∣ry a matter, to concur with her Majesty. To the latter point she saith as hath been alledged before, that the King had already given order for certain ships to be sent thither, and prayed that her Majesty would be content to do the like. In which point I concluded, that though I would (according to her request) move her Majesty in that behalf, yet I did shew her that I did greatly doubt that her Majesty would hardly be drawn to assent thereto without some letter of as∣surance from the King unto her, as had been before moved. And so leaving the matter of Portugal, I descended to the third point touching the cold assistance given to the Duke, letting her understand that I had special charge from her Ma∣jesty from time to time, to recommend both unto the King and unto her his cause; and therefore being given to understand that notwithstanding the ear∣nest motion made on her Majesties behalf unto the King, at my first audi∣ence he was weakly furnished of two principal matters incident to the en∣terprise he had in hand, that is of Treasure and martial counsel, I prayed her to have due consideration both of the person, and of the action; of the person, for that he was her son, and such a one as was like to yield as great honor as ever
did childe to mother, and for the action, if the damage were considered, that the Low-Countries have brought to this Crown, since it was joyned with Spain, having within the space of 24 years given them two notable overthrows, as al∣so ministred within three yeers time, toward the charges of the war 360000000 florens. It shall then appear that to reduce that Country to yield yeerly 3000000 towards the abating of the pride of him that gave the said overthrows to remove so potent an enemy from them, and to transport the civil wars into a forraign Country out of this Realm, that both the action and the Author is wor∣thy of maintenance; and therefore must needs follow that, if so great bene∣fits be neglected, it seemeth that there hangeth some secret judgement of God over this Crown, I did also put her in remembrance how happily this forrein imployment of the Duke her son did fall out, to put by a thing that might have proved no less grievous to her Majesty, then dangerous to the Realm, and that was the division that might fall out between her two sons, a matter that hardly would have been avoided if either he should live in the Court or out of the Court within this Realm, considering that this said Realm in respect of the ci∣vil troubles, is full of persons discontented, and also of such as have no other virtue to get credit, then by breeding of dissentions, and though for the pre∣sent it was known that there was good liking between the two Princes in out∣ward appearance, yet it is evidently known unto the world, that the King here∣tofore hath stood in some jealousie of him, which sparks being not throughly extinguished by evil disposed persons, might easily kindle again. With this speech she seemed to be greatly moved, and letting me understand that she had care thereof, and did what she might to procure him that support that was necessary, acknowledging the enterprise to be both honorable and profitable. But (said she) the King without the assurance of the marriage will not be drawn into any open breach with the King of Spain, which he should hardly avoid if he should assist his brother in such sort as was meet: she did also in a sort acknowledge that though heretofore there had been some jealousie between her two sons, yet now there was great good-will and love between them, notwithstanding that by some evil instruments there might be some disunion bred between them, she did for the avoiding thereof amongst other respects, greatly wish that the marriage might take place, In the end of my speech I did lay before her such Reasons as might induce her to use some mediation towards the King, for the removing of the impediment of our Treaty, for that the same could no way prejudice the marriage, whereunto she answered, that the King was resolved touching the continuance of the stay until such time as he might hear from his Ambassador. This in effect was that which past between us August 30. 1581. Francis Walsingham.
To the Lord Treasurer. MY very good Lord, I received by the last Messenger, two Letters from your Lordship, the one of the last of August, and the other of the second of this present: For the first, I am very sorry that the King of Portugal is so great∣ly grieved as he is, and yet if the answer made of the conference by those that were appointed to deal with Don Diego de Rotelia, and Don Emanuel de Silva, be by him well remembred, he hath more cause to blame France, then he Q. Majestie, being at that time resolved that the preparation should not go forward unless the French King would concur, as also, that he himself should bear such loss as should fall out through the said preparation. And whereas he findeth himself grieved, for that his loss falleth out to be greater then he looked for (whereof the greatest part of the blame is laid upon me) surely no man is so much to be charged therewith as Doctor Lopes, who sundry times in the Kings name, desired me that the preparations might be greater then was first agreed upon for that the King doubted that those forces would not be sufficient. And for the defraying of the charges, he did assure me, that the King did mean to procure some money out of the Low-Countries upon Jewels. Seeing then that this encrease of charges grew upon the Kings own motion, he cannot in reason be offended either with her Majestie, nor with any of those that have been dealers in the same; notwithstanding, it were a very Princely part (consi∣dering into what a perplexed estate the poor Prince is thrown) for her Majestie to take upon her the discharge of the loss that is sustained in the said preparations, whose estate I do not think yet so desperate, but that God will one day raise him up again to pluck down the pride of him who is the sworn enemy both to God and her Majestie; I do utterly mislike of his repair hither, seeing no rea∣son that should move him to attempt the same, considering how he hath been dealt withall, especially upon the Kings denial to write his Letters to her Maje∣stie, if my first advice touching his repair into the Low-Countries had been fol∣lowed, both thesles of the Asores had been preserved, and also the East and West Indian Fleet defeated. This day there is come advertisement out of Spain that the Fleet is arrived from the Moluccaes, who besides the bringing of great quantity of Treasure, have brought advertisements that the said Islanders have yielded to the Kings obedience, I am very glad that the poor Prince resteth so well satisfied of my dealing towards him, for I was in doubt that the Count Vin∣niso, who is a very vain man, had sought to cause him to conceive otherwise of me then I deserved; notwithstanding that it is apparent to all the world, that the stay for the preparations for the Islands, hath grown from hence (no man being better acquainted with all then himself) yet doth he blame her Majestie, being carried away with a vain hope that the King here is greatly disposed to as∣sist his Majestie when he shall repair thither, which in the end will prove bnt an abuse, and I pray God it be not with the peril of his person. September, 1581. Fr. Walsingham.
To the Lord Treasurer. MY very good Lord, by the general Letter your Lordship may perceive what resolution the King is grown unto touching the Treatie; which (considering the naked direction we received, in case the Treatie had held) fal∣leth out very well. Surely, unless her Majestie shall hereafter be better inclined to prefer safetie before charges, it shall be but in vain for her to have any deal∣ing with forreign Princes; and I would to God her Majestie had no need of for∣reign assistance: Notwithstanding, I see she is not disposed to redeem her peril otherwise then necessity shall lead her (who is one of the most dangerous Pilots that can take the helm in hand, for where necessity ruleth, election and coun∣cel can take no place) and though dealing underhand heretofore hath accidental∣ly (in respect of the weakness of the Princes her neighbours) continued her Ma∣jestie in a peaceable kind of Government: yet now that Scotland is aliened from her Highness, and the King well near of years fit to match with the daughter of some Prince (that may stand with him for his pretended title) her Majestie is to look for another kind of reckoning. That house that is most affected here to the said King, and doth above others imbrace his cause, never carryed great∣er sway then it doth presently, upon such causes as I will open to her Majestie and your Lordship at my return. I hope to depart hence on Thursday next, and in the way to visit the Duke de Anjou with whom I think meet besides com∣mon dutie, in respect of the good will he beareth to her Majestie, to confer, before my departure out of this Realm. And therefore being doubtful where to find him, and how long he will stay me, I cannot certainly let your Lordship understand at what time I shall return to the Court there. Septemb. 13. Fr. Walsingham. To the Lord Treasurer. IT may please your Lordship to understand, that on Sunday the tenth of this moneth we had audience of the King, where I the Secretary did remember unto him, how far we and his Deputies had proceeded in the Treatie of the League defensive and offensive by his consent: where, by means of letters from his Ambassador in England the same was broken off, for such causes (as it was said) as he had written; whereof her Majestie being advertised from us, and she having conferred thereupon with the said Ambassador, found by the Copy of his Letters (which he shewed for his excuse) that the same was not in such terms as had been reported to have come from him, as we thought his Majestie had been advertised from his said Ambassador by his last dispatch: And there∣fore her Majestie had given us in charge to pray his Highness in her name, that we might proceed with his Ministers in the treaty of that League, being so ne∣cessary for both Realms, for the causes which his Majestie had heretofore pro∣pounded. The King answered with long speeches, how much he desired her Majesties amity, and especially to see the effect of this marriage, upon conditi∣on to be shortned of six years of his life: and how happy he would think him∣self, if it might please her Majestie to think his brother worthy of that favour therein: The great good which such a conjunction would bring to both Realms: and further in effect, the like speeches of affection as he had used before time:
and in this matter continuing still upon the point of the marriage, as the strong∣est bond of amitie of all other. And as for a league, he said, there was a already a league defensive between them, which he was content to enlarge for the more assurance of his good will in any thing that might be found to lack, or were meet to be added thereto: But as for a league offensive, he did alwaies wish and mean that it might go with the marriage. Thereunto in answer divers reasons were used to move him to proceed to the Treaty begun; and among other that there was, none so strong a bond as that which was grounded upon necessity, and that the cause of the necessity thereof at this time was not un∣known to him, that by the concluding of such leagues, the marriage was not put back; that the great benefit that this Realm was like to receive by it was not small, by assuring a Countrey unto it, where, and by the help whereof, this Realm had taken great loss of late years, by two overthrows in the King his fathers time, letting him also understand, that her Majestie (seeing the Duke in an enterprize so profitable for this Realm, and honourable for himself, in∣stead of assistance to receive rather overthwarts and impediments) had just cause to confirm her opinion touching the difficulty propounded, for the stay in not proceeding in the marriage; for seeing that if the same had proceeded, the greatest burthen of the war must have lighted on her self, the ability of the Duke and of the Sates being not such as was able to encounter the forces of so puissant a Prince as the King of Spain; And therefore seeing his Majestie upon answer from his brother, had consented that such league should be treated upon, without speaking of the Marriage; and Deputies appointed by him, the same well begun, and some particularities for a league offensive agreed upon; her Majestie and all the world may find this alteration now to be very strange. Hereunto, after he had used many speeches of the former substance, in general terms, without answering any particularities, offering himself and all his means to be at her Majesties devotion whose good will he sought with his soul and af∣fection, he concluded, that there was no such surety in a league offensive, as there was in the marriage; which proceeding, all should be as her Majestie pleased; and that if he had been otherwise understood, either he did not de∣liver his mind so clearly as he did mean; or else his meaning was mistaken of us, and of his Deputies; for that he did never mean but that the league offence and the Marriage should go together, and not otherwise. Having heard this his Majesties conclusion, and repeated it unto him, I the Secretary said, That seeing his Majestie was so resolved, her Highness had in that case commanded me to return home my service, being more needful there then here, for causes which I remembred unto him; and that he might think himself of some it time to treat further of these matters, praying his Majestie to appoint when I might receive his commandments to her Majestie, and to take my leave. He said, he would gladly have us at this marriage of the Duke of Ioyeuse, the eighteenth of this moneth; but seeing her Majestie had commanded me to return, it should be when I would, using many speeches full of affection to her Majestie, to be uttered at my return to her Highness. Then we went to the Queen Mother, and rehearsed unto her what had passed by the King: Whereunto she used in substance the like speeches the King had done; adding more plainly, that they feared such a league being made defensive and offensive, the marriage would be clean broken, with divers other speeches, wherewith I think not need∣ful to trouble her Majestie, until my return. At this time I the Secretary pray∣ed Queen Mother to think well of these matters, being of such importance against the time, that I should come to take my leave of the King and her, and so for that time we departed. And for that we might doubt of some alteration,
we did forbear to send away this Corrier, until we had taken our leave, which was upon Thursday the twelfth of this present; at which time there passed no∣thing from the King and Queen Mother but ordinary complements, and specially recommending the Marriage. Paris the 13 of September, 1581. Francis Walsingham. Henry Cobham. Iohn Sommers. Reservatio 12 Septembris. NOs Fransciscus Walsingham, &c. Henricus Cobham, &c. Johannes Som∣mers, &c. Omnibus ad quos presentes pervenerint salutem, ut supra: Denuo tres integros Menses adjiciendos censemus, quos mensis Septembris die 12 incipere intelligimus. In cujus rei Testimonium has literas nostras mannuum uostrarum subscriptione munimus. Data ex urbe Parisiorum 12 Septemb. 1581. Francis Walsingham, Henry Cobham, Io. Sommers. FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE of the most Remarkable Things. A ALva Duke 40, 45, 46, 48, 137, 139, 268, 269 Offers 30000 Ducats to ran∣som the Earl of Northumberland, 75. Plots against the Queen 299 Ambition indures no bridle 143 Anjou Duke Hen. 25. See Hen. 3. and Marriage. Anjou, and Alanson Duke Francis, of∣fered for an Husband to the Queen, 195, 196, 257, 297, 331, 333. Un∣handsom, 343. Of good parts, 413 Against Rochel, 308. A great Servant to the Queen 360, 361 Answers to the French Embassador, 271 By the Lord Burleigh concerning the Match with Duke Francis. 335. See 348 Antonio of Portugal, 354, 379, 388 393, 394, 398, 421. 434 Anvile Marshal of France, 343 Aremberg Grave 370 Argile Earl, 4, 36, 299. A Traitor, 302. Alwayes false, 312 Arran Earl 412 Arras ardinal 123 Athol Earl, 302 Aumale Duke 275, 295, 306 Austrian House, the Popes Champion, 121 Austria Don John, 137, 221, 288. B Bedford Earle 13 Bellieure Monsieur 381 Beni Massino 271 Birac 95 Biron Baron 27, 258 Bisegno Abbot 358 Bothwel Earle 13, 151 Boughquien Lord 302 Brandenburgh Marquiss 301, 303 Bricqmault Mons 34 Bricquemont hanged 278, 379, 282 Brulart Secretary of France 265 Buckhurst Lord, 18, 20, 31, 42, 49, 68. 69 Bull of Rome against the Queen 49 Bullen Duke 258 C Calliac Mons. 21 Cambray besieged by the Prince of Parma 381, 384, 385 Campian the Iesuite taken, betrayes his friends 373 Candale Mons. 343 Capteni Thomas 94 Carew Francis 283. 285 Cassels Arch-Bishop a Traitor, 58, 73 74, 75, 77 Cavalcant Mons. 66, 69, 82 Cavannes Mons. 7. Hanged 279
Cecyl Sir William, Baron Burleigh 51 An enemy to Popery 72 Zealous for the French match 81 115 234 153 Wearied with an idle Parliament 94 Complains of the Queens mercy 164 For the English honour, ill used in Libels 327 328 Sincere 133 336 Hated by the Spaniards 162 164 Charles the Fifth 123 Arch Duke 98 Charls the Ninth of France 5. Puls down the Cross at Paris 151 The greatest dissembler of his age 49 82 83 118 122 124 125 135 143 144 161 169 173 220 251 252 306. Bloody 279 Chartres Vidam in England, 260 263 265 Chastel Herault Duke 4 296 303 315 333 Chasteauneu 333 334 Chastilion Cardinal 51 Clanlicard Earl 238 Cobham Sir Henry 22 67 71 285 356 Colignie Admiral of France 6 122 135 154 233 234 His advice to his King 241 Colonna Prospero 357 Commissioners to treat concerning the French Match 348 Como Cardinal 358 Common Prayer Book of England not indured by Papists 97 Conde Prince 6 17 122 240 Forced to go to Masse 245 Conference between Sir Francis Wal∣singham and Mons. de Foix 90 Betwixt Queen mother and Sir Fran∣cis Walsingham 429 Duke Montmorency, and the English Lords 214 Crosse Marshal of France 151 258 388 Will not obey the Kings verbal com∣mand 396 Cotton Sir Thomas 57 Croque 165 177 181 202 203 D Dale Doctor 310 311 333 Darlie Lord, Husband of the scots Queen 13 Derby Earl 303 De Foix Mons. 62 65 67 69 109. In England 129 218 317 318 De l'Archant 89 De la Guord Baron 266 280 305 332 De la Haye a faithless French man 57 De la Roche 33 34 95 167 168 Denmark King 183 Drake. See Fran. 379 Dun Briton Castel taken 78 E Edenburgh the London of Scotland 334 Elizabeth Queen of England, favours not the rebels of other Princes, careful of the French of the Religion, 2 3 19 23 A Monarch 3 Accountable to none for her actions 10 Had a Negative voice (as it seems) in Parliaments 203 215 219 Seems to desire the Match with Henry of France 29 40 Will not allow him the exercise of his Religion, 65 66 89 98 110 111 113 129 130 132. See 330 335 339 340 See 115 116 138 155 199 Will not have the second Marriage go on 374 Pretends the dislike of her subjects, to avoid it 354 Against any worship but of her owne Church 99 Irresolute as to the execution of the Duke of Norfolk 165 Enterview Betwixt the Queens of Eng∣land and France propounded 271 272 277 For the young King of the Scots 178 Her civility to the Navarrois Queen, Admiral, &c. 210 211
How she takes the Massacre 247 248 259 Sick of the Smal-Pox 274 Likes not the proceedings of France against Law 297 Protects the French fugitives, and why 319 344. intercedes for them 263 265. Too sparing, 372 375 379 387. See Walsingham. Abhors a war 374 377 Forward to advance the revolt of the Low-Countries 379 381 388 Cold in the cause of the Bastard Don Antonio 379 388 Aides him 383 Emden Countess 149 England, no Country once so free from impositions 21 English, how thought of by the French, 325 Zealous Subjects for the Queen 335 341 Escars 8 Este Cardinal 357 F Felton sets up Pius his Bull against the Queen 49 Feria Duke 59 Ferrara Duke 42 43 Fernihurst Lord 373 Fitzmorris Iames 42 167 168 347 Flemming Lord 78 139 181 183 Flushing Rebels 217 Francis the Second of France 12 Francis of Anlanson and Anjou, See Anjou Duke. French greatness dangerous 127 Disorders in Government 240 246 Spoil the English 265 Their falsenesse and dissembling 276 Desirous to get Leicester and Burleigh into France 277 G Galloway Bishop 77 Gilbert Sir Hmphrey 299 Glasgow Arch Bishop 299 302 Grandmont Mons. 267 Graunge Governour of Edenburgh Ca∣stle 151 152 Gray Baron, Deputy of Ireland 359 373 389 Guarda Bishop 358 Guise house 36 for the Scots Queen, 192 240 Duke 267 269 275 295 314 428. Cardinal 280 H Hamilton Earl 138 Hanging of Gentlemen not used in France 279 282 Harris Baron 134 Hawkins Sir Iohn 126 379 Henry the II King of France 12 Henry the III forbids exercise of Reli∣gion to the Hugonots 356 Earnest for the match with his bro∣ther, and the League 376 Will have no League Offensive with∣out it 440 His great charges in the Treaty 397 Henry the IV Prince of Navarre 16 245 Hosteni Duke 221 Hugonots of France 2 3. run themselves into the Kings nets 122 Their Lands on sale 245 Great servants of the English Queen 135 Love not the Cross 151. See Massacre Hume Lord 214 320 329 Hunsdon Baron 151 Huntley Earl 138 312 315 333 I Jenlis 223. defeated in Henault 225 Jersie Iland 272 Jesuites mortal enemies to the Queen, 172 173 Inn Keepers of Kent 21 Inquisition 123 Instructions for the Earl of Worcester, 318. For Sir Fra. Walsingham 352
For a League with France 355 Joyeuse Duke 294, 440 K Katherine Queen Mother of France, 6 12, 35. per tot, &c. Killigrew Henry 145 Kirkaldie Iames 302 L Languedoc Hugoots rebel 294 Lansac Mons. 24, 49, 239 La Valette Leagues how made 171, 414. With France, publick and secret, 355 Not liked without the Match, 364, 365, 388, 366, 367, 368, 399, 392. Causes of it 372, 374, 403, 422, 423. Leicester his good and pious sentences; 47, 51, 69, 82, 105, 116, 324. To be fastned for the Match, 104. Slights the Earle of Worcester, 312 Lennox Earle 138 Levingston Lord 4, 77, 244, 312, 326, 334 Liberty under the English Princes, here∣tofore as great as any where 61 Lidington Lord 152, 137, 244. Lincoln Ele Lord Admiral, sent into France 201, 205, 219. Lodowick Count of Nassaw 54, 121, 123, 176, 184, 333. Notably cheated by the French King. 125, 258 Longaville Duke 50 Lorrain Cardinal 8, 38, 73, 74, 77, 123 167, 168, 314, 331. Duke 88, 301 Loughleuin Lord 302 Low-Countries the pretence of their Revolt 123 M Maine Duke 395 Malicorn Mons. 27 Mannesiere Mons. 240, 265, 287, 288 297 298 299, 301, 304, 305, 307. Mary Queen of Scots 4, 10, 11, 12, 13, 137, 139, 152. Not to be spoken for 321 Margaret of France reads the Bible, 122 Martinengo Count 306 Marre Earl 138, 299 Marriage treated betwixt Henry of Na∣varre, and Margaret of France, 122, 135. Doubts in it 182, 183 Be∣twixt the Queen and Henry of An∣jou designed 55. Instructions con∣cerning it, 61, 62, 63. See 68, 69, 70 Articles of it, 83, 84, 85, 86, 131, 132. Counsellors imployed in it, 66 83. Carryed on inconstantly, 133. Not taken in earnest by the French, 67. Betwixt the Queen and Fran∣cis of Anjou, 218 226 227 229 230 330 331 336 339. Eagerly pursued, 360 361 362. See 390 Marriage Solemnity betwixt Princes of different Faiths 175 Medina Coeli Duke 189 195 Memorials for Mr. Sommers, 384 385 Mendoza thrust out of England for pra∣ctising against the Queen 163 Mildmay Sir Walter Monluc Marshal 8 Montmorency Duke 8 97 102 108 151 188. In England 201 218 231 240 Monts in Henault besieged 245 taken 258 M organ General 217 M oreton Earl 77 138 244 299 Be∣headed 431 Moth Fenelon French Embassador 30 90 138 141, &c. Murther on shooters hill 347 N Navarre King turned by his wife 91 Queen 24 176 182 183 Nemours Duke 50 Nevers Duke 238 258 300 New star 299 Norfolk Duke 134. His plots discove∣red 137 140 148 Norris Sir Henry 19 18 19 20 22 23 Northumberland Earl 3 75 Execu∣ted 237 Nouë Mous. 184 297 301. Persidious 332
O Odonnel 359 373 Ogleby Lord 312 Olivarez Conde 40. More grave then wise 56 Orange Prince 48 122 144. To have been  of Babant, &c. if the Spaniard could have been beaten out, 128. See 225 226 240. Retires in∣to Germany 267 269 295 333 Ormond Earl 238. Discontented 373 Oxford Earl 134. Married to the Lord Burleighs daughter 164 P Parliament of 1571. impertinently busie 94. Bloody 203 219 Parma Prince 381 384 Perrot Sir John 347 Philip the second of Spain entertains the Queens fugitives 58 59. How he carried things towards the Queen, 369 370 Pinart Secretary of France 23 31 122 305 309 375 Plots upon Ireland 58 Poigney Mons. 4 Popes Authority in England destru∣ctive to the Crown 4. Designs again England 36 Princes have no other bridle but Religion 91 Princes of Germany of the Reformed Churches. 301 R Rebellion in the North coloured with Religion 3 Rhee Iland taken by the Rochellers 301 Religion is a constant perswasion confir∣med by time 191. Cannot be more then a pretence to invade what is a∣nother mans 155 Ridolf 95 137 Rochel in rebellion 280 297 301 302 Besieged 331 Rolph a counterfeiter of the Kings hand 266 Romero Juliano 27 Ross Bishop 5. 77. restrained 107. in the Tower 151 Roulart Canon of Nostre Dam mur∣thered 246 Rutland Earl 39 42 141 S Saint Andrewes Arch-Bishop taken 78 Sancerre besieged 332 348 Savoye Duke 287 293 303 Schomberg Baron 332 Scots, Lords come to treat concerning their Queen without a Commission 77. Everlasting Rebels 101. Yet will not live without a Prince of their own 178. Gracious in France 244. Will do any thing for money 249 320 324 329. Seton Baron 27 36 95 177 181 Sidney Sir Henry 82 Sir Philip in France at the time of the Massacre 250. of rare parts 273 Skeldon 36 Smith Sir Thomas 51 54 134 152. imployed in France 153. Thinks Charles the Ninth a faithful Prince 169 180 261 318 Sommers Henry 354 Sora Duke 356 Spaniards of what carriage 56. Ambi∣tious, enemies to England 121. Con∣quer Portugal 358 Spanish greatness dangerous 354 355. Mony arrested 81 Spinoa Cardinal 59 Story Doctor will not swear allegiance; Hanged 105 Strozzi Peter 95 188 189 217 251 294 359 Stukeley 36 41. Knighted by the Spa∣niard 56 59. in disgrace 105 Suffex Earl 5 T Tauannes Viscount 258 Terçaera holds for Don Antonio 421 Tilignie Mons. 276 Time a great advantage in the mi∣nority of Princes 298
Throgmorton Sir Nicholas 45 287 Treaties of Princes. Of the Queen with Charles the IX. 155 156 157 158, &c. 185. With Henry the III; passages and propositions in it 399 400 401 423 Tresham Sir Thomas 390 Turein Vicount 367 385 V Valentinois Bishop 302 Valx Lord will take no Oath to the Queen 290 Venetians at sea 312 Victory at Lepanto 149 150 Viracque Mons. 137 315. taken 334 342 Vitelli Marquiss of Colona 44 48 223 Vimioso Conde 394 434 W Walsingham Sir Francis Embassador in France 1 &c. Received by the King 22 23. Much mistaken in his French Creed 82 83 104 118 122 144 173 252. Calls Charls the IX sincere, pius inimicus, &c. 175. Confesses his o∣vermuch confidence 257. See 270 Thinks the French King the only dis∣sembler 300. Sets spis over the Lord Seton; acts without war . Ear∣nest for the match 96. Perswades to war with Spain 127. Would turmoil all other Princes, and why, 128. Un∣dermines a Iesuite 172. Desires only not to lose by his service 188. His o∣pinion of the Spaniards 234. Ill used in France 242. Called off 253. The Queen great opinion of him 263 and love 275. Advises against the Queen of Scots life 267 268. Fearful eve∣ry where of the Queens sparing 303 &c. 357 426 427. Too open 322. Poor in France 326 327. Sent again into France 352. Blames the Queen, and why 408. Calls the Scots Queen bosom Serpent 427. returnes 440. War, when, and what just 127. Neces∣sary where 128 Westmoreland Earl 3 143 275 299 Williams Sir William 313 Worcester Earl 307. Abused by Leice∣cester 312. His instrnctions for his French Embassy 318. Dishonorably dealt with by the French 327. Will not see his sister the wife of a Rebel, 328 Writing to the Scots Queen in linnen, 328
