E1586 R30035 11237018 47016
THE HUMBLE PETITION Of the Lords & Commons assem∣bled in Parliament unto his Majesty (with the Reasons moving them, to advise his Majesty) to decline his intended Journey into Ireland: Sent to Yorke by the Earle of Stamford, Sir Iohn Culpepper Knight, Chancellour of the Exchequer, and Anthony Hun∣gerford Esquire. Who presented the same to his Majesty at Yorke, on Monday last, being the 18 day of April, 1642. And ordered to be printed and published by the Commons House of Parliament. Die Veneris 22 of April. H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON, Printed by A.N. for John Franck, 1642.
May it please your Majestie, YOur Majesties most loyall, and faith∣full Subjects, the Lords and Com∣mons in Parliament have duly con∣sidered the Message received from your Majesty, concerning your pur∣pose of going into Ireland in your own person to prosecute the warre there with the bodies of your English Subjects levied, transported, and mayntained at their charge, which you are plea∣sed to propound to us, not as a matter wherein your Majesty desires the advice of your Parliament, but as already firmely resolved on, and forthwith to be put in execution, by granting out Commis∣sions for the levying of two thousand foot, and two hundred Horse for a Guard for your per∣son when you shall come into that Kingdome, wherein we cannot chuse but withall reverence and humility to your Majesty, observe that you have declined your great Councell the Parliament, and varied from the usuall course of your Royall Prede∣cessors, that a businesse of so great importance con∣cerning the peace and safety of all your Subjects, and wherein they have a speciall interest by your Majesties promise, and by those great sums which
they have disbursed, and for which they stand in∣gaged should be concluded and undertaken without their advice, whereupon we hold it our duty to de∣clare, that if at this time your Majesty shall goe into Ireland, you will very much endanger the safety of your Royall Person and Kingdoms, and of all other States professing the Protestant Religion in Chri∣stendome, and make way to that cruell, and bloudy Designe of the Papists every where to root out and destroy the Reformed Religion as the Irish Papists have in a great part already effected in that King∣dome and in all likelyhood would quickly be at∣tempted in other places, if the consideration of the strength and union of the two Nations of England and Scotland, did not much hinder, and discourage the execution of any such designe, and that we may manifest to your Majestie, the danger and misery, which such a journey and enterprize would procure we present to your Majesty the Reasons of this our humble opinion, and advice. 1 YOur Royall person will be subject not one∣ly to the casualty of warre, but to secret pra∣ctises, and conspiracies especially your Majesty continuing your profession to mayntaine the Pro∣testant Religion in that Kingdome which the Pa∣pists are generally bound by their vow to extirpate. 2 It will exceedingly encourage the Rebels who doe generally professe, and declare that your Ma∣jesty doth favour and allow their proceedings, and this insurrection was undertaken by the warrant of your Commission, and it will make good their ex∣pectation of great advantage by your Majesties pre∣sence
at this time of so much distraction in this King∣dome, whereby they may hope we shall be disabled to supply the warre there, especially there appearing lesse necessitie of your Majesties Journey at this time, by reason of the manifold successes which God hath given against them. 3. It will much hinder and impaire the meanes, whereby this warre is to bee supported, and will encrease the charge of it, and in both these respects, make it more insupportable to your Subjects: and this we can confidently affirme, because many of the Adventurers who have already subscri∣bed, doe upon the knowledge of your Majesties In∣tentions, declare their resolutions, not to pay in their money, and others very willing to have subscribed, doe now professe the contrary. 4. Your Majesties absence must necessarily very much interrupt the proceedings of Parliament, and deprive your Subjects of the benefit of those further Acts of Grace, and Justice which we shall humbly expect from your Majesty for the establishing of per∣fect union, and mutuall confidence betwixt your Ma∣jesty and your People, and procuring and confirming the prosperity and happinesse of both. 5. It will exceedingly encrease the jealousies and feares of your people, and render the doubts of your Subjects more probable, of some force intended by some evill counsells neere your Majesty, in oppositi∣on to the Parliament, and favour of the malignant party of the Kingdome. 6. It will bereave your Parliament of that advan∣tage, whereby they were induced to undertake this
warre upon your Majesties promise, that it should be managed by their advice, which cannot be done, if your Majestie contrary to their Counsell shall under∣take to order and governe it in your owne Person. Upon which and divers other reasons wee have re∣solved by the full and concurring agreement of both Houses, that we cannot with the dutie which belongs to us, consent to any Levyes, or raising of Souldiours to be made by your Majesty, for this your intended expedition into Ireland, or to the payment of any Army or Souldiers there, but such as shall bee im∣ployed and governed according to our advice and di∣rection, and that if such Levyes shall be made by any Commission of your Majesty, not agreed to by both Houses of Parliament, wee shall be forced to inter∣pret the same to be raysed to the terrour of your peo∣ple, and disturbance of the publicke peace, and hold our selves bound by the Lawes of the Kingdome, to apply the authority of Parliament to suppresse the same. And we doe further most humbly declare, that if your Majesty shall by ill counsell, be perswaded to goe contrary to this advice of your Parliament (which we hope your Majesty will not, We doe not in that case hold our selves bound to submit to any Commissioners, which your Majesty shall choose, but doe resolve to preserve and governe the King∣dome by the counsell and advice of Parliament for your Majestie and your Posteritie according to Alle∣giance, and the Law of the Land. Wherefore we most humbly pray, and advise your Majesty, to desist from this your intended passage
into Ireland, and from all preparation of men and Armes tending thereunto, and to leave the managing of that warre to your Parliament, according to your Majesties promise made unto us and your Royall Commission granted under your great Seale of Eng∣land, by advise of both Houses, in prosecution where∣of, by Gods blessing we have made a prosperous en∣trance by many defeats of the Rebels, whereby they are much weakned and dis-heartened, and have no probable meanes of subsistence, if our proceedings shall not be interrupted by this interposition of your Majesties J urney, but that we may hope upon good grounds, that within a short time, without hazard of your Majesties person, and so much dangerous con∣fusion to your Kingdomes, which must needs ensue if you should proceed in this resolution: We shall be enabled fully to vindicate your Majesties right and authority in that Kingdome, and punish those horri∣ble and outragious cruelties which have bin commit∣ted in the murthering, and spoyling so many of your Subjects, and bring that Realme to such a Con∣dition as may be much for the advantage of your Ma∣jesty, and this Crown, the honour of your government and contentment of your people, for the better, and more speedy effecting whereof we doe againe renew our humble desires of your returne to your Parlia∣ment. And that you will please to reject all Coun∣sels, and apprehensions which may any way derogate from that faithfulnesse, and Allegiance which in truth and sinceritie we have alwayes borne, and pro∣fessed to your Majesty, and shall ever make good to the uttermost with our lives and fortunes.
Die veneris 22. of April 1642. It is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, that this Petition shall bee forth-with published in Print. H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.
