e2981 r20871 12118696 54381
ENGLANDS HVMBLE REMONSTRANCE TO THEIR KING And to their PARLIAMENT: SHEWING The Cause of this bloudy and destructive Warre by the KING against his Par∣liament and People. O Lord let not the KING be unto thy People the rod of thy fierce wrath. Printed according to Order. London, Printed for G. L. 1643.
His Majesties Cause of this Warre is either just or unjust, or dubious, viz. partly just, and partly unjust. 1. WE will first suppose his Majesties Cause to be just, that he has onely the defensive part, and is necessitated to fight; and that the Parliament, as yet, hath offered no termes of Ac∣commodation to him, but such as are more unjust then all the plagues of this calamitous warre. This so being supposed, makes him innocent, but yet most unfortunate; it makes him the first man that ever fortune pict out to ingage in such a wretched de∣struction of men and treasure without blame; amongst all his Ancestors, there will not appeare upon search one of them who was just, and maintained a just cause, and yet met with such generall opposition from his Subjects, much lesse from the Lords and Commons assembled in a Parliament. How triviall soever the Kings side accounts this, there was not ever a worse prodigie in the World to amaze any State, then this is, if it be true, that the or∣derly representative body of this nation, has, causlesly and unnaturally, risen up against their righteous King to pursue him so farre as ours now is. It is not to be denied, but that some Parliaments have done some unjust things, when they have beene wrought upon by the force and fraud of Princes; but no Example can be shewed, that ever any Parliament did such an unjust thing as this, contrary to all motives and influences of a gracious and religious Prince.
Some of the Kings party have argued thus; If Par∣liaments may erre when they are perfect, having the concurrence of the royall State with them, much more may they erre when the royall State recedes from them, &c. But this I hold a grand mistake; for if I have any reason to make a right use of story, Parliaments are repesented to me never lesse liable to error, then when they receive least impressions from the King. With what regret then ought the King to look upon this un∣precedented disaster? Certainly if he looke upon us with a naturall eye, under such unparalleled sufferings, or upon himselfe with a pious eye vnder such an une∣quall affliction, it cannot but administer thoughts of honour to him; bonus pastor ponit vitam pro ovilius, so said that Prince of Peace in whom onely there was no sinne, and in whose flocke joyntly and severally taken there was nothing else but sinne; and yet his death sea∣led as much as his mouth affirmed. Moses seemed to preferre the welfare of the obstinate Jewes, not onely before all his temporall interests, but also before his eternall diadem in Heaven; and Saint Paul seemed to be rapt up with a species of the same Zeale. The passions of some heathen and hereticall Princes towards their leige Subjects have beene almost above the pitch of humanity: With what a wrange kind of hypochondriacall frenzie did Augustus Caesar cry out, Redde mihi Legiones vare? If the blood of his Sub∣jects had been drawne forcibly out of his owne deerest Veins, it could not have parted from him with a stron∣ger resentment. How did our Queene Mary even to to the death, deplore the losse of one Towne in Pi∣cardie? With what strange Instruments did griefe make incission in her heart, whilst it would ingrave the
name of Callice there? The losse of all Kings in all wars uses to be very do∣lorous: but native Kings in civill Warres when they looke upon such vast desolation, as is now to be seene in England and Ireland, must needs thinke that their owne interest, their owne honour, their owne safety, is of lesse consequence. 2 We will now suppose the Kings Cause to be un∣just, that the Parliament has had none but loyall in∣tentions towards him and his royall Dignity, nor has attempted any thing but to defend Religion against the Papists, the Lawes of the Land against Delin∣quents, and the Priviledges of both Houses against Malignants; and on the contrary we will suppose, that that private Counsell which the King has follwed ra∣ther then his publike owne, has aimed at the Arbitra∣ry rule of France, and to effect the same has counte∣nanced Popery, and but pretended danger from the Parliament, from the City of London, and from the best affected of the whole Kingdome: Qui supponit non ponit: We will not assume, but presume onely, that the great Counsell of the Land is in the right ra∣ther then the King and his claudestine Counsell; but see what will follow upon this supposition, if it prove to be true, as it is neither impossible nor improbable; if this be true, what a formidable day is that to be wherein the King shall render a strict account for all the English Protestant blood which has beene issued out, and is to be yet issued out in this wicked and un∣naturall quarrell? Manasseh which filled Jerusalem with blood, and made the Channels thereof flow with the pretious blood of Saints, could not contract so blacke a guilt, as he that imbrewes two large King∣domes with blood, and that with the blood of the best
reformed Professors of our Saviours Gospell. That blood of Protestants which has beene shed by Papists, as in the Parisian Massacree; that blood of Christians which has beene shed by Infidels, as in Turkey; that blood of Saints which has beene shed by Hereticks, as in the Arian Emperours dayes; that blood of stran∣gers which has beene shed by conquering Usurpers, as in Peru of late, may admit of some colour or excuse as to some degree of hainousnesse, and may plead for some kind of Expiation; but this is beyond all thought or expression. The goodly Kingdome of Ireland is almost conver∣ted into a Golgotha, and the more goodly Kingdome of England is hasting to a worse point of desolation. It must needs be therefore, that he to whose cruelty and injustice so much confusion shall be imputed, must be perpetually abominated as a plague of humane kind, more monstrous and portentuous, then any age for∣merly had the strength to produce. The ripping up of a Mothers wombe, the fiting of such a Metropolis as Rome was, were but straines of vulgar narrow-hearted cruelty; Antichrist himselfe may owne the depopula∣tion and vastation of our Brittish Islands, as acts wor∣thy of his dying fury. 3 But it remaines now in the last place, that we sup∣pose some doubt to be in the Case, or some mixture of injustice in some circumstances: as that though the King incline not at all to Popery himselfe, yet he has favoured and enabled Papists too far to doe mischiefe; and though he cannot with safety cast himselfe wholly upon the fidelity of the Parliament, yet he has no cause utterly to reject their consent, and approbation in the filling up of all places of publike power and trust as the emergent necessity of the times now is, nor
to persist in this al-consuming war rather then to con∣descend to an Accommodation; if we lay downe this for supposed, we must needs conclude that the King has not punctually, and duly discharged his Office, so as that he can cleerly acquit and absolve himselfe be∣fore God of this lamentable effusion of Christian blood; for there must not onely be a perspicuous ju∣stice in the Cause, but an absolute necessity of the war when Kings take up the sword against such a conside∣rable number of their Subjects, as our King now fights against. Though the Cause may be just, yet the warre is not lawfull where the miserable consequences of it do too farre out-ballance the iniquity of the conditions offe∣red and proposed by the assailed party. Wherefore, if the meere and cleere justice of a Cause cannot alwaies wipe off guilt, how shall he be purged from offence whose Cause is not totally just, nor undeniably evi∣dent in a warre of this nature? If the King does not ap∣parantly fight for Antichrist, yet 'tis most apparent that Antichrist does fight for the King; the whole Hi∣rarchy has declared their ingagement by publishing Buls and by sending supplies into Ireland and England out of severall Popish Countries. On the other side, if the Earle of Essex does not ap∣parently fight for Christ, yet it seemes very probable that Christ fights for him; for our great Armies with∣in the Circle of the last yeere have foure times met, and still the King, side hath gone off with losse and dis∣advantage. Redding being begirt with his Excellen∣cies Forces, all his Majesties power could not relieve it; yet Gloucester being begirt by his Majesties For∣ces, his Excellency found meanes to relieve it. And as for Edge-hill and Newbery, though neither side was
totally routed, yet the mastery of the field was left to his Excellency; and had not fraud done better service to the King then force, scarce any other encounters in other parts had bin prosperous to his Popish Armies. These things seeme to make the Kings Cause at lest dubious, for it were strange if in these latter dayes Christ and Antichrist should be so farre reconciled in any one Cause, as to unite their battels in the same Ex∣pedition, or to pitch their Tents in the same field; and grant any doubt in this Case, and the King can never be capable of justification in prosecuting it so far with fire and sword; for the King has already sworn to up∣hold and preserve in their intire vigor the Laws of the Land, and the Priviledges of Parliament; and we can∣not deny, but even this doubt might be decided by the Lawes in Parliament, or by some other Judicatory out of Parliament, if the King would referre it to such a decision, if the King will admit of no Ju∣dicatory to determine this matter, what are all our Lawes and Priviledges worth? If he will admit of one but doubts what it is, and will not be resolved by his Parliament in that doubt, what will all his oathes pro∣fit us? what will all his deepe professions of favour to our Lawes and Priviledges stand us in stead? Nay, when the King is not certaine of victory, and yet hath by so many dreadfull oathes debarred himself from ill advantages by victory, if this devouring war (wherein so much losse is, and no gaine at all to countervaile it) be still protracted, and preferred before a just Peace, all these inexpiable mischiefes will be charged upon him, and future ages must needs suspect, that love of ruine and destruction, and a perfect hatred to the very nature and being of man, was the execrable cause of it. Imprimat. Ja. Cranford. FINIS.
