E3648 R8666 13255434 98680
AN EXACT JOURNAL OF THE SIEGE OF Namur, &c.
AN EXACT JOURNAL OF THE SIEGE OF NAMUR: Giving a Particular ACCOUNT Of the several Sallies and Attacks, and other most remarkable Passages from the first Investing of the Place. TOGETHER WITH The ARTICLES of Capitulation, both for the Surrendring the City and Castle. LONDON: Printed for I. Whitlock, near Stationers-Hall, 1695.
AN EXACT JOURNAL OF THE SIEGE OF Namur, &c. FOR the better understanding the Motions of both Armies, so soon as they took the Field; of the Confederates striving to amuse the Enemy; and co∣ver their main Design; and of the French, deluded by those Amusements, and endeavouring to defend themselves from the feign'd Attempts of the Confedeates, 'tis necessary that we should make a Repetition of the Movements on both sides from the beginning of the Campagne; since they all tended to a Siege; of which Posterity, as well as the present Age, will be glad to have an Exact Account. The Mashal de Villeroy was no sooner arriv'd in the French Army, but that he might win the Affection of so many great Officers, over whom he was to command, he told the chiefest among 'em, that he had in his Stables a
Hundred Horses, which they might make use of when they had occasion: That he would also keep Three. Ta∣bles, where they would do him a kindness to come and Eat, and that his Purse was still at their Service. After these Complements, the French General having visited all the Army that lay in different Quarters, from Furnes to the Meuse, caus'd those Troops that lay about Kièvraine, to pass the River Haisne, the 3d of June, in order to en∣camp at Blaton, Two Leagues from Condè. The 6th, a∣bout Four in the Afternoon, he order'd the whole Army to march, and take up their Post in the Camp at Leuse. The same Day also, M. de Bouflers encamp'd with his Army at Gosseliers, upon the Pieton, Two Leagues from Charleroy. In the mean time, the King of England, who arriv'd at Gaunt, the 6th of June, departed the same day for the Ar∣my which lay at Aerseel, near Thielt, under the Command of the Prince of Vaudemont, and the Duke of Wirtembergh. The next day his Majesty visited all the Posts round about the Camp. The Marshal de Villeroy being inform'd of the King's Ar∣rival in the Army, upon the 8th, by Five in the Morning, Decamp'd from Leuse, and marching all that Day and the next, upon the 10th encamp'd at Cordes between Tour∣nay and Oudenard. The same day he visited the Lines, between the Lys and the Scheld, and between Ypres and the Lys, and order'd the raising of some new Bastions from Ypres to Commines, and to furnish 'em sufficiently with great Guns. Upon the 10th. the King took a review of the Horse, and upon the 11th, detach'd away Twelve Squadrons, un∣der the Marquess de la Foret, Lieutenant General, who pass'd the Lys at Machelen, over Three Bridges, with Orders to joyn the Elector of Bavaria, who lay encamp'd with his Army at Ninove. The same day also the King decamp'd, and to the End he might draw nearer to the Lines, encamp'd at Rousselare, over against Commines and Ypres, and advanc'd the 13th to Bekelar, a League or there∣about
from the Enemies Lines. Now in regard this Move∣ment threatned the very Center of 'em, as well as Menin, Ypres, la Kenoque, Furnes, the Canal d' Eauve and Boasingue: Villeroy seem'd to be at a great puzzle, not knowing well what effectual Course to take for the Preservation of so many Places at a time. Thereupon he forthwith issued out several Orders; he caus'd great Numbers of Men to march several ways, under several Commanders, and chang'd the Posts of several. M. de Rosen, who lay at Eschem, to defend the Line from Courtrai to the Scheld, pass'd to Ypres to defend the whole on that side, M. de Mon∣trevel, was sent to Eschem, in the Place of M. de Rosen. M. de Capestan was appointed to command at Kenoke; the Count de la Motte, to command at Ypres, and M. de Pra∣contal at Comines. M. de Caraman commanded to Ypres, and M. Davejan to Courtray, and M. de Montal lay next to Dunkirk. The Marshal also order'd several Pieces of Ca∣non to be planted upon the Rising Grounds of Hollebeck, where he had rais'd new Works, as having observ'd that part to be weaker than any of the rest. During these Motions, the Elector of Bavaria, who lay encamp'd at Ninove, departed from thence the 14th, pass'd the Dendre, and encamp'd at St. Stephens. The 15th he ar∣riv'd at Ename upon the Scheldt, a League below Oudenarde; and the 17th encampt at Castre, within half a League of the Enemies new Line. On the other side, the Marshal de Bouflers who lay with the Body of an Army at St. Gui∣lain, to observe the Electors Motions, being inform'd of these Movements, departed the 15th, and encamp'd near Tournai. The 16th he drew near the Scheld, and the 17th encamp'd under the Lines of Courtrai, where he receiv'd a Reinforcement of Horse and Foot, that Villeroy sent him. At the same time that the Elector encamp'd at Ninove, the Count of Athlone was detach'd from his Army, with Two and Twenty Squadrons of Horse, and Nine of Dutch Dragoons, and some Bavarian Troops, to march toward Louvain, and joyn, if it were necessary, with the Troops
of Brandenburgh and Liege, that lay quarter'd at Hologne, about a League from that City, and where they were joyn'd with the Brigadier Damprè, with Four Regiments of Dutch Horse; and from whence they decamp'd the 18th, in order to march to Mehaigne. All which time, the Count de Harcourt lay with a Volant Camp of French Horse in the Condros, to observe the Confederates on this side. Marshal de Villeroy being inform'd, that the King of England drew near the Lines between Ypres and Warneton, decamp'd from Cordes, and march'd all Night of the 13th and 14th. The Foot being led by the Prince of Conti, and the Horse by the Duke of Bourbon; and the whole Army encamp'd at Houthem in Two-Lines, the first all of Infantry, the Second all of Cavalry. Till the 19th, the French wrought hard to secure their Works rais'd all along the Lines; they also press'd forward the finishing of the New Works, and distributed Ammu∣nition among the Soldiers. All the care of the French having been by these Motions, to retrench the more safely, and so to order it, that they might not be constrained to come to a Fight; a Proof sufficient that the Confederates were Superior to 'em in Number. Upon the 17th, the King detach'd away the Duke of Wirtembergh, with 3000 Men, and some Artillery, with Orders to advance toward Kenoque, to the end he might draw the Enemy that way, and make 'em believe that there was a real Design upon that Fort: But before they could get thither, there was a Post that stood in their way, about half a League from the Fort, of which it behov'd 'em to make themselves Masters. This Post was defended by above 400 Dragoons, who were attacqu'd with such an undaunted Bravery, as surpriz'd the Enemy themselves. M. de la Motte, who commanded on that side, sent a Reinforcement to his own, so that there was brisk Firing on both sides: But at length the French were forc'd to give way, and the Assailants made themselves Masters both of the Post, and the Mote on that side: They also lodg'd themselves there, and made a Battery of Two Pieces of
Canon in the same Place. It was the common Opinion, that in this Action, the Duke of Wirtemberg lost about Two Hundred, and the Enemy near Four Hundred Men. In the mean time, the Count de la Motte caus'd another Battery to be rais'd in Opposition to that which the Con∣federates had erected, and they began to play one upon ano∣ther with great Fury. The French also made all the haste they could to entrench themselves beyond the Yser, casting up the Earth before the River, because the Moat which they possessed, lay lower than that which was opposite to it, the Ground being Marshy. They were also Masters of part of another Moat, which lay under the Canon of la Kenoque: And they shelter'd themselves besides, by means of a Parapet which they rais'd all the length of the Ground which look'd toward the Consederates, and which they cut in two or Three Places, to render the Access more diffi∣cult. Upon the 20th in the Afternoon, the Duke of Wirtem∣berg being strengthned with some new Reinforcements, Villeroy who had notice of it, sent away from the Left Wing of his Army, Eight Battalions, and a Brigade of Horse, under the Marquis of Feuquieres, Lieutenant General. The Night of the 20th to the 21st, was spent in continual Skirmishes; and there was a Report spread Abroad, that la Kenoque was assayl'd in Military Forms: But that was almost im∣possible, and it was sufficiently apparent, that the Assaylants had no design to do it; but only to draw down all the strength of the Enemy to that side of Flanders, by feigning the Seige of la Kenoque, and thereby cause the French to run at the wrong Deer. For it was a most difficult Task to pass the Yser, by reason of the Works which the French had cast up; and there was no attacquing the Fort, without passing that River: And though the Confederates had pass'd it, there lay beyond the broken Bridge, a great Quagmire, with a Road about Thirty Foot broad, wherein the French had made several Entrenchments one behind another. Be∣sides, Montal commanded with his Volant Camp, from
Dunkirk to Fintelle: His Forces stretching themselves from Furnes to this Place, which is a Considerable Post, well fur∣nish'd with Men, because that they who would pass the Yser must take it before they can come at Furnes. While these things were thus Acting on this side, the Elector of Bevaria lay not Idle. Upon the 17th of June the Horse and Foot had orders to prepare Facines or Faggots to be lay'd before the Regiments. The 19th the E∣lector riding with between three and four thousand Horse to View the Ground about the Lines, found that the French had posted themselves at the Mill of Belleghem, which is not above half a Quarter of a League from Fort de Clar, and the Lines. In this Place were posted five hundred Foot, and eight or ten Squardrons. Therefore M. General Fagel was sent away with some Troops to make himself Master of the Post. The Onset was Rude and Obstinate, for they charg'd and return'd to the Charge several times. But the French were constrain'd to give way, and retreated into their Lines the best they could, and in great disorder, being closely pursu'd by the Confederates. The Mill be∣ing thus taken, the Victors entrench'd themselves upon the Place, and maintain'd their ground. By this time some part of June being spent in all these Attacks, and having sufficiently fatigu'd and remov'd the Enemy at a distance from the Place where the Attaque was really design'd, private Orders were given to the Branden∣burghers, the Earl of Athlone, to the Army of the Elector of Ba∣varia and the King of Englands Forces, to set forward in Or∣der to put in Execution the Design which had been lay'd some time before. For all this while the Confederates, i order to what they cheifly propos'd to themselves, had made great Preparations at Leige of Great Guns, Ammunition and Provision, Pickaxes, Spades, Shovels and other Uten∣sils for Seiges, which were conveigh'd by Water down the River Meuse. They had got together a great Body of Men compos'd of the Troops of Munster, Cologn, Leige, Bran∣denburghers and others, who were advanc'd as far as Falaise, upon the Mehaigne. These were all order'd to march
directly for Namur; and the Earl of Athlone decamp'd from Bethlem's, tending his march to the same Place. He en∣camp'd at Roesbeck the 22d where he made a Halt one day; then marching three days together, and crossing the Famous Plain of Fleurus, he encamp'd the 29th at Mellé, within an hour and a half's march of Charleroi While the Brandenburghers got before and advanc'd still nearer to the Samber: And upon the 2d of July, he cross'd the Sam∣ber and invested Namur on that side next Condros. In the mean time the Elector of Bavaria decamp'd from Castre, about the 28th at night, and came the next morning to St. Lievens Hauten, and the 30th encamp'd at Ninove. The 1st of July he came to Hall, and the next day to Masy, within two leagues of Namur. The 3d he made his Approaches nearer to the City, cross'd the Samber, po∣sted his Men and took up his Head Quarters in the Abby de Maloigne. The Baron of Heiden, General of the Branden∣burghers, who had pass'd the Samber below Charleroi, took his Post next to Morlaigne, and sent a Detachment over the Meuse on that side next to Condros. While the Earl of Athlone posted himself on this side the Meuse with his Caval∣ry: And thus Namur, upon the 3d of June, was invested on every side. His Majesty of Great Britain upon the 27th of June sent away the heavy Baggage, the Suttlers and the Artillery from the Camp at Bekelaer: And the 28th by five a clock in the morning the whole Army decamp'd in two Colums, and marching on both sides of the Road with the Artillery encamp'd at Rousselaer. In the mean time the Duke of Wirtemberg having demolish'd the Post which he had made himself Master off, retreated to Dixmude with the Bo∣dy under his command. The 29th his Majesty having left the Army to the Conduct of the Prince of Vaudemont, departed with a De∣tachment of Granadiers and the Guards of his Body, and took the Road of Vilvorde. However ten thousand Men of that Army had orders to march to Brussels through Deinse, Gaure, and Alost.
His Majesty lay the 30th at Grimbery, and the 1st of July at the Abby of Parc near Lovain. The 2d he ar∣rived near Namur about a eleven a clock in the forenoon, and took up his Head Quarters at Coutoix le Chasteau. He held a Council of War that Evening, and the next Morn∣ing the Army drew nearer the City. The 3d his Majesty took up his Quarters at Flawen, on this side the Samber. Villeroy observing these unexpected Movements, sent away several Detachments to joyn Bouflers. But the Prince of Vau∣demont who watches the French General, sent away as many Detachments from his Army, as the Marshal detach'd from his, and Encampt at Gramme near Deinse. The 4th in the Evening the Beseigers began to fall brisk∣ly to work in drawing and making their Lines of Circum-Vallation, and Contra-Vallation; but notwithstanding all their diligence they could not prevent Bouflers from getting into the Town with several Regiments of Dragoons, and M. Megigni the Chiefest Engineer in France, next to M. Vauban. So that there was then said to be in the Town and Cittadel, besides those Seven Regiments, one and twenty Battalions, a Regiment of Cavalry, several Great Officers, a Company of Frank Volunteers, a Company of Canoneers, another of Miners, a Brigade of Engineers, and Ammunition and Provisions for six Months. By the 12th the Lines being finish'd, and some Batteries to cover the Workmen and Pioneers, the same evening the Trenches were open'd in three several Places; and the Beseigers play'd from one Battery while the Workmen labour'd without ceas∣ing to bring the rest to perfection: During which time the Beseiged made three Sallies, but in every one had no Suc∣cess, being still repuls'd with loss: Tho' Mr. General Fa∣gel was wounded in one of 'em, and the Baron of Plettem∣berg, the Bishop of Munster's Nephew, and a very good Officer, Slain with a Cannon Bullet. On the 8th of July N. S. Twenty Battalions of Foot, of which Thirteen were English and Scotch, being sent from the Prince of Vaudemont's Army joyn'd the Beseigers, un∣der the Command of the Count of Nassau, Lieutenant
General, and M. General Ramsey; and upon the 10th, Four English, and Two Battalions of Dutch, under the lead∣ing of the Lord Cutts, arriv'd in the Camp; so that the Besiegers were then no less 90 Battalions of Infantry. The Artillery also consisted of 120 Great Guns, and 60 Mor∣tars. Upon the 12th of July, Major General Salish relieved the Trenches; the next day, Major General Lindeboome, and upon the 14th, Major General Henkelem. During which time, the Besiegers Works and Approaches being carried on within Pistol-shot of the Enemies Out-works upon the Hill near Brussels Gate, his Majesty resolv'd to storm those Works. To which purpose, all things being in a rea∣diness, the Attack was begun on Monday the 15th, about Six a Clock in the Afternoon, upon the Right Hand, by Five Battalions of the Foot-Guards, commanded by Major General Ramsey, seconded by Nine Battalions more of English and Scotch: Upon the Left, Eight Dutch, and other Regiments under the Command of Major General Salish, were order'd to undertake the Assault. This Attack was performed with a more than ordinary Courage, and a Suc∣cess answerable. For after a very sharp and obstinate Dis∣pute, that held near upon Two Hours, the Besieged were beaten out of their Forts upon the Hill, and a Great En∣trenchment that leads to the Town, of which the Victors possessed themselves, being the most considerable Outworks which the Besiegers had on this side. In this Attack, the Besiegers had in all about 300 Men slain out-right, and 400 Wounded. Of the English Guards, Lieutenant Collonel Robinson, Five Lieutenants, and Two Ensigns were slain; Colonel Matthews, and several others were wounded. Of the French side; M. Moulevier, and M. de Vitry who acted as Brigadiers, and the Count of Mor∣stein, Son in Law to the Duke of Chevreuse, with about 50 Commanders more of Note kill'd, besides Inferior Of∣ficers, and about 1600 Men Kill'd and Wounded, The same day, about Two Hours before this desperate Attack, the Besieged made a Sally upon the Brandenburghers
Quarter, but after a sharp Conflict, were beaten back, and pursu'd to the very Gates of the Fort near the Meuse. The Ene∣mies loss could not choose but be very considerable, on the other side the Brandenburghers lost a Collonel, and some o∣ther Officers kill'd, and had about a Hundred Men kill'd and wounded. On the Tuesday Night following, Major General Heuke∣lom reliev'd the Trenches; the next Night, Major Ge∣neral Salish, and on Thursday Night, Major General Ramsey. And at the same time, they had several Bat∣teries playing against the detach'd Bastions, that were be∣tween Brussels and St. Nicholas Gate, toward which they were making their Approaches with all the speed they could. While things were thus hotly disputed between the Besiegers and the Besieged at Namur, Marshal de Villeroy well understand∣ing that the Army under the Command of the Prince of Vau∣demont was very much weaken'd by the sending of several Detachments to the Siege and other Places, thought he bad now an Opportunity to do a considerable piece of Service for his Master, by cutting off so considerable a part of the Con∣federate Forces: To which purpose he drain'd all the French Garrisons round about, and having by that means drawn together a Force that was almost treble in Number to the Prince of Vaudemont, he set forward with a full Resolution to fall upon him in his Trenches, in Front, Flank and Rear; confident he had him in such a Snare, that 'twas im∣possible a Man should escape him. 'Twas upon the 10th of July therefore, that the French Army under Villeroy decamp'd from Pont Escanaffe, and quitted their Lines to attack the Prince, who lay near Deinse. Now in regard that the Confederates were so en∣camp'd, that the Enemy would have had 'em in Flank, the Prince thought it convenient to alter the Array of his Ar∣my, and to post his Right Wing beyond Aerseele, whereas it was posted at Dendergem; and the Left Wing he posted all along the Lys, a little above Gramme, whereas before it was posted at Zeveren, near Deinse. About Eight a Clock
in the Evening, some Squadrons of the Enemies, advanced as far as Dendergem, and began to charge the Prince's Ad∣vanc'd Guards, who retreated between Dendergem, and the Front of the Army, according to the Orders they had re∣ceived. The Night following, the Prince order'd a Line to be cast up, to cover his Left Wing and Main Body, and order'd several Pieces of Canon to be planted in the prin∣cipal Avenues to the Camp. The 14th, between Seven and Eight in the Morning, it was easily perceiv'd, that the E∣nemies Army began to reach Denderghem, making a shew as if they intended to side off to the Princes Left Wing. In the mean time the Right Wing was surrounded with a Line, as the Left and the Main Body had been environ'd before: But the Enemy made a Halt near Denderghem, till about Noon, when their whole Army fil'd along the High-way of Thielt, and came to post themselves within Canon shot of the Prince's Right Wing: And then it was, that the Prince expected a General Assault. But they durst not venture to attacque him, seeing him so well en∣trench'd, and in so very good Order to receive them, the Great Guns being extreamly well dispos'd for that pur∣pose. In the mean time the Prince having Advice, that the Count of Montal was filing along his Right Wing, with a great Body of Horse and Foot, in order to charge 'em in the Rear, and the Marshal to attacque him in the Front, for that their Forces were much more numerous than His, the Prince immediately caus'd all the Baggage to pass the Scheld at Deinse, from thence to be Convoy'd to Gaunt, which was done. Afterwards, he drew off his Artillery from the Batteries, and order'd them to take the same Road; as also the Ammunition Waggons, and the Infan∣try, in several little Bodies. And the better to hinder the Enemy from perceiving his Retreat, the Prince order'd M. d' Overkirk to face the Enemy, with all the Horse and Dragoons of the Right
Wing, and for that purpose to range himself in Battel Array, from Aerseel to Vink, which was done; and after the Artillery, Baggage, Ammunition-Waggons and Foot were got far enough before, M. de Overkirk follow'd with the Cavalry and Dragoons, as the Prince had order'd him. Thus was the Enemy amus'd, notwithstanding they lay so very near, and that the Prince did not begin to march till about Five or Six of the Clock in the Afternoon, and consequently in open Day-light. And this March was per∣form'd in so good Order and with so much Speed, that the Enemy durst not attack the Consederates. Nor had they lost one Man, but for a Stratagem which the French us'd, which was by making use of Green Colours, to intermix with some of the Rear guard, and to fall upon Two Bat∣talions, and some Granadeers, before they could get in∣to a Lane through which they were to pass. But the Granadeers, and another Battalion making a Halt, the Enemy was soon repulsed: However this Stratagem cost the Confederates 200 Men. The Marshal enrag'd that such an Opportunity had slipt out of his Hands, Burnt and Plunder'd the Village of Wootergen, where the Prince had his Head Quarters. When his Majesty of Great Britain was inform'd that the Army and the Prince were safe, and what a Brave and Masterlike Retreat he had made, he sent the Prince the ensuing Letter.
Cousin, YOƲ may well imagin how uneasie I was upon the Receipt of your last Letter, dated Yesterday Noon, which came to me this Morning by break of Day; and how great a Joy your other Letter was to me, Dated from Marykerk, near Gaunt, this Day at Three of the Clock in the Morning, finding that you under∣stood so well with so much prudence, and so gloriously to disingage your self from so imminent a Danger. I am much oblig'd to you for it; for in this Retreat you have given greater Marks of a general accomplishment in the Art of War, than if you had won a Battel. I absolutely approve your Conduct upon this occasion, and I hope it will caution the Enemy from attempting any more of the same Nature. In the mean time, I impa∣tiently expect to hear which way they will bend their March, now they have miss'd their Blow. I remain always, &c. From the Camp before Namur, the 15th, at Nine a Clock in the Evening. Sign'd, WILLIAM REX.
But to return to the Siege; after the Attack on Monday was over, a Letter was intercepted from M. Bouflers to the King of France, wherein, after the Marshal had given him a Relation of the particulars of the Attack, he very much lamented, that it had cost his Majesty above a Thousand Men, among which he reckon'd the Counts of Maulevrier and Morstein, the Marquis of Monbron, the Governor of Cambray's Son, Colonel of the Dauphin's Regiment, Two other Colonels, 16 Captains, and several good Officers and Persons of Note. It was a Woman who undertook to carry the Letter to Dinant, from thence to be sent to the Court; but instead of the Recompence which M. Bou∣flers put her in hopes of receiving for her pains, the Be∣siegers hang'd her up upon a Gibbet, that she might serve for an Example to others, who should undertake such kind of Messages. On the 18th of July, Orders were given out for Major General Ramsey, with Five Battalions of Guards, to Storm an Old Tower that stands below a certain Place call'd la Bouge, and the Enemies Works descending toward the Counterscarp; the order of which Attack was thus. The First Battalion of the First Regiment of Guards, a Bat∣talion of Coldstreamers Regiment of Guards, and a Battalion of Scotch Guards, were order'd for the Attack upon the Right Hand, toward the bottom. The Second Battalion of the first Regiment of Guards, was appointed for the At∣tack on the Left Hand, by the Old Tower. At the Head of these Attacks, march'd a Hundred and Twenty Fuse∣liers, who carried Fascines before them; and the same number of Granadiers, follow'd by a Hundred Pioneers with Spades, Shovels and Gabions, &c. On the Right of the Body which advanced on the Right Hand, march'd a Hundred Granadiers, carrying Fascines before them, fol∣low'd by Fifty Pioneers; and the same Number of Grana∣diers was on the Right of the Body on the Left Hand, be∣tween the Two Attacks.
Half an Hour after Six a Clock in the Afternoon, the Signal was given, at what time the Battalions before men∣tion'd march'd forward in the appointed Order, with that undaunted Courage and Bravery, which is not to be ex∣press'd, never taking any notice of the Enemies Firing, which was very thick and furious: For the Fuseliers that were in the Front, advanc'd with their Fascines to the very Palisado's, where when they had laid 'em down, they fell a Firing upon the Enemy, while the Granadiers ply'd the Tower and Works, the Battalions in the mean time march∣ing close after 'em, with their Muskets shoulder'd, till they came so very near, that they presented over the Palisados, driving the Defendants from thence, and pursuing them through a wide Place of Arms, to the bottom of the Work. But the Enemy firing a-fresh from the Counterscarp, and a Redoubt that lay on the other side of a Hollow way, upon the Assailant's Flank, the Lord Cuts immediately hasten'd to second those that were engag'd, with Three Bat∣talions of Titcomb, Stanley and Collingwood; with the First of which, he flew to the lowest Palisados, and together with the Guards, a Second time beat back the Enemy, some into the Water, others where they could best shift for themselves. At the same time Brigadier Fitzpatrick, with the Lord Hamilton's, his own Regiment of Fuseliers, Ingolsby, Saun∣drson, Lowder and Maitland, set forward toward the At∣tacks, with the Two First to relieve the Dutch Guards, and those that were with the Lord Cutts, at the lowest Palisa∣do's; the rest were drawn up by the Tower, to give assi∣stance as occasion requir'd; only Lowders Regiment was posted on the other side of the Hollow way, to prevent Flanking and Surprize. In the mean time, Major General Ramsey commanded the Pike-men to carry Fascines, and raise a work sufficient to withstand a Musket Shot; and when he had posted in that Place, the Regiments of In∣golsby, Sanderson, Lowder and Maitland, he drew off the rest by break of Day, to the First Parade. The Fury
and Heat of this Action lasted about Two Hours, in which time the Besiegers possessed themselves of the Enemies Works, notwithstanding they were defended by such con∣siderable Numbers of Resolute Men. In this Bloody Action, the Assailants both Officers and Soldiers, signa∣liz'd themselves to that degree, that 'twas no wonder that they who did more than Men could be thought to do, should be superior and victorious over those who did no more than only what Men could do. The chief Officers Slain and Wounded, were Colonel Robinson Kill'd, Lieutenant Colonel How, and Lieutenant Colonel Davis Wounded, of the First Regiment of Guards. In the Coldstream Guards, Colonel Matthews, Lieutenant Colonel Edgeworth, and Leiutenant Colonel Jones Wound∣ed, Pierce and Morison, Lieutenant Collonels taken Priso∣ners. Of the Scotch Guards, Lieutenant Colonel John Ha∣milton wounded. Of the Dutch Guards, Goudaker and Pa∣nute, Lieutenant Colonels, and Major Hetzler wounded. Of the Royal Regiment, Major Mac Ilvain Slain, and the Lord George Hamilton Wounded. Of Colonel Ingolsby's Regiment, Lieutenant Colonel Sabin Wounded, besides several Captains, Lieutenants and Ensigns, and others Kill'd and Wounded; and the whole Loss of Private Soldiers, accor∣ding to the Account given in by the several Colonels, was 308 Slain, and 604 Wounded. And as for the Enemy, they had no less than 1600 Kill'd and Wounded, by the Information of the Deserters. In this Interim, Villeroy had laid a Design to have sur∣priz'd Nieuport, by means of a Correspondence which he held with a Person who had undertaken to deliver the Sluces into his Hands. But the Prince of Vaudemont having an inkling of it, sent immediate Orders to Lieutenant Ge∣neral Bellasis, (whom he had detach'd some Days before toward Bruges, with Twelve Battalions) to march with all speed toward the Canal, and dispute the Passage with the Enemy, which he did the next Night. The French know∣ing nothing of this, continu'd their March toward the Ca∣nal, but seeing Twelve Battalions posted on the other side,
they were so astonished, that they desisted from their De∣sign, and retreated faster than they came, fearing to be swallow'd up by the Waters of the Sluces which the Go∣vernor had open'd upon their Approach. And as for the Traytor, finding himself disappointed, he made his Escape to Furnes. The 25th at Night, the Besiegers posted themselves at the Foot of the Redoubt of Pallart, and about Mid∣night, set their Miners to work: Which enforc'd the Ene∣my that defended it, to surrender at discretion by break of Day, being in all Six and Fifty Men, among whom were a Captain, an Engineer, Two Lieutenants, and an En∣sign. Upon the 27th of July in the Morning, his Majesty ha∣ving resolv'd that an Attack should be made upon the First Counterscarp of the Town, came into the Trenches him∣self, and after he had given ample and requisite Orders, more particularly, that all the Batteries as well of the Great Guns as Mortars, should play without intermission upon the Faces of the Bastion, before St. Nicholas's Gate, and the front of the Counterguard that lay upon the Left Hand of the Ravelin near the Meuse, return'd to his Quar∣ters. In the Afternoon, he went again into the Trenches, and about Five a Clock in the Afternoon, the Attack be∣gan. The English march'd from the Head of the Trenches on the Right Hand, and advanc'd to the first Counterscarp that covers the Sluces. All the while the Enemy fir'd thick and furiously, and sprang Three or Four small Mines fill'd with Bombs upon the Glacis; nevertheless the As∣sailants made themselves Masters of the Counterscarp, and while they drave the Enemy from their Defences, the Be∣siegers made a Lodgment behind 'em upon the Glacis of the Counterscarp before mention'd. At the same time the Dutch march'd upon the Left Hand, and advancing along the Meuse, fell upon the Ene∣my, who defended the First and Second Counterscarp in Flank, and in less than a Quarter of an Hour drove the Besieged out of the first Counterscarp, from one end to the
other. Which done, the Assailants presently began to lodge themselves with Wool-sacks, Gabions and Fascines, some of which unfortunately taking Fire, burnt a part of the Lodgment, made by the English to secure their Left against the Counterguard of St. Rocque's Bastion. However the English, defenceless as they were, maintain'd their Ground, and kept the Enemy that were posted within the said Coun∣terguard in play, till they had made a new Lodgment be∣hind the First, which was at length put out. In the mean time the Dutch perceiving that the Enemies firing from the Counterguard, very much gall'd the English, mounted the Breach of the Counterscarp next the Meuse, plying the and Enemy with their Granado's, lodg'd themselves upon the Breach of the Counterscarp, as the English had done on the Counterscarp it self; by which means, they kept all the first Counterscarp, from the Meuse to the Inundation. The Enemy all this while kept firing continually with Five or Six Pieces of Canon, several of the Bullets of which flew near the Place where the King stood; and one of 'em kill'd Mr. Godfrey, and took off the Arm of Lieutenant Collonel d' Eck. Of the Besiegers, between Three and Four Hundred Men were Kill'd and Wounded in this Action. Nor could the Enemies Loss but be considerable, in regard that few of their Men who were posted in the first Coun∣terscarp, escap'd with their Lives; as also, for that the As∣sailants Canon and Bombs, and the small shot of their In∣fantry did great Execution. At the same time, the Elector of Bavaria attack'd, and made himself Master of an Advanc'd Post of the Enemies, between the Sambre and the Castle-Hill, wherein were lodg'd about Four Hundred Men, besides a Detachment to guard the Abby of Salsine, and another House that stood near it, Places both very proper for laying a Bridge over the Sambre, and to facilitate the Attack of the Castle. Du∣ring this Action, the Besieged Sally'd out of the Castle, both Horse and Dragoons, to second their Men, but upon the Electors sending some Squadrons against 'em, they presently retreated.
After these Two Attacks were over, his Majesty order'd the Ditch of the Town to be drain'd; to which purpose, the Dam that kept in the Water, was undermin'd and blown up. Upon the 29th of July, it was resolved that the Electors Men, should the next Morning early, attack the Enemies Lines, and Retrenchments that secur'd all their New Works before the Castle, between the Sambre and the Meuse: And the Forces appointed for this piece of Service, consisting of Bavarians, Brandenburghers, and other Foreign Troops, were order'd to move soon after it was dark, and during the Obscurity of the Night, to advance so near the Ene∣mies Trenches as possibly they could, without being dis∣cover'd. Upon the 30th, as soon as Day was broke, the Signals being given, the Assaylants fell on in Three several Places. The Assent of the Hill proved somewhat difficult, besides that the Enemy had Eight or Nine Great Guns, conve∣niently planted at some distance without their Works, ad∣ditional to those mounted upon their Fortification. But notwithstanding all this, the Besieged were soon driven from their Lines, and that with so little Loss on the Assailants side, that had they stop'd according to their Orders, there would have hardly been Twenty lost. But the Granadiers in heat of Courage, pursuing the Fugitive Enemy, ad∣vanc'd so far, that they drove 'em from the Counterscarp of some of their strongest and most regular Works; but not being provided to lodge themselves, they were con∣strained to retire to the Ground where they were first com∣manded to post themselves, which was a good way within those Lines, which were by the Enemy thought so strong, as well by reason of their Scituation, as of the New Works which they had added since the Siege, that the Pur∣chase of 'em would have cost much dearer than they did. This Action cost the Besiegers about a Hundred Men Slain, and a Hundred and Fifty Wounded. The French sent out of the Castle both Horse and Dragoons to second their Men, but upon the marching of a Detachment no less nu∣merous
against them, they presently retreated, without making the least Attempt. Upon the First of August, his Majesty caus'd an Onset to be given to the Counterscarp, before the Half Moon, and the Demi-Bastion, on the Left Hand near the Meuse. This Attack was begun about Seven a Clock in the Morning, by the English Guards, under the command of the Lord Cutts upon the Right Hand, and on the Left by the Dutch, led by Brigadier Dedem; who notwithstandig the continual Fi∣ring of the Enemy, before Ten a Clock had lodg'd them∣selves on the Right Hand, and secur'd their Lodgement. The Dutch also not being able to maintain the Work it self, lodg'd themselves upon the point of the Demi-bastion: And this Action cost the Besiegers about Four Hundred Men Kill'd and Wounded, part English and part Dutch. In this, as in all the rest of the Onsets made in the time of this Siege, the Soldiers behav'd themselves with that un∣daunted Courage and Bravery, that they carried all before them, and the Oldest and most experienc'd Officers declar'd that they never saw such vigorous Storming of Ramparts and Bulwarks before. And now the Besiegers being lodg'd upon the Counter∣scarp, were preparing for a general Assault upon the Town; when upon the Third of August, about Two in the After∣noon, the Enemy hung out a white Flag, and desired a Parley; which being granted, Hostages were exchang'd, Colonel William Seymor, and Major Storek for the Besiegers, and Count Nogent, and a French Major for the Besieged. Upon which a Treaty ensu'd, and the Town was surrender'd upon a Capitulation that contain'd these following Ar∣ticles.
Articles of Capitulation, demanded by the French, for the Surrendring of the Town of Namur. I. THE Exercise of the Roman Catholick Religion shall be preserved in the Town, and no other permitted. Granted. II. All the Priviledges of the Inhabitants shall be preserved, and their Goods that are Confiscated, restored. Granted. III. All the Inhabitants, French and others, may stay in the Town, or remove in Three Months, with their Families and Effects. Granted. IV. None of the Burghers, or others, shall be troubled for ha∣ving served the French King, and they, as well as all the De∣serters, shall be Pardoned. Granted, except what relates to the Deserters. V. The Horses taken during the War, and bought by the Burghers or others, shall not be taken from them. Granted. VI. The Sick and Wounded shall be Transported to Dinant, with the Persons appointed to take care of them; and Boats and sufficient Carriages shall be provided for them by the Allies, (they paying for the same) with the necessary Convoy and Pass∣ports, within Six Days after Signing this Capitulation. The Besieged may provide Boats for their Sick and Wounded, and shall have Pasports to send for what Boats and Boat-men they want from Dinant, and may make use of what Boats there are at Namur, provided they send them forthwith back again. VII. Such of the Sick and Wounded as are not in a condition to remove, may continue at Namur, and when they are well, shall be furnished with Carriages and Pasports to carry them to Dinant. Granted.
VIII. Six Days shall be Granted to the Garison of the Town to retire into the Castle with their Families and Effects, during which time, no Hostility shall be committed by either Party, on the side of the Town or the Castle; and to prevent all disorder, the Troops of the Allies shall only possess themselves of the Gate of the first Enclosure of the Attack, and none of them shall enter into the Town, until the Garison is entirely retired into the Castle, and the Second Gate of the Second Attack, shall during the said time, be guarded by the Garison. There are Granted to the Besieged, Two Days only, to begin from the 4th at Noon, and they shall forthwith give up the Posts at the Entrance of the Iron Gate. The Be∣sieged may place a Guard jointly with the Allies, at the Gate of the Old Enclosure, to prevent Disorders. IX. The Garisons in the Redoubts of St. Fiacre, Espiney, and St. Anthony, may enter into the Town, and thence retire into the Castle. Granted. X. All Persons put by the French King into any Places of Judicature, or others, shall continue to enjoy the same. Granted. XI. No Officers Sick or Wounded, or others, shall be stopt on accompt of Debt, or on any other Pretence, but Security shall be given to such as can but make out their Debts, for Payment of the same. Granted. XII. All Contracts and Agreements made between the French and the Burghers, and with the Magistrates shall be faithfully performed. Granted, provided the same be not prejudicial to his Ca∣tholick Majesty. XIII. The Horses and Equipages of the Officers and Garison in the Town, shall be Conducted with a Convoy to Dinant, and they may not be stop'd or searched, on any Pretence what∣soever, and no prejudice done to the said Equipages, or those that conduct them. Rejected.
XIV. The Prisoners taken during the Siege, shall be releas'd on both sides. Granted. XV. All the Hostages may be conducted with a Convoy to Dinant. Granted. XVI. There shall be given up the Town, which is between the Sambre, and the Attack of St. Nicholas's Gate, as also the Iron Gate, and the Two Towers which are at the end of the Gate of the Meuse, towards the Condros, except Gate Lewis, which is to remain in the Hands of the Besieged. Granted. XVII. The Hostages given on both sides for the due Exe∣cution of these Articles, shall be reciprocally restored, after the full performance thereof. The Mines and the Magazines shall be discovered by the Besieged to those that shall be appointed for that Purpose. The Besieged shall commit no Disorder, nor insult over the Inhabitants in quitting the Town. These Articles were Signed the 4th of August, by the E∣lector of Bavaria, and Count Guiscard, Governor of Namur. No sooner had the Confederates made themselves Masters of the Town of Namur, which they had bravely and fairly won in a manner by Inches, but the unhappy Tidings ar∣riv'd, that Dixmude and Deinse were both shamefully deliver'd up to the French, and the Garrisons made Prisoners of War; the one by the Treachery of Major General Ellen∣bergh, the other by the perfidiousness of Colonel Ofarrel. Ellenbergh after he had done his business, retir'd to Paris, to receive the Rewards of his Villany; and Ofarrel shelter'd himself in Cambray.
Upon the 12th of August at Night, the Besiegers broke Ground, in order to make their Approaches to the Castle, and carrying on their Trenches about 150 Paces before Cohorn Fort, toward the Sambre, made a very good Lodgment. The 13th they advanc'd their Trenches about 200 Paces farther; and that Afternoon one of the Besiegers Bombs fell into one of the Enemies Magazines, wherein lay about 500 Granados, and some Powder, which blew up, and did them considerable Damage. The 14th, the Besiegers continu'd their Works with good Success. The Night following, the Enemy made a Sally upon Six Hun∣dred of the Besiegers, commanded by Colonel Seymour, who were posted near the Palisados of the French, to secure the Pioneers that wrought in the Trenches; but the French were repulsed, and several of them Slain, and the Besiegers Works were still carried on a Hundred and Fifty Paces farther. On the Besiegers side Four Men were Slain out-right, and Twelve Wounded, among whom, Colonel Seymor's Major, and one Captain. 'Twas said that Marshal Bouflers design'd to have taken the advantage of that Sally, and to have forc'd his way out with his Horse, but that finding the Be∣siegers had so well posted their Troops to receive him, he thought it not convenient to put his Design in Execution at that time. The 15th the Besiegers made a new Trench of about Three Hundred Paces in the Plain of Salsine, behind the other which they had raised before; and ran a Line from their Lodg∣ment, as far as the old Trench at the Foot of the Moun∣tain, to secure themselves against Sallies. During which time, the Enemy were so thrifty of their Firing, that the Besiegers had only Five or Six Men Wounded. The 16th the Besiegers advanc'd their Trench in the Plain of Salsine, and enlarged and mended that at the Foot of the Mountain, which had been much endamag'd by the Rain. The 17th they advanc'd their Trench at the Foot of the Hill, above a Hundred Paces, and carried on that in the Plain of Salsine, in order to meet it. The next Night the
Enemy fir'd thick and three-fold with their Small-shot and Great Guns, and made Two Sallies to disturb the Pioneers; but were presently beaten in again; Ten private Soldiers being Kill'd out∣right, and a Colonel who commanded in the Trenches, and some others being Wounded. Upon the 28th of August, about Eleven a Clock at Night, the Enemy made a Sally with about 200 Dragoons Mounted, and 500 Granadiers. The First made an Onset upon the Right Hand, with 160 Granadiers, where they were soon repuls'd by the Count of Ribera, who was visiting the Night Posts. After that, they made an Attack upon the Left Hand, where the Lord Cutts had posted his advanc'd Guards to secure the Work∣men; at what time a Hundred Dragoons came upon Lieutenant Sutton, a Lieutenant of Colonel Seymor's Regiment, who being posted in the Plain of Salsine, with 35 Fusiliers, suffer'd 'em to advance within a few Paces of him, and then discharging all his Fire upon 'em, retreated to his main Body; after which, the Dragoons pressing hard upon him, he gave 'em a Second Vol∣ley; at what time the Spanish and Bavarian Horse, who were posted in the Plain of Salsine to second the Infantry, fell in pell mell with the Enemy, and pursu'd 'em to the very gate of the Castle. In which Action, the Enemy confess'd that they had one half of their Dragoons kill'd, together with the Officer that commanded them. Upon the 25th, came Letters to Whitehall, that His Majesty having receiv'd Information, that Villeroy was upon a full March to Fleurus, thought it convenient to leave the Camp before Namur to the Conduct of the Elector of Bavaria, and the Duke of Hol∣stein Pleon, and join the Army commanded by the Prince of Vau∣demont, taking up his Quarters at Bonesee near Mazy. The next Day the Enemy made a Halt at Fleurus, being joyn'd by the De∣tachment from Germany, and the other Troops commanded by the Count de Harcourt. In the Evening of the same Day, the French marched to Gem∣blours, and seem'd to prepare themselves for a pitch'd Battel, for they lest their Tents, and advanc'd toward the King of England, as near as the Ground would permit. Upon which His Ma∣jesty drew out his Army, with a Resolution to engage. And
in that posture the whole Army continu'd all that Day; his Ma∣jesty staying in the Field in Person, from Four a Clock in the Morning, till Eight in the Evening; in which condition the Con∣federates stood ready to receive the Enemy, whenever they thought it convenient to begin. And it seem'd that Villeroy had either a real intent to relieve the Besieged, or else to try what a Bravado would do. For he caus'd several Pieces of Canon to be discharg'd, which were suppos'd to be a Signal, and which were answer'd by the Besieged with Lights from the Highest part of the Castle. In the mean time, the Works before the Castle went on very well, and the Canon had made great Breaches as well in the Castle as Coehorn, insomuch that all the Discourse was of a General Assault. Upon the 29th of August, came an Express from his Majesties Camp to Whitehall, giving an Account, That a General Storm had been made upon the Castle of Namur, that still it held out, which Assault was order'd in the following manner. The Lord Cutts was appointed to attack the Counterscarp and Breach of the Terra Nova, with a Detachment of Granadiers, and 4 Regiments of Infantry. Count Rivera, a Major General in the Spanish Service, was order'd to storm the Coehorn Fort, on that side next the Terra Nova, with 3000 Spaniards and Bavarians; M. General la Cave, was assign'd to attack the Coehorn on the Right Hand of the Spa∣niards, with 2000 Brandenburghers, while M. Gen. Swering attack'd the Casotte with 2000 Dutch Infantry, and another Colonel at∣tack'd the Lower Town with about 2000 Men more. The English advanc'd with great Order and Resolution, and had gain'd the top of the Breach, forcing their way through Fire and Smoke on every side; but they found the Enemy so advan∣tagiously posted and entrench'd behind the Breach, and the Ground on their side so very bad, that they could not get Ground in front, but were forc'd to retire. Count Rivera was Slain among the foremost, upon their first Ap∣proaches to the Coehorn; however the Bavarians posted themselves upon a Saliant Angle of the Counterscarp, and kept firing fu∣riously upon the Enemy, who endeavour'd with great Obstinacy to dislodge them: Insomuch, that when most of the Officers of the Bavarian Guards were kill'd and Wounded, and that the o∣ther
Regiments had suffered great Damage, the Enemy still firing with a more than ordinary Resolution, the English who had quit∣ted the Terra Nova, as not being able to do any good on that side, seconded the Bavarians and Spaniards, under the Command of the Lord Cutts, who at the same time having order'd a Lieutenant of Colonel Mackay's Regiment, with 30 Men, to break through the Palisados, and attack a Battery of the Enemies; the Lieute∣nant executed his Orders with that undaunted Bravery, that he turn'd Seven of the Enemies Canon against themselves, and at the same instant secur'd some of their Mines; by which means the English and Bavarians planted their Colours upon the Palisados, and made a good Lodgment. In the mean time M. Gen. la Cave, with his Brandenburghers, and M. Gen. Swering with his Dutch-men, made each of them Two other Lodgments, of which the Besiegers continu'd in pos∣session, and presently fell to work to improve them, in order to another Assault; and the Batteries were order'd to play afresh upon the Terra Nova, to make the Breach wider, and facilitate a 2d Attack. In this Action, the Loss that fell upon the Four English Regi∣ments, who made the Assault, was as follows. The Lord Cutts Wounded. Nineteen Commission Officers kill'd, and Fifty Four Wounded. Private Soldiers 339. Slain outright; 682 Wounded; Volun∣teers Wounded, Col. Windsor, Mr. Thompson, Mr. Stanhope. Other Advice from His Majesties Camp at Ostin, Sept. 1. N.S. gave a farther Account, that during these Transactions, the Ene∣my appear'd every Day in the Front of the Confedrates Line; that on the Tuesday before, they came with about 70 Squadrons to Boneff, extending their Line from that Place, to the Right Hand, near Perwys. Upon which, his Majesty order'd the Confederate Army to move, extending his Right Wing to Longchamp, and his Left to St. Denis; and leaving a Brigade of Masy to secure that Post. The last of August, they appear'd with about Eleven Squa∣drons near the Advanc'd Guard, but were soon repuls'd. The next day his Majesty having din'd Early, and in the Af∣ternoon being upon the Road, returning to the Siege, in order to give Directions for a second Attack of the Castle, was met by an Adjutant sent by the D. of Bavaria, to inform his Majesty
that M. Bouflers and the Count de Guiscard had desir'd to Capitu∣late; that they had offer'd at first to treat for Coehorn Fort alone, but that being refus'd 'em by the Elector, they had agreed to capitulate for the whole. Thereupon, so soon as his Majesty was arriv'd, Hostages were exchang'd, and Proposals brought from the Castle to the Salsine; the Enemy insisted at first, that they might have Ten Days time to expect Succour, but that was absolutely refus'd 'em; for it was plain, that the Enemy had suffer'd very much in the last Assault, and that they were extreamly discourag'd by their Losses. So that at length upon the 2d of September, N. S. in the Morn∣ing, the Capitulation for the Surrender of the Castle of Namur was Sign'd, and the Besiegers took the possession of part of the Outworks; upon which Villeroy began to draw off, and retire with the French Army toward Flerus. The Substance of the Capitulation was, That the Outward Fortifications, that is to say the Fort of Coehorn, the Redoubt Casemate, the Hornwork of Bale, and the Casotte should be delivered up the 2d Instant by nine in the morning. That the Garrison should march out with Drums beating, Colours flying, two pieces of Cannon 24; two 12; and two 6 Pounders, two Mor∣tars, and this upon the 5th Instance in the morning. That they should be provided with Horses and Wagons sufficient for trans∣portation of their Equipage, and such of the Sick and Wounded as are able to depart with the Garrison, and that the Besieged might leave Officers and Commissaries to take care of the rest. That no Officers shall be stopp'd for Money lent, or Goods deliver'd, provided they give Security, or Hostages for satisfaction of what they might owe. That no satisfaction should be demanded for Houses demolished during the Siege, but that Cattel and Horses taken in the County of Namur be∣fore the Siege, shall be paid for. All Magazines to be faithfully deliver'd up. All Mines to be faithfully discover'd, &c. Of this Capitulation, Two Copies were Sign'd, One by the E∣lector of Bavaria, the other by Marshal de Bouflers, and Monsieur de Guiscard. FINIS.
