G1729B R26757 9531661 43535
Great NEWS FROM Scotland and Ireland, GIVING An Account of the Death of the Chief of the Rebels Clans in Scotland, of the State of King James in Ireland, and of the Di∣visions betwixt the Irish and French Ge∣nerals, in a Letter from Edenborough. Edenborough the 8th of May, 1690. THE true Account of Lochzels, the chief of the Rebels Clans death, is, that the Rebels having resolved to send some considerable Men of their Number to the late King James, to signifie the Condition they were in, and to ac∣quaint him that they could not be able to hold out a∣gainst the powerful Army that was coming against them; and Sir John Drummond of Machany having said to Midenald of Glengary, That they that were King James's Proselytes were his Enemies: Glengary said, That he was  Rogue, and that he was as good a Protestant as he was: upon which they both drew, Lochzel came to separate them, and in the doing of it got his deadly wound. Letters came here yesterday from the North, bringing Confirmation of Sir Thomas Levingstone and Major Mackay's Conduct, who led on the Party at Crundale; and add, that Ruthan and Cannon having sled diffe∣rent ways in the time of the Action, they are in pursuit of Cannon's Party that sled with him, of which, and the former, you may have a fuller Account by our next. Lieutenant George Murray who was taken Prisoner at Pearth this day Twelve-month by the Lord Dundee, and has been Prisoner since for the most part in the Isle of Mull, being exchanged, as was said, formerly with Captain Dunbar, arrived here on Tuesday Night, and gives an Ac∣count that he received none of the Money his Lady sent to him, the Carrier being plundered thereof by the Rebels, but was in a starving Condition, as appears by the Figure he makes at present. But he gives this Incouragement to all honest men here, that the Rebels there are in a great Consternation, fearing they shall have no Relief from Ireland; and that he doubts not but the Common People will yield at the first Approach of any of the King's Forces.
Last Night we had the following Letter by the Post from Ireland. The Tenor follows: Lisborn 23 April, 1690. The Nineteenth Instant Colonel Gustavus Hamilton went from his Garison at Clunsh, with a small Party, twelve Miles into the Enemies Quarters, and brought off Two hundred Cows, Four hundred Sheep, and a great many Horses; and though he past near several of their Garisons, met with no Opposition, but came safe home. Then followed the Account of Sir Cloudsley Shovels Action which you have heard. The 22d Instant a Party of Four hundred Irish got safe into Charlemont, but we do not hear they have carried in any Provisions more then upon their backs. This Recruit is not much valued by our Great Ones here, who say that great numbers of men is not mainly material to the Defence of that Place. The late King has permitted several Women of Quality to come from Dublin lately, who say that the French and Irish Factions clash mightily, and that King James conceiving the latter to be the best support he has at present, complies with and favours them most. Tyrconnel and the French generally Jarr-extreamly, but the former and his Cabal bear the sway in all Consultations. Since writing of this, I spoke just now with a man that came from Ardmagh yesterday morning, who says, Yesterday by break of day Ma∣jor Oregan came from Charlemont with Five hundred Men, intending to surprize a small Fort which we have on the Black water near Benbburb, and Twelve Miles only from Charlemont: The Ford was kept by one Captain Moor, with a Detachment of One hundred of the Derry men; he being Alarmd by his out Centinels, who were beaten in, presently put his Men in Order, and marched out and encountred the Enemy fair∣ly in the Field, who were divided in three Batalians, the one drawn up before another; he Attack'd the first, and put them to the Rout very suddenly, so as they all ran for it; Oregan and most of them fled to∣words Crawfield, and some towards Loghgall, where some of Col. Dun∣comb's French lye, who came out and knock'd them down, and brought in thirteen Prisoners; and when he came away about Nine a Clock, he says, all the Country was pursuing them with Huy and Cry, but how many were killed he could not learn: he says of our men were killed twelve or thirteen, and several wounded. ADVERTISEMENT. THe History of the late Revolution in England, with the Causes and Means by which it was accomplished. Together with the Settlement thereof under their most Serene Majesties King William and Queen Mary, by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament. London, Printed for Tho. Salusbury at the Sign of the Temple near Temple-Bar in Fleetstreet. 1690.
