H898 11771693 48885
THE Lamentable Cry OF OPPRESSION OR, The Case of the Poor, Suffering & Per∣secuted People called Quakers in and about FAKENHAM in NORFOLK. Shewing the Cruelty, Injustice and Inhumanity of se∣veral Magistrates, Officers and Informers in those Parts against the said People for these many years, in the great Spoil and Ha∣vock of their Goods and Estates. Represented to all Moderate Men in Authority, & their Neighbours and Country Men, in this impartial Relation; to the end that all may be warned from having a Hand in such Un∣merciful and Unchristian Dealings. By a Well-wisher to all your Souls, and one that through the Lord's Mercy hath been accounted worthy not only to believe, but also to suffer for the Truth's sake, known to the World by the Name of Joseph Harrison. Ye shall be hated of all men for my Name's sake; but he that endures to the End, the same shall be saved, Mark 13.13. Whosoever hateth his Brother, is a Murderer; and ye know, no Mur∣derer hath Eternal Life abiding in him, 1 John 3.15. What mean ye that ye beat my People to pieces, and grind the Faces of the Poor, saith the Lord God of Hosts? Isaiah 3.15. Printed in the Year 1679.
TO THE READER Serious Reader; I Do desire thee impartially to peruse these ensu∣ing Particulars, and then let the Witness of God in thy Conscience judge, whether these Procee∣dings are agreeable to Righteousness, Law and true Justice. Should we have set out all the Matter and Manner of Proceedings in the full Extent of it, it would have swelled into too big a Volumn, and haply have multiply'd the Sorrow of many tender and true∣hearted Protestants, to hear of such Actions acted by professed Protestants one against another; and it may make the Heathen to question the Christian Religi∣on, when they hear of those Rending, Tearing and Devouring Dealings amongst the Professors thereof. Certainly the Papists may Laugh at the great Victory they have gotten by their under-hand accomplishing such a Law, as sets one Protestant against another, In such a Day as this; and that for no other Reason, but for their Sincerity to God-ward; not for any Vice, but for Virtue; when they themselves see it Policy to maintain Unity, though differing in some Cir∣cumstances, a thing practised in all Ages: But if thou cast thy Eyes, thou wilt see the great Promoters and Encouragers of this Stratagem, are such as would be
accounted the wiser sort in the Age; and that upon the same Foundation the Jews would have Christ put to Death, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye, John 19.7. The Principal End of our writing is: First, Thereby to Warn all Magistrates in and about Fakenham, to take heed for the future; our Cause is committed to the Lord, who hath pleaded it, and in this day rewarded our Service of Love, and given us that Treasure in our Earthen Vessels, which is of more Value than all our outward Substance lost, if summ'd up all together; from the Sense of which we can truly say the Scripture is fulfilled, A Little that the Righteous hath, is of more value than great Riches: and though you have taken our Goods, yet our Peace continues; and as our Sufferings abound, even so our Consolation hath much more abounded; so that now in the Lord have we cause to rejoyce, and be glad for∣ever and forever. 2dly, We hope this will warn all Officers, one and other, to take heed how they any more break up Doors, break into Houses, though under Pretence of Advice & Order, and then take away three or four times the value of the sum charg'd, making Friends to themselves by selling our Goods at one half of their worth, pleading Authority, but indeed prompt thereunto by a wicked and revengeful spirit. That God that fitteth in Heaven beholds such Unrighteous Actions, and when the Whirlewind of his Displeasure arises, may scatter what the Ungodly have gather'd of the Spoil of the Innocent; for he is a Just God, and when he takes Vengeance of his Peoples Enemies, none shall withstand his Power: and therefore to him we have committed our Cause.
3dly, To Encourage you our Relations & Neighbours, who when our Adversaries have gather'd themselves in Companies to destroy, have surrounded us with Tears in your Eyes, and Pity towards us: Well, we hope you will now see the difference, between such as only pro∣fess the Christian-Religion and Gospel-Righteousness out of the Life thereof, and those that live a Gospel-Life, a Life of Righteousness, and in that pure Religion which is unspot∣ted from the World: The Actions of Men demonstrate by what spirit they are led: If you see a Lyon greedy & devouring, will you call such a Creature a Lamb? no surely: Adam considering the Nature of every thing, gave it a fit Name: and certainly the Proceedings of our Enemies in the meanest Capacity, must be adjudg∣ed according to its Nature. 4thly, Consider who have been the Agents to carry on this inhuman Design; call them over by Name that have been the Informers, & see if you can pattern them for ill living in a whole County: if it had been a good Imployment, surely some good and sober Men would have been imployed in it, and accounted it a good Ser∣vice. Dare any of you Justices, that have persecuted us, say, That William Watt and his Wife, and several o∣thers, have not sworn Falsly many times? and yet no Check put to them, no, but you must have all affirmed for Truth that they say, and that for no other Reason, but because they Swear for the King: Oh hard measure! Hath not the Lord pointed at this W. Watt with great & signal Remarks of his Judgments, that you the Ju∣stices and other the Officers might be warn'd thereby? But have you not been hardned, not considering the Hand of the Lord, and still encouraged this wicked In∣former to proceed, & have taken his Testimony when
he stood a good distance from the House where the suspition of a Meeting was, and when he saw three or four come out of Joseph Harrison's Gate, concluding it to be upon such an account, and no other; what proof of Religious Exercise was here? what ground to believe that Will. Watt heard either preaching or praying? could any such thing be made appear at such a distance? and yet what was the Consequence of this insufficient In∣formation, but Warrants, Distresses, Rending and Devour∣ing? Do the poor Quakers suffer because they worship God? but if our Persecutors have had the Common-prayer often read amongst them, surely they have heard that part of it again and again (though they have little regarded it) that saith, From Envy, Hatred and Malice good Lord deliver us; but what Effects have been brought forth by them, is apparent to our impartial Neighbours. Oh! do not the Heavens blush, and is not the Earth asham'd? what can you say for your selves, some of you? When four poor Quakers (so called) were travailing in the Way together, nothing looking like a Conventi∣cle or Meeting; and because that Number was insuffi∣cient to convict by, did not the Informers espye a fifth Person on the Road, and a Stranger to the other four: what of Religious Exercise was here? and where was the number of Five here? what did you do to enquire the Truth of this out, and to correct the Malice, Envy and Hatred of the Informers? but was not this convic∣ted by some of you, as a Conventicle, and Warrants for the same been granted, and Distresses taken? did you send for the Accused, to hear them, and take part with them, as much as the Law would have permitted? Hath Justice a Ballance in her Hand, and will you not put one grain of Equity into the Scale of the pretended Offender? We
have cause to fear, you have taken your Measures to force Conformity upon us from some others besides the English Church (so called.) Have not some of our Neighbours had their Cattel taken from them, under Pretence they were some of ours, when indeed they were not, only the Informer said they were? and what Relief could the Owner have at your hands for this Injury? none at all, until they were for∣ced to right themselves before a Judge of Assize and Jury? and then Justice was done them: And may I ask one Question? Pray, who bare the Charge of that Defence of Suit? Poor W. Watt was altogether unable (& if you deny it) the People will still surmise from whence he must have had support. Indeed that Informer hath been like one of Pharaoh's Lean Kine, that swallow'd the Fat, and yet was very ill favour'd; for what was he the better for all he has been help'd to? nay, but has he not been much the worse? what a Curse hath gone along with it! and hath it not been seen by our Enemies? surely then they have wilfully shut their Eyes. Have not smooth & fair words been spoken to some of us, although suddenly followed by Harsh and Cruel Actions? Oh C. C! were not these thy words? We know you will not Swear, but give me a true Account, What was the Reason your Son & you were absent from the Church, and I will believe you: was not Answer then truly made, Her Son (that was one of the Persons accused for not being at his Parish Church (so called) was Sick all the time for which he was presented, and she her self was to look to him most part of the time: And was not this a true Answer? but what was the result of this? didst thou not that Night grant out Warrants to distrain? and was it not done to the greatest Extremity? And when
Distresses have been taken, which of you have made inquiry, whether Officers have not done more than they ought to have done, that so you might put a stop to part of the Cruelty? or, is there no Mercy to be extended to Persons that differ in Manner of Worship from you? have you not read what that great Mo∣narch of England said to his Son? The Extremity of the Law is Tyranny: but have you abated us one tittle of it? Fellons and Murderers have had the Liberty to bring in Witnesses to clear themselves when accused; but we are fallen into the hands of such, as we must neither hear our Accusation, nor know our Accusers: How∣ever, we can say from the bottom of our Hearts, our Desires are to the Lord, That he would shew you Mercy, before your Sun be set, and your Day be over, and Mercy be excluded from you. And so tender-hearted Reader, I refer thee to the following particular Relation; and if thou hast any Scruple of the Truth thereof, our Neighbours can ful∣ly satisfie thee of it, if thou enquire of such who are without Prejudice to us, who can satisfie thee, our Sufferings have been much more than thou wilt find made publick herein. And now I commend thee to the Grace of God, and to the Appearance thereof in thine own Heart, that therein both thou and I may come to find Acceptance with him, and be approved in his Sight. J. H.
THE Lamentable Cry OF OPPRESSION, &c. A Brief Account of the Sufferings of the Peo∣ple of God called Quakers at Fakenham, upon the account of not going to the Stee∣ple. House, to their Worship; where for several Three First Dayes Absence there∣from, they had Goods taken from them, and were sent to Prison, as follow. First follows the Proceedings of Robert Sheldrake and Robert Pepper against the said People, in and about the Year 1668. IN the fourth moneth, (1668.) there was taken from Wil∣liam Monk a Chair-Table and four Joynt-Stools, to the value of 6 s. And taken from Anne Harrison of the same Town a pair of Dog-irons, a Hake, a Chasing-dish and pair of Tongs, to
the value of 6 s. Her Husband being then a Prisoner in Nor∣wich Castle. Taken from Margaret Peckover of the same Town, three yards and a quarter of Scotch-cloth, to the value of 5 s. Taken from Joan Watson the Curtains from off her Bed, to the value of 3 s. her Husband being in Prison at the same time. Taken from Fran. Larders for his Wife, a Flagon, to the va∣lue of 1 s. 6 d. In the 5th month following taken more upon the same account. From William Monk, a Covering off his Bed, to the value of 6 s. Taken from Margaret Peckover Goods to the value of 6 s. 6 d. Taken from Anne Harrison, a Form and a Smoothing-Iron, to the value of 5 s. In the 6th moneth taken more from William Monk, two Hol∣land Payles, a pair of And irons and a Pewter Pot, to the value of 6 s. Taken from Margaret Peckover, a piece of fine Vermillion, to the value of 7 s. In the same moneth they took more from her, a quantity of Vermillion, to the value of 7 s. 6 d. In the 7th moneth, taken more from Margaret Peckover, Ca∣ligo Lawn, to the value of 6 s. Taken more from the said William Monk, being an Aged Man, six Pewter Dishes, to the value of 10 s. In the 8th moneth, the said William Monk and his Wife, she being also an Aged Woman, had their Mitimus made to send them to Prison, by Henry Clifton a Justice (so called) but fall∣ing both sick, Margaret Peckover their Daughter took them home to her House before they went to Prison; but no sooner were they made able to stir abroad, but the said Clifton sent to the Constable, threatning to send him to Prison if he did not speedily carry the two Aged Persons away to Prison, which ac∣cordingly
the Officers did; and they both Dyed Prisoners in a lit∣tle above a quarter of a year, finishing their Testimony for the Everlasting Truth. [Note, The said Hen. Clifton, that committed them to Prison, lived not long after, but Dyed a Sad and Lamentable Death, as its very well known.] Further, Margaret Peckover aforesaid had taken from her up∣on the same account, a quantity of Scotch-cloth, to the value of 6 s. 6 d. her Husband being then in Prison. Anne Harrison had taken from her, a Pewter Dish and a Ket∣tle, to the value of 4 s. Thomas Watson having been a Prisoner a long time, coming home to see his Wife and small Children, they took away his Coat for his Wife's absenting from their Worship. Sarah Pond had taken from her a Chair-Table upon the account aforesaid. Allice Williamson had taken from her the Covering of her Bed, to the value of 4 s. [Note, William Hemsteely and others they carryed to Prison because they could not take a Distress of them.] In the same year (68.) Henry Gibbs, William Wasy and Ri∣chard Fideman being at Joseph Harrison's House, there came Richard Jessup and Robert Shildrake Churchwardens (so called) and Tho. Whidby Constable, and pulled them out of his House, and carryed them in a Cart before Christopher Calthorp (called a Justice) who dwelt near the Town of Fakenham, who required them to find Suerties for their good Behaviour, they refusing (not being guilty of the Breach thereof) he committed them to Prison. In the year (69.) Hen. Gibbs, William Wasey, John Wade, Robert Peatree, Hugh Sheltram, Robert Southgate, Richard Rouse and Nicholas Witeman, being met together with others at the House of Joseph Harrison in Fakenham, they were stayed by the Constables until the aforesaid Christopher Calthorp came to them (with several disorderly people following of him) and he committed the abovesaid Persons to Prison.
A further Accompt of some of the Sufferings of the People of God called Quakers in and about Fakenham in Norfolk, with the Names of some of those Justices, Informers, Constables and other Officers concerned therein, being chiefly for meeting together to wait upon and worship the living God, and because of their Dissent from the Pub∣lick Worship, or Church (so called.) JOseph Harrison of Fakenham was fined 5 l. for a Meeting at his House, about the 29th of the 3d moneth, 1670. and had taken from him about the 2d of the 5th moneth following, by the Officers of the said Town, William Watt being Informer, two Feather Beds, two Feather Boulsters, one Flight Boulster, a Rugg, Curtains, Vallans, Curtain-Rods, two Bed Blankets and a pair of Sheets, four Darnick Stools, two Darnick Chairs, three great Green Chairs and a Bed-cord, all worth 7 l. Robert Southgate of Twyford was fined 5 l. for the same Mee∣ting at Joseph Harrison's, the 29th of the 3d moneth, 1670. and had these Goods taken from him, viz. One Side of Beef, one Bullock's Hide, a Side of Mutton, and several other Joynts of Mutton, certain Swine, two Cupboards, and other Goods, valued at 5 l. 15 s. John Wade was fined 20 l. for a Meeting at his House in Twy∣ford the 5th of the 4th moneth, 1670. and had taken from him by Warrant from Doctor Herbert Ashly (called a Justice) as followeth; Two Horses, a Cart, a Plough, and other Husbandry Goods, a Bedstead, several Chairs, and other valuable Houshold Goods, to the value of 24 l. 13 s.
Joseph Harrison was fined 5 s. for being at the same Meeting, and had taken from him a Brass Pot and a Warming-pan, worth 10 s. Robert Southgate was fined 5 s. for being at the same Meeting, and soon after had taken from him (by Edward Winter and John Banes, by Warrant from the aforesaid Herbert Ashly) one Bullock's Hide, a Neat's Tongue and a Cheek, worth 8 s. Robert Southgate was fined more by the said Justice, 9 l. 13 s. 2 d. for the House. He was fined 10 s. more (for the second Offence, so called) for being at a Meeting at John Wade's aforesaid, upon the 26th of the 4th moneth, 1670. by the said Justice. He was also fined for the said Meeting 9 l. 10 s. more for the House by the said Justice (so called) and about the 28th of the same moneth Edward Winter and John Browne, Constables of Bintree and Twyford, came into the said Robert's House to strain for the last three Fines, being all expressed in one Warrant, and they took from him four Cows, one Calf, one Cart, one Bed as it stood, one Feather Bed more, one Rugg, with all the Furni∣ture belonging to the Bed, except the Bedstead, four Brass Ket∣tles, one Brass Morter, several great Pewter Dishes, one Fra∣med Table, one Chair Table, with several other Houshold Goods. worth 30 l. Joseph Harrison was fined 15 s. for himself and his Wife, for being at the same Meeting, by Warrant from the said Dr. Ashly, and had taken from him a Horse, with Bridle and Saddle, Pillion and Pillion-cloth and Foot-stool, as they came riding, worth 4 l. 10 s. He was fined 3 l. 1 s. 4 d. ob. more, for a part of John Wade's Fine for the House, for the said Meeting, and had taken from him one Horse, three Pewter Dishes, two Porrigers, a Tankard, a Candlestick, a Brass Pot, a Brass Kettle, a Skimmer, a Casting Ladle and a Form, all worth 4 l. Edmund Peckover of Fakenham was fined 5 s. for his Wife's being at the aforesaid Meeting, and had taken from him in Mo∣ney 5 s.
There being a Meeting at the House of Joseph Harrison in Fakenham, the 2d of the 5th moneth, 1670. and Samuel Cater being there, and declaring the Truth to the people present, Wil∣liam Watt his Wife came, and after some time went to inform the Officers thereof, who came and had Friends before Christopher Calthorp (a Justice) who asked her, tendring her the Oath, To speak the Truth, and nothing but the Truth of what she saw and heard; asking her, If she was in the Room where the Meeting was? She said, No, but was at the Door. He asked, Why she went not in? She said, The Room was so full she could not get in. The said Justice ask't her, What Samuel said in the Meeting? and she told him Words that Samuel did not speak; Samuel appealed to the Officers that heard him, who said, The Woman Lyed, and they were not his Words: then Samuel appealed to the Justice to do us right, there being no Cause he should convict us by her Testimony; and she, for her own Ends, to accomplish her Un∣godly Desires, spake that which was not true, as it did appear to him: The Justice answered, He did not believe all was true she said: but he did believe that he Preached at Joseph Harrison's House, and for that he would fine Samuel Twenty Pounds: which accordingly he did, and sent the Records of Conviction to the Magistrates at Elye, who sent out their Warrants, and took away his Goods. Joseph Harrison was fined 5 l. for the said Meeting being at his House, and had taken from him by Warrant from the said Christopher Calthorp & one — Brightus Justices (so called) two Bedsteads, a Tester, five Chairs, two Chests, one Pewter Case, two Tables, one Bed-cord, one Glass-Case, one Cow, four little Hoggs and one Sow; all worth 6 l. 10 s. Mary Johnson was fined 5 l. for part of Joseph Harrison's fine for the said Meeting being at his House, and had Goods taken away from her to the value of 7 l. Edmund Peckover aforesaid was fined 15 s. for his Wife's be∣ing at two Meetings at Joseph Harrison's and one at Thurning, and had taken away in Money 15 s. Joseph Harrison was fined 20 s. for himself and his Wife be∣ing
at a Meeting at Thurning the 3d day of the 5th moneth, 1670. for which the Officers of Fakenham, by warrant from Sr. Jacob Ashly (so called) took away his Horse, worth 4 l. 10 s. Edmund Peckover was fined 10 s. for his Wife, by a War∣rant from the said Jacob Ashly Knight and Justice (so called) upon the Information of two Informers Richmond and Lynes, who informed the said Justice of a Meeting that was (they said) in the Road-way to Thurning, where there were but Four Friends talking together, and these two Informers coming past them, espyed a Stranger at some distance (not one of our Friends) and said, Now they would Swear it a Meeting, and did so; and upon the 1st of the 10th moneth, 1670. Rich. Collins Warden, Roger Henry Constable and John Wortely came to the said Ed∣mund his Shop, and for the said Fine took out of his Money-Box 10 s. Joseph Harrison being fined for the same pretended Meeting, the Officers the same day went to his Stall in Fakenham Market, and took from him forty two pound of Beef, worth 7 s. Joseph Harrison being fined for a Meeting at Twyford, had taken from him upon the 5th of the 11th moneth, 1670. a fat Sheep, worth 10 s. Joseph Harrison being fined 5 l. for a Meeting at his House upon the 15th of the 9th moneth, 1670. by a Warrant from Nathaniel Shouldham and Christopher Calthorp (called Justices) and had taken from him by the Officers of Fakenham, who came to his House the 2d of the 1st moneth following, and took from him half a Bullock, worth 2 l. 10 s. The 9th of the same moneth they came again, and took for the said Fine the value of three Quarters of Beef and four Quarters of Mutton, worth 2 l. 5 s. Again, they took as much Tallow as came to 17 s. Edmund Peckover was fined 10 s. for being at the said Meet∣ing at Joseph Harrison's, the 15th of the 9th moneth, and had taken from him upon the 18th of the 11th moneth following, seven yards and three quarters of Linnen Cloth to the value of 14 s. The 17th of the 6th moneth, 1671. the Informer William
Watt, with the Officers Henry Gogney and John Cook Wardens, and Roger Henry a Constable, went towards another Town where Joseph Harrison used a Pasture-Cloase, the Informer went in (as it was said) and took out two fat Bullocks, which were worth 6 l. 10 s. And for this they said, they had a Warrant from the aforesaid Nathaniel Shouldham and Christopher Colthorp, for a Fine of 10 l. for a Meeting that was at his House upon the 3d of the 3d moneth, 1671. And upon the 6th of the 7th moneth next, the same Officers came again to Joseph Harrison's for the remainder of the aforesaid fine, as they said, and took from him three Bullocks, which cost him 10 l. 10 s. not offering him any Over-plus thereof. Edmund Peckover was fined 10 s. for his Wife being at the same Meeting at Joseph Harrison's, and upon the 18th of the 6th moneth, 1671. Henry Gogney Warden and Roger Henry Constable, came to Edmund's Shop with a Warrant to levy the said Fine, and took from him a piece of Green Say of twenty yards and a half, worth 1 l. 15 s. The 10th of the 5th moneth, 1674. at a Meeting at the House of Joseph Harrison in Fakenham, there came William Watt the Informer, with the Officers of Fakenham, Nich. Hill, Christ. Overton, Rob. Cooper and Covenant Hemsteely, who stood till the Meeting was done, and then demanded Friends Names, who demanded to see their Warrant, but they shewed none; they took some Friends Names, and went away. The 19th of the same moneth came the said William Watt and some of the aforesaid Officers, viz. Hill, Overton and Cooper, and took the Names of several Friends, and the rest they took and imprisoned till the next day, being between forty and fifty in number, and had them before him called Sr. Christopher Col∣thorp, who took their Names and dismissed and fined them, as af∣ter followeth. The twenty sixth of the same moneth, Friends being peace∣ably met to wait upon the Lord at Joseph Harrison his House, the Officers came into the Meeting, and when
the Meeting was done, took Friends Names and went a∣away. For these three Meetings was made great Havock and Spoil of several Friends Goods, as followeth: The 28th of the 6th moneth, 1674. the Officers of Faken∣ham, viz. Nich. Hill Constable, Christ. Overton Overseer, and John Read an Informer, went early in the morning (as it was said) to a piece of Land of the Widow Hemsteely's, by a War∣rant from Sr. Christopher Calthorp (so called) and took thirty five Sheep, to the value of above 10 l. for Fines, which were imposed on her Son William Hemsteely, for a Meeting at Joseph Harrison's the 19th of the 5th moneth (74.) viz. 5 l. 5 s. for Joseph Harrison, 5 s. for himself, 5 s. for the Widow Mayes, 5 s. for her Daughter, and 5 s. for the Wife of John Bee; in all 6 l. 5 s. [Note, William's Mother, whose the Sheep were, was not one called a Quaker, nor was at the Meeting.] The same day the Officers, viz. Hill, Overton, Cooper and Humphry Moore, went to Edmund Peckover's Shop in Fakenham with a Warrant to levy 10 l. viz. 5 s. for himself, 5 s. for his Wife, and 9 l. 10 s. for Joseph Harrison part of the fine for his House, and took these Goods following; Five yards of milled Searge, thirty yards of French Druggists, and fifty two yards of the best Prunella. The next day they came again, and took twenty four yards and three quarters of Druggists, twenty yards and three quarters of Sattin, sixteen yards of black Prunella, twenty four yards of Ozenbridge. The 31th day of the afore∣said moneth they came again, and took eight yards of Stuff, and ten yards and half an ell of Searge; in all worth 18 l. The aforesaid 28th day they went to a poor man's House, one William Bullard, and for a fine of 5 s. for his Wife's being at the same Meeting, they took his Coal-grate, his Kettle (having not another to boyl their Victuals in) and two Pewter Dishes, all worth 10 s. 4 d. The 29th day of the said moneth the same Officers, Hill and Overton, went to the House of Francis Larder, where there
was no Body but a Child of about six or seven years of Age, him∣self not being one called a Quaker, and for a fine of 5 s. for his Wife's being at one of the aforesaid Meetings, they took a Rugg, a Blanket and a Feather Boulster; all worth 15 s. The same 28th day of the 6th moneth, the said Officers of Fakenham went to the House of Thomas Watson, a very poor man, having a Wife and Five small Children, and nothing but his Labour to Maintain them, he having suffered long and tedious Imprisonment upon the account of Truth; they said they had a Warrant to strain for 10 s. viz. 5 s. for himself, and 5 s. for his Wife, for being at one of the aforesaid Meetings; they looked about, and went away, and told the Magistrate (as it is said) That there was little in his House to take, but the Bed they lay upon; he bid them, Take his Bed: so the next day they took their Feather Bed and a Blanket worth 12 s. and left them none to lie on, so they lay upon Straw. And the 2d of the 7th moneth they came again, saying, They had not enough; so they took their Coal-Grate and their Kettle, in which they boil∣ed their Food, worth 4 s. The 31th of the said 6th moneth, the Officers went and brought away from Joseph Harrison a fat Bullock and five Sheep, and shut them up in a House at Nich. Hill's; when Joseph heard of it, he went and demanded of them, Wherefore they did it? who told him, They had a Warrant from Sr. Christ. Calthorp for a fine of 5 l. 5 s. for a Meeting being at his House upon the 19th day of July (74.) the Bullock and five Sheep worth 5 l. The 3d day of the 7th moneth they came again, and said, They want∣ed 23 s. of the fine; and took fourteen stone and twelve pound of Beef off his Stall in the Market, worth 1 l. 12 s. fourteen pound to the stone. The 9th day of the 7th of moneth (74.) the Officers of Hor∣ningtast, viz. Robert Reeve and William Franklin Over-seers, and Tho. Reeve Warden, went to Francis Hill's (he being then in Prison upon an Assize Process) and told his Wife, They had a Warrant from Sr. Christ. Calthorp, to strain for 10 s. viz. 5 s. for her Husband, and 5 s. for her self, for being at a Meeting at
Joseph Harrison's of Fakenham upon the 19th of July (74.) they asked her, If she would Consent they should take 10 s. of the 20 s. that was left as an Overplus of her Cows? for they had taken two Cows from them in the 3d moneth fore-going for his and his Wife's absenting from the Steeple-house twenty six Weeks be∣fore, though they never demanded it in all that time, so they counted it came to 52 s. and sold the Cows, and would have returned 20 s. or someting more, but he would not receive it; she told them, She had done no Wrong, neither would she consent to their doings; so they took a Mare from her, worth above 2 l. The 14th of the 7th moneth (74.) some Officers of Bur∣ningham went to Peter Wynne with a Warrant from Christopher Calthorp, to levy a Fine of 5 s. for being at one of the aforesaid Meetings at Joseph Harrison's, he being a very poor man, his Wife lately dead, and he left with Nine Children, Seven of them small, and in a very poor Condition; they took from him a pair of Dog-irons, a Cicle, a Spit, and the Kettle he had to boyl their Victuals in, the value of them about 8 s. The same day the Officers of Burningham aforesaid went to Robert Barwick's of the same Town to levy for a fine of 5 s. for being at the said Meeting at Joseph Harrison's, and took from him a Kettle and a Pot, valued above 12 s. The same moneth the Officers of Twyford, viz. Tho. Everet Over-seer and George Press Warden, came to Robert Southgate with a Warrant from Christopher Calthorp, to levy a Fine of 10 s. for himself and Wife being at a Meeting at Joseph Harrison's the 19th of the 5th moneth (74.) for which they took a Hide worth 10 s. and as much Beef as was worth 2 s. in all 12 s. The 16th day of the 7th moneth (74.) the Officers of Fa∣kenham, viz. Nich. Hill, Chr. Overton and Robert Cooper, went to Joseph Harrison's with two Warrants from Chr. Crow (a Ju∣stice, so called) to levy for two Meetings at his House, one up∣on the tenth of the fifth moneth (1674.) and the other upon the twenty sixth of the same moneth, five pounds for the one, and four pounds fifteen shillings for the other; they went
into his Orchard, and took three fat Bullocks, worth Nine Pounds. About the same time the Officers of Fakenham took away from the Widow Hemsteely four Cows and two Bullocks, they said, for fines imposed on her Son William, viz. 5 l. 10 s. for the House, 20 s. for Tho. Watson and his Wife, and 10 s. for himself being at one of the abovesaid Meetings. The 23d of the same moneth, Hill and Overton went to Jo∣seph Harrison's House again, and took away another fat Bul∣lock for the fines aforesaid, worth 3 l. 5 s. About the same time the said Hill and Overton with Robert Cooper and Humphry Moore went to Edmund Peckover's Shop with two Warrants, as they said, to strain for the King; but Hill refused to produce his Warrant for a time, though required by Edmund's Wife; but by Robert Cooper's perswasion they were read; and they were for 16 l. 5 s. for the said two Meetings, viz. 2 l. for himself and his Wife, and 15 s. for their Son Jo∣seph, for two Meetings, 5 s. for their Daughter Rebeccah, and 5 s. for their Maid Martha Phillips for one Meeting, and 13 l. for Joseph Harrison, viz. 8 l. for one Meeting, and 5 l. for another, being parts of the 20 l. fines for the House, for which they took as follows; Seven yards one quarter of Searge, twenty two yards more of Searge, sixteen yards one half more of Searge, seven yards three quarters of Searge, eight yards of Searge, ten yards of Searge, eight yards one half of Silk Farrendine, ten yards one half of Stuff, four yards of Stuff, three yards three quarters more of Searge, seventeen yards one half of Searge and five yards of Say, worth above 17 l. Soon after the aforesaid Officers, Hill and Overton, came a∣gain to Edmund Peckover's House, and Hill took down six large Pewter Plates, cost 2 s. 6 d. apiece, and nine Pewter Dishes, and a Porringer, and gave them to Overton to carry away, and denyed to let them be weighed, but Reviled Edmund's Wife very much for requiring it; and because their Son Joseph Peck∣over would have had them weighed, Hill took him and buffeted him, and dragg'd him to the Stocks, and put him in for a time;
and they took more Goods, as much Stuff as came to Ten Pounds. The next Night, Hill, Overton and Moore came again to Ed∣mund Peckover's Shop, and said, They wanted 30 s. still; so took fifty two yards of Ozenbridge and a piece of Stuff, both worth 2 l. 10 s. so that for the fine of 16 l. 15 s. they took Goods to the value of above 30 l. The 19th of the 6th moneth, 1674. the Officers of Hor∣ningtast came to Francis Hill's Wife, with two Warrants from Justice Crow (so called) to strain for her Husband and her self being at the two Meetings at Joseph Harrison's aforesaid, one the 10th, and the other upon the 26th day of the 5th moneth aforesaid, 40 s. for her Husband and her self, 5 s. for Theodora Todd, and 5 l. for Joseph Harrison (for the House) and they took away five Mileh Cows, worth about 12 l. [Note That Francis his Wife was but at one of the Meetings, yet Nicholas Hill and Chr. Overton swore she was at both.] The 25th of the 7th moneth, 1674. the Officers of Coltreak, went to the House of William Woode to strain for 15 s. for his Wife's being at two Meetings at Joseph Harrison's, and they took a Feather Bed and a Feather Pillow, a Bed-blanket, a pair of Sheets, a Brass Pot and a Kettle, worth above 1 l. 5 s. [Note, The man was not one called a Quaker.] The 30th of the 8th moneth, (74.) the Officers of Swanton∣overs went to Robert Southgate's to levy 3 l. 10 s. viz. for himself 10 s. for young Anne Harrison and the Widow May 15 s. for Anne Bee 10 s and for Joseph Harrison 1 l. 15 s. and the said Officers, viz. James Naylor and Tobias Hasting Constables, Richard Morrice Over-seer, Robert Goddard the younger and Isaac Wale Wardens; Nayler and Goddard with a great Trove Hammer, brake up a Door that was locked, and took away a fat Swine, worth 1 l. Soon after they came again to make up their fine, and brake up a Chamber Door, which they did with that Violence, that they brake his Iron Butchering-Ax and some
other things with doing it, and then took away two Feather Pil∣lows, with a Pillow Case, a new Blanket and a Bullock's Hide, all worth 17 s. [Note, There was a Bed and Boulster, and other things, taken away from Robert at the same time, which a Neighbour of his would buy of the Officers, and return again to Robert.] The 30th of the 8th moneth, the Officers of Fakenham went to Anne Bee for 10 s. for being at the said two Meetings at Joseph Harrison's (she was fined 20 s. but they got 10 s. of it of Robert Southgate aforesaid) and they took from her a Cup∣board-Table, a Kettle, and a Feather Pillow. And upon the 5th of the 2d moneth (75.) they went to her again to make up the fine, and took an Iron Pot with the Hooks, and her Hat, in all worth 14 s. The 20th day of The 7th moneth (74.) Friends being peace∣ably met to wait upon God at the House of Joseph Harrison in Fakenham, William Watt and Nich. Hill Informers, Humphry Moore a Constable, and Chr. Overton Overseer, came in and staid some time, and took the Names of several Friends; and the said Informers went to one Robert Walpoole a Justice (so cal∣led) and swore they heard Joseph Harrison say, They were met to Worship God, and they could do no otherwise; the Magistrate told Joseph the Informers said so, though there was not one word spoke to them; whereupon he gave them a Warrant, wherein he fined Joseph Harrison 10 l. and Edmund Peckover 10 l. viz. 20 s. for him and his Wife, 10 s. for their Son Joseph, 10 s. for their Daughter Rebeckah, 10 s. for their Maid Martha Phillips, and 7 l. 10 s. for Joseph Harrison, and some others were fined by him for that Meeting. So upon the 14th day of the 8th moneth (74.) the Officers of Fakenham, John Bately and William Sudbury Constables, and Chr. Overton Over-seer, went to Joseph Harrison's with the aforesaid Warrant to levy the said 10 l. and they took two fat Bullocks, worth 6 l. The 28th of the said moneth, the said Officers took from the
said Joseph, by the said Warrant, his Cow, he having no more to succour his Children withal, worth 2 l. 10 s. The 10th of the 10th moneth (74.) they went to Joseph Har∣rison's Stall in the Market in Fakenham, and told him, They had not their Fine up yet; so they took a Side of Beef, weighed 12. Stone and nine Pound (fourteen pound to the stone) worth 1 l. 10 s. The 17th of the same moneth some of them came again to his Stall in the Market, and told him, They wanted about 20 s. still of the Fine; so they took from him ten stone seven pound of Beef (fourteen pound to the stone) worth 1 l. 4 s. The 17th of the 8th moneth (74.) the Officers of Fakenham, viz. Fran. Page and Covenant Hompsteely Wardens, Chr. Over-son and Will. Sippense Over-seers, John Cooke, Will. Sudbury and John Bately Constables, went to Edmund Peckover's Shop, and said, They came to levy 10 l. by the said Warrant from Justice Wal∣poole, for the said Meeting the 20th of the seventh moneth; and they took as followeth, Forty four yards and one half of Hol∣land, ten yards one quarter of Stript Linnen, four yards one half of full Searge, nineteen yards of red Semperternum, fifteen yards one half of Searge, six yards one quarter of Full'd Searge, four yards three quarters more of Searge; all worth 8 l. Some time in the 10th moneth following, some of the said Officers went to Edmund's Shop again, and found a Purse with Money, and told out 5 l. in the Absence of Edmund and his Wife, which they carryed away, 5 l. The 15th of the 10th moneth (74.) the Officers of Walsing∣ham went to Nathaniel Ʋrines of the same Town with two War∣rants, one from the said Justice Walpoole for 10 s. and one from Justice Crow aforesaid for 40 s. for a Meeting at Joseph Har∣rison's in the 5th moneth foregoing; and they took from him a Mare, worth 3 l. About the same time the Officers of Swanton-overs, viz. Will. Girling and Jacob Webster Constables, Richard Morrice and Isaac Wale Overseers, and Robert Goddard Warden, went to Robert Southgate's with a Warrant from the said Justice Walpoole to strain for 7 l. viz. for himself and his Wife 20 s. for Tho∣mas Watson and his Wife 20 s. for young Anne Harrison 10 s.
for Anne Bee 10 s. for Mary May 10 s. for Theodora Todd 10 s. for Elizabeth Todd 10 s. and for Ioseph Harrison 50 s. and they took from him two Cows, a Mare, a Saddle and Bridle, all worth 7 l. 10 s. Here follows a Copy of part of a Warrant, granted by Ju∣stice Bedingfield (so called) of Wighton near Wal∣singham, upon the Information of William Watt, the old Informer, and his Son in Law Henry Nichols. Norfolk,WHereas upon the Information of William Watt, of the Parish of St. Peters in the City of Norwich, Sadler, and Henry Ni∣chols of Fakenham in the County aforesaid, taken upon Oath before me Christopher Bedingfield Esq. one of his Majesty's Justice of the Peace for this County,Note, The 26th Day of November was the Day called Thursday. That on Sunday the 26th of November last past, divers Persons, whose Names are hereunder written, to the Number of above five, all his Majesty's Subjects, and above the Age of six∣teen years, were present at an Unlawful Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting, under Colour or Pretence of Religion, in other manner than according to the Liturgy of the Church of England, in the House of Jo∣seph Harrison in the Parish of Fakenham above said, contrary to the Law in such Case made and provided, &c. This Warrant was dated the 8th day of Ianuary (so called) 1674. and therein were fined, Ioseph Harrison for the House 20 l. Nathaniel Ʋrine 20 s. for himself and Theodora Todd,
Margaret the Wife of Edmund Peckover 10 s. Mary the Wife of Francis Larder 10 s. Rose the Wife of Richard Cambridge 10 s. besides more in the said Warrant expressed. [Note, Although the Information whereupon this Warrant was grounded was False as to the Day mentioned, yet no Reason would prevail to stop their Cruel Proceedings, as appears.] For upon the 12th day of the same moneth, viz. the 11th moneth (74.) the Officers of Walsingham went to Nathaniel Ʋrine's, to levy his fine of 20 s. for being at the said Meeting, and took as much Hose-yarn as came to 1 l. 8 s. Not long after the Officers of Walsingham, viz. Benjamin Rudkin Over-seer, Richard Winter and John Hill Constables, went to Joseph Harrison at his Stall in Walsingham Market, with a Warrant from the said Justice Bedingfield, to levy for the said Meeting; he asked them to read it, and therein he was fined 20 l. for a Meeting at his House on Sunday the 26th of Novem∣ber (74.) he told them, He had no Meeting at his House on that day; they might find in an Almanack, that the 26th of Novem∣ber was upon the Day called Thursday, and so the Information was false; and he did believe, they ought not to strain his Goods by a Warrant granted upon a Wrong Information: then some of the Officers went to the Magistrate (they said) he being then in Town, and told him of the matter, but he encouraged them to execute the Warrant (as they said) and he would justifie them in it; some of them were loath to do it, knowing the Informati∣on to be False; but John Hill said, Right or Wrong I'le take it; so took all the Beef he had left, to the value of about 13 s. 6 d. The Warrant was made to strain his Goods at Fakenham, at Walsingham and Scoulthorp; and Watt the Informer carried it from Town to Town where he had any Goods; then he brought it to Fakenham Officers, who knew the Information to be False, some of them were loath to execute the Warrant, and forbare a while; but the Informer being troubled at it, went to the said Justice that gave it forth, who altered the date of it, from the Twenty Sixth day to the Twenty Nineth day, and sent it with
a Threatning Letter to the Officers of Fakenham, and forced them to levy for the 29th day, although he had caused Walsing∣ham Officers to levy for the 26th day. The 18th day of the 12th moneth, 1674. the Officers of Fakenham, viz. Covenant Hempsteely, John Cook, William Sud∣bury and John Bately went to Joseph Harrison's Stall in the Market, with the Warrant to distrain his Beef, and they read it, and it was altered to the 29th day aforesaid; Joseph said, My Goods have been distrained at Walsingham, and so have Na∣thaniel Urine's, for the 26th day; and would you now strain for the 29th day, and all by one Warrant? and some of them appeared troubled, and said, It was not Right, but the Magistrate would force them to do it; so they took five stone four pound of Beef, worth 12 s. And Watt the Informer being troubled they proceeded no fa∣ster, went and complained of the Officers to the Magistrate, who sent forth a Threatning Letter to the Officers of Fakenham, whereupon they went to him, and found him much displeased with them, and said, He would not be trifled withal, but would have his Warrant executed, or to that purpose. Whereupon On the 5th day of the 1st moneth, 1675. the Officers of Fakenham went to Joseph Harrison's House, viz. Fran. Page, Covenant Hempsteely, Iohn Cooke and others, and they took a Feather Bed and Boulster, a Pillow and Case, and other Hous∣hold stuff, worth 3 l. then went into his Stable, and took his Horse, worth 2 l. 10 s. and about twenty five hundred weight of Hay, worth 1 l. 15 s. And upon the 22d of the 1st moneth, (75.) Overton and Bately took a Horse and a Mare that were in Joseph Harrison's Ground, the Horse was his own, but the Mare was not, yet they sold them both, notwithstanding Ioseph told them, The Mare was not his own; she was worth 3 l. and the Horse was worth 20 s. in all 4 l. The 1st day of the 2d moneth (75.) Francis Page, Iohn Cooke, Iohn Bately, William Sudbury and Christopher Overton, went to Joseph's Stall in the Market, saying, They were come
again upon the old account, and they took six stone and two pound of Beef (fourteen pound to the stone) came to 16 s. 5 d. The 8th day of the same moneth they came again to him in the Market, and took away four stone and five pound of Beef, 12 s. The 15th of the same moneth most of the same Officers came again to Joseph's Stall in the Market, and took from him eight stone and eleaven pound of Beef, came to 1 l. 6 s. 9 d. The 27th of the 3d moneth (75.) Rice Guin and March Thorp Wardens, John Cooke a Constable, and Humphry Moore in Over-seer, went to Joseph's Stall in the Market, and took from him five stone and five pound of Beef, worth 16 s. The 10th of the 4th moneth (75.) Guin, Cooke and Moore went again to his Stall, and took away four stone and nine pound of Beef, worth 13 s. The 1st day of the 5th moneth (75.) Guin, Thorp, Cooke and Bately went again to his Stall, and took from him five stone and five pound of Beef, worth 15 s. The 8th day of the same moneth the same Officers came again to Joseph's Stall in the Market, and took from him five stone and four pound of Beef, came to 15 s. The 15th of the same moneth, Thorp, Cooke, Bately and Sudbury came again as he stood in his Stall, and took from him eleaven stone and five pound of Beef, worth 1 l. 10 s. [Note Here are Goods taken away Twelve several times from one Person, for one Fine, grounded upon a wrong Infor∣mation. Upon the 18th of the 12th moneth (74.) some of the Officers of Fakenham went to Edwund Peckover's Shop, and said Now the Warrant was altered, and they were come to strain for the 10 s. fine; they sought for Money, but finding none but the Change-Box, they took out of it in small change 4 s. Upon the first day of the first moneth (75.) they went again to Edmund's Shop, and took away 6 s. in Money to make up his Fine, 6 s.
And concerning Mary the Wife of Francis Larder, who was fined 10 s. in the said Warrant by Christopher Bedingfield, the Officers came to strain for it; but seeing little left in the House, except the Bed she lay on, they went away, and reported the same to the said Magistrate, who commanded the said Officers to take her Bed from under her, though they told him, she was more like to Dye than to Live; and she did Dye the same Night, being the first day of the first moneth, 75. in the morning. ☞ Note, Mary Larder's Husband was one that was not called a Quaker; yet, according to his Wife's Desire, he was willing she should be Buryed in Friends Burying-Ground, which was accordingly done: but the Savage Cruelty of some acted upon her Dead Bo∣dy, ought not to be buryed in Oblivion; for upon the 5th day of the same moneth Thomas Bretland's Ser∣vant, Richard Tendick and one Robert Bloome pulled the Dead Corps out of the Grave (where it ought to have rested) in an Inhuman Manner, break∣ing the Coffin, so as they were forced to tye it toge∣ther, lest the Corps should fall out; and they brought it and set it in the Market-place, by Edmund Peck∣over's Door, to the great Amazement of many Peo∣ple, who were troubled as the sight thereof, she having been some dayes in the Ground. This is an Action which would be detested of the sober Heathens: How great a Shame then is it, to see and hear of such Bar∣barity amongst those that would be called CHRI∣STIANS! though how far they are from the Na∣ture of Christianity, that are the Actors of such Tragedies as these, is apparent to all True Chri∣stians.
The 12th day of the 7th moneth (75) Friends being peace∣ably met at the House of Joseph Harrison, William Watt's Wife came to the Door, and stay'd a while looking upon Friends, and went away; so Watt and his Wife went to Christopher Crow of East-Bilney, a Justice (so called) and swore it a Meeting, and he granted out his Warrant, and fined as followeth; Joseph Harrison for the House 9 l. Fran. Hill 10 s. for himself, and 5 s. for Sarah Hill, and 6 l. for the House; Nathaniel Ʋrine 10 s. for himself, 10 s. for Mary Mayes, 5 s. for Mary Tur∣ner, and 5 l. for the House of Joseph Harrison: Edmund Peck∣over for his Wife 10 s. Joseph Peckover 10 s. for himself, and 10 s. for his Sister Rebeckah; Rose Cambridge Widow 10 s. and Thomas Watson and his Wife 20 s. So on the 25th day of the 7th moneth (75.) the Officers of Horningtast, viz. Thomas Reeve Warden and Over-seer, with several others, went to Fran. Hill's to levy his Fine of 6 l. 15 s. and took from him twenty one yards of Cloth, two Horses, and another parcel of Cloth, in all worth 7 l. 15 s. and in Money 2 l. 9 s. 6 d. in all 10 l. 4 s. 6 d. The 28th of the 7th moneth, 1675. the Officers of Faken∣ham, viz. Rice Guin and March Thorp Wardons, Robert Thomp∣son and Hugh Jarres Constables, and Humphry Moore Over-seer, went to Edmund Peckover's Shop to levy his fine of 10 s. for his Wife's being at the said Meeting at Joseph Harrison's, and they took from him nine yards of Ell wide Green Say, worth above 20 s. Upon the same day the said Officers went to the Widow Cambridge her House, to levy her fine of 10 s. for being at the said Meeting, and they took from her three Brass Kettles and five Pewter Dishes, worth 18 s. [Note, Ʋpon the same day they went to Tho. Watson to levy his Fine of 20 s. but he had been so pillaged before, that there was little worth the taking; he, his Wife and Children were forced to lie upon Straw, so little Mercy found they amongst their Neighbours.
The 19th of the 8th moneth (75.) the Officers of Walsing∣ham, viz. John Pattington a Warden, William Hawn and Rob. Feltwell Constables went to Nath. Ʋrine's Shop with a Warrant from Justice Crow aforesaid, to levy his fine of 6 l. 5 s. for him∣self and others being at the said Meeting, and they took from him thirteen pound and one half of Hose-Yarn, worth above 1 l. The 18th of the 10th moneth (75.) the said Officers went again to Nathaniel Ʋrine's Shop, and took from him Wastcoats, Tobacco, Pipes, Boxes and Writing Paper, as much as was worth 4. l. 10 s. The 18th of the first moneth (76.) the Officers of Walsing∣ham aforesaid, went to the said Nathaniel's Shop again to make up his fine, and they took from him his Mare, all that he had left; she was well worth 2 l. The 29th of the 8th moneth, 75. the Officers of Fakenham, viz. Rice Guin and March Thorp Wardens, Rob. Thompson and Hugh Jarret Constables, and Humphry Moore Over-seer, went to Joseph Harrison's Shop to levy his fine for the said Meeting, and they took three Tallow-Loaves, came to 16 s. The 4th of the 9th moneth (75.) the same Officers came again to his Stall in the Market, and took from him six stone and one pound of Beef, worth 12 s. The 18th day of the same moneth the Officers came again to Ioseph's Stall, and took away six stone and one pound of Beef, worth 12 s. The 2d of the tenth moneth following the Officers came again to his Stall, and took away five stone and six pound of Beef, worth 11 s. 6 d. The 9th of the same moneth they came again to his Stall, and took away from him eight stone and four pound of Beef, worth 18 s. The 30th of the same moneth the Officers went again to Io∣seph Harrison's Shop in the Evening, when it began to be dark, to strain again; he asked them, What! for the Old Warrant still? they said, For the Old and the New both: so they took away a
very fat Bullock, that was killed and hung up, and two Tallow-Loaves, all worth 3 l. 11 s. The 6th of the 11th moneth they came again to his stall in the Market, and took from him five stone and an half of Beef, worth 12 s. The 13th day of the same moneth they came again to his Stall, and took away seven stone and eleaven pound of Beef, worth 18 s. The 3d day of the 12th moneth (75.) the said Officers came to Joseph Harrison's Stall again, and told him, They were come for more Beef; and they took from him six stone of Beef, worth 15 s. The 9th of the same moneth, in the Evening, the said Offi∣cers came again to his Shop to levy; for they said, They had not yet made up their Fines: so he having a whole Bullock hung up in the Shop, Humphry Moore being himself a Butcher, clave it down, and his Boy brought his Beast and carryed it away; it was worth above 2 l. 10 s. The tenth day of the said twelfth moneth March Thorp came to Joseph Harrison, and told him, He had cast up the Bills of what they had taken for the two last Fines, and they had but about 22 l. yet; although himself and Rice Guin had told him, when they came to levy upon the 30th of the 10th moneth foregoing, That they had then 22 l. odd Money; since which day they had taken two fat Bullocks, with three parcels of Beef, and two Tallow-Loaves, and yet say they had but 22 l. or about 22 l. And indeed, its credibly reported, That some of the Officers buy of the Meat for a small matter (if any thing) and whether they give any Account or not, we do not know. It is reported also, That some of them have fate great part of several Nights Drinking with Watt the Informer. This is the Havock and Spoil they have made of Innocent People's Goods, for which they have laboured hard, and for which one day their Persecutors must give an Account to God. About the beginning of the 2d moneth (76.) William Watt,
or his Wife, or both, went and informed Sr. Christopher Calthorp (so called) of a Meeting at Joseph Harrison's the 5th of the first moneth before; whereupon he issued out his Warrant to bring Ioseph Harrison, Margaret Peckover and Nathaniel Ʋrine, with some others, before him; and accordingly they did appear be∣fore him: and the said Watt and his Wife did upon their Oaths depose, That they stood in a certain Clouse (which is about a quar∣ter of a Furlong from Joseph's Gate) and saw Joseph Harrison, Nath. Urine and a Woman come out of Joseph's Gate, and go up towards the Pownd (or Pinfold) and saw Fran. Hill come out of the said Gate, and go in again, and take his Horse, and go up into the Town; and further, That he saw the Widow Cambridge and Mary Mayes come out of the Gate also. Upon this Information the said Magistrate fined Joseph Harrison 7 l. Marg. Peckover 10 s. Ioseph Peckover 10 s. Rebeckah Peckover 10 s. Tho. Watson 10 s. Mary May 10 s. Rose Cambridge 10 s. Anne Bee 10 s. Wil∣liam Bullard 10 s. Nath. Ʋrine 7 l. and Fran. Hill 7 l. [Note, The Evidence and Proof given by the Informers, was only (to this effect) That they saw certain Persons come out of Joseph Harrison's Gate, upon which the said Iustice grounded his Warrant to levy for a Meeting in Joseph's house. Surely this kind of proceeding it without Comparison, and doth demonstrate a great deal of Cruelty and Inhumanity, beyond either Law or Reason. So upon the 13th of the 2d moneth (76.) the Officers of Wal∣singham, viz. Will. Leverington Warden, Tho. Capper and Tho. Cooper Constables, went to Nathaniel Ʋrine's Shop with a War∣rant from the said Christopher Calthorp, to levy the said Fine of 7 l. and they took from him a Box of Tobacco, a Box of Pipes and a Stock-Lock, worth 12 s. 9 d. The 27th of the 3d moneth (76.) the said Officers with some others went to Nathaniel Ʋrine's Shop to levy again, and they took from him Hose-Yarn, Tobacco, Paper and other Goods, to the value of 3 l. 10 s. About the 20th day of the 2d moneth (76.) the Officers of
Fakenham, with Watt the Informer, went to John Bee's, to le∣vy for his Wife's Fine, and took from him a Bedstead, Curtains and Vallens, and other Bedding, worth 17 s. The same day the said Officers went to Edmund Peckover's Shop to strain with two Warrants for 50 s. his Wise asked them, For what? and they said, For 20 s. for her Son Joseph & her Daugh∣ter Rebecca, ordered by Justice Crow, and 30 s. for her, and her Son Joseph, and Daughter Rebecca, ordered by Justice Cal∣thorp; she required to see their Warrants, which they seemed loath to do, but at last did shew it her, and Christopher Calthorp had ordered them in his Warrant to take Edm. Peckover's Goods only for his Wife's Offence, and of Joseph and Rebecca's own Goods for their Fines; but they said, It was all one, they would take the Father's Goods for their Fines: and they took away thir∣ty seven yards one half of Alking Holland; Moorland took it, and carryed it away by Thompson's order; it was worth 3 l. 10 s. The 4th of the 3d moneth (76.) the Officers of Fakenham, and Watt the Informer went to Rose Cambridge, a poor Widow, to strain for 10 s. and they took from her a Trunk with five Sheets in it, and a Napkin, the Covering off her Bed, a Blanket, a Table, two Chairs, and other things, in all worth 1 l. 5 s. The same day the said Officers went to William Bullard's, a poor man, having very little in his House worth taking, only a Bedstead, which was a good one, and by the said Warrant for his 10 s. fine; they set Watt the Informer to take it down, with a good Tester and Cord, and a Bed-board and Plank, worth 12 s The 11th of the 3d moneth (76.) Tho. Moorland Warden, Rob. Doulton and Hugh Jarret Constables, went to Thomas Wat∣son's, having five Children, and said, They were come to levy 10 s. by virtue of a Warrant from Sr. Chr. Calthorp; but he be∣ing a very poor man they could not find any thing of value, so they went away; but in the afternoon the said Moorland, Jarret and Doulton went to Tho. Watson's Wife, as she was in the Mar∣ket; for she baked a little Bread to sell, to help to maintain her poor Children, and so Hard-hearted were they, that they took all the Bread she had, being Nineteen Penny-worth.
The 15th of the same moneth they came again, and took from her Fourteen Penny-worth more, in both 2 s. 9 d. The 2d day of the 4th moneth (76.) William Watt the Infor∣mer and his Wife went to Walsingham Market with a Warrant directed to the Officers of Fakenham, from Christopher Calthorp, who had written a few words at the bottom of the War∣rant to the Officers of Walsingham to levy Joseph Har∣rison's Meat at the Market;Note. so Tho. Capper and Thomas Cooper Constables, and Will. Framingham Warden, went to Joseph Har∣rison's Stall in the Market, and told him, Will. Watt had brought them a Warrant from Sr. Chr. Calthorp, to strain his Meat; he bid them read it, which they did; and he told them, That was Fakenham Warrant, he did believe they need not take unless they would; they said, Sr. C. Calthorp had sent to them, and they must and would take: so they took as much Beef and Lamb as came to 16 s. It is observable, that this William Watt the Informer, that has been so active in persecuting his honest Neighbours, whereby they have been so spoiled, as is before related, the Lord laid an heavy Judgment upon his Body, whereby he was made a publick Example of the Anger and Displeasure of God against this his Wicked and Ʋn∣godly Practice; for several Times when he has come to our Meet∣ings, to inform against us, he has been so seized on, that he could not speak of a long time; and when he has gone away, has been forced to stand still several times in less than a Furlong going: It was ob∣served, that his Illness seized most upon him when he was most busie in this Work; which caused him and his Wife to say, The Quakers bewitch't him: he made such strange Noises many times when his Fit was upon him, that many were much affrighted with it, which caused many sober people to say, His Work of Informing was Bad, and he would come to a Bad End. And about the 16th day of the 8th mon. 1679. he was stirring as he used to be about his Wicked Work, and at Night eat his Supper, as his Wife says, as well as ever he did, and after he had sup't, suddenly fell down on the Floar, and his Daughter skreck't out, and he stared on her, it seems, and so dyed,
very full of Vermine; and he had a nasty stinking. Body by his Life time, and so he dyed; and it was very hard to get any Body to carry him to burying, only the Over-seers for the Poor hired four men to carry him. Note also, That notwithstanding all the Money and Goods that he had gotten from the Sufferers by his In∣forming, the Parish was fain to keep him before he dyed, and be at the Charge of burying him; and also now are fain to keep his Wife, who was a Companion with him in this Wicked Work. Note also, That John Richmond, a Companion of the aforesaid Watt in his Informing, who having had before pretty well about him, is since come to take Collection of the Parish. Attested by Joseph Harrison, Anne Harrison, Edmund Peckover, Margaret Peckover, Tho. Watson and his Wife, Joseph Peckover. Upon the 16th day of the 6th moneth, 78. John Hilyard Priest and Justice (so called) issued out a Warrant to levy 20 l. upon the Goods of Joseph Harrison, for a Meeting, which the said Warrant said was at his House the 14th of July, 78. not ex∣pressing the Informers Names; and in pusuance of this Warrant, the 12th of the 7th moneth (78.) the Officers of Fakenham, viz. Tho. Bretland Warden, Tho. Salmon Constable, Hen. Gogney Over-seer, came to Joseph Harrison's Stall as he stood in the Market, and took from him seven stone and twelve pound of Beef, worth 18 s. The 19th day of the same moneth, Tho. Salmon and Edward Beston Constables, Hen. Gogney and Rob. Dolton Over-seers, came again to Jos. Harrison's Stall in the Market, and took from him seven stone and nine pound of Beef, worth 16 s. The 26th of the same moneth the said Officers went to Joseph's stall again, and took eight stone & seven pound of Beef, worth 18 s. The 10th of the 8th moneth, Hen. Gogney, Rob. Dolton, Rich. Pawly and Tho. Bretland came again to his Stall, and took eight stone and four pound of Beef, worth 18 s.
The 23d of the same, the said Officers came again with T. Garret the Butcher, Constable, came to Joseph's House, and finding the Shop door locked, asked him to open it, which Joseph refused; Bretland said, He must break it up; Ioseph told him, It was more than the Law required; Bretland replyed, He cared not for that, he was ordered so to do: so they brake open the Door, and took 5. quarters of Beef, 2. Tallow-loaves-2. Hdes, in all worth 3 l. 10 s. The 6th of the 9th moneth some of the same Officers came a∣gain to the House of Joseph Harrison to levy for the same fine, and threatned to break open the Door; for they had such Order (they said) from the Magistrate; Ioseph replyed, They had no such Order from the King and Parliament; yet they brake open the Door, and took to the value of seven quarters of Beef and two Tallow-loaves. worth 3 l. 15 s. [Note, Its credibly reported, that some of the Officers sold this Beef for 8d. per stone, though Joseph sold of the same for 2 s. 4 d. per stone: and the Tallow for 8 d. a stone, and Joseph sold his Tallow about that time for 3 s. 8 d. per stone, at fourteen pound to the stone. The 14th of the same moneth, Tho. Bretland Warden, Tho. Gar∣ret Butcher, Fran. Page and Rich. Pawly Constables, Rob. Dolton Overseer, went to Joseph Harrison's when he was from home, and they brake up several Doors, and took away about fourteen stone of Beef, three quarters of Mutton, four Tallow-loaves, worth together 2 l. 5 s. The same day in the afternoon, Page, Dolton, Gogney and Pawly came into the Market to Joseph's Stall, and took away from him eight stone of Beef, worth 16 s. The 12th of the 10th moneth the Officers came again to his Stall, and took as much Beef as was worth above 18 s. The 19th day they came again to his Stall to levy, and took nine stone of Beef, worth 18 s. The same day Ioseph's Son brought two Bullock's Hides into Market, they took them also away, which were worth above 1 l. The same day Ioseph brought more Beef into Market for his
Customers, and as soon as he had cut it out, Bretland, Gogney, Garret and Pawly came again, and took it all, not suffering him to sell any to his Customers; it was worth about 16 s. Upon the 9th of the 7th moneth, 1678. Will. Leverington, Iohn Ditchwell and Iohn Williamson, Officers of Walsingham, came to Natahaniel Ʋrine of the same Town, with a Warrant from the aforesaid Iohn Hilyard, and for a fine of 10 s. imposed on him for himself and his Wife being at the Meeting at Joseph Harrison's, the 14th of the 5th moneth aforesaid, and they took from him 15 l. of Tobacco, cut and dryed, worth 12 s. besides a Box with it. The 17th of the 6th moneth, 1678. Tho. Bretland Warden, Tho. Garret, Tho. Salmon and Edw. Beston Constables, and Robert Dolton Overseer, come to Edmund Peckover's Shop, with a War∣rant granted forth by John Hilyard, the said Priest & Magistrate, to strain for 10 s. for Margaret his Wife being at a Meeting at J. Harrison's House the 14th of the 5th moneth, and they took in Money 10 s. & they took 5 s. more at the same time for their Son Walker Peckover, although not mentioned in the said Warrant. The 18th of the 12th moneth, Tho. Bretland & Rob. Sheldrake Wardens, Hen. Gogney and Rob. Dolton Over-seers, and Francis Page a Constable, come to Edmund Peckover's Shop with a War∣rant from Iohn Hilyard aforesaid, to strein for 15 s. for a Meet∣ing at Joseph Harrison's, for which they took a piece of fine Hol∣land of about twenty two yards, worth about 3 l. About the 12th of the 12th moneth, 78. J. Hilyard aforesaid granted a Warrant against Edm. Peckover, to have him brought before him, and to bring Sureties for his Good Behaviour, be∣cause, being Over-seer for the Poor in the Town of Fakenham, he refused to strein the Goods of Joseph Harrison, for a Meeting the fourteenth of the fifth moneth at the House of the said Jo∣seph Harrison, whereupon the said Iohn Hilyard granted a Warrant to strein 5 l. upon the said Edm. Peckover's Goods; for which fine of 5 l. Tho. Bretland with some other Officers went to a Chest of the said E. P's, where some of his best Goods were, and took 4. whole pieces of Searge, with 5 other pieces of Stuff, & about 12. yards of Hair-Camblet, and ten yards of Hair Grogrin; they returned part of these Goods, but kept for the said 5 l. fine to the value of 13 l. and upward.
Rob. Curby of Holt was fined for a Meeting at the same Town upon the 30th of the 10th moneth, 78. the sum of 10 l. 5s. More, the said Robert was fined for a Meeting at Holt afore∣said, upon the 6th of the 11th moneth, 78. but the said Robert was not at the Meeting, yet Fra. Guybon of Thusford issued out his Warrants, and upon the 13th day of the 11th moneth Will. Carr and J. Bacon Over-seers, Sam. Dalibon Constable, Iohn Bret and Iohn Canham Wardens, took away from the said Robert sixteen Hats and a parcel of Hat-bands, worth 1 l. 5 s. Moreover, the Door of the said Robert Curby was broken o∣pen by the Informers, they having some of the Officers present with them, and they took away a Table, six Chairs, one Bedstead with Curtains and Vallens, three Bedsteads more, two Chests, one Coffer, with several other Houshold Goods, with about six∣ty odd stone of Wool, worth together about 12 l. Iames Bunting of Burningham, for a Meeting at Holt the 30th of the 10th moneth aforesaid, was fined 5 l. 5 s. by a Warrant from the abovesaid Fra. Guybon, and upon the 14th day of the 11th moneth following the Officers of the said Town took from him one Coat, one pair of Breeches and a Hat, one Bible, one Cloak-bag, with several other things, worth 30 s. Here follow more Sufferings for Absenting from the Steeple-House, being lately executed. THe 20th of the 6th moneth, 1678. Tho. Bretland Church∣warden (so called) Tho. Salmon and Tho. Garret Consta∣bles,This was with a War∣rant from Fra. Guy∣bon of Thusford. with Hen. Gogney an Over-seer, came to the Shop of E. Peckover to strein for 15 s. for himself, his Wife, his Son Walker and two Maid-Servants, for Absenting three Weeks from the Parish Church (so call'd) so they took for the 15 s. one piece of fine Searge, worth 3 l. And Tho. Bretland's Wife sent to borrow 0 s. of Margaret Peckover, so sent the piece of
Searge again with 5 s. in Money by her Servant, retaining only 15 s. The 29th of the 8th moneth, Tho. Bretland with some other Officers came to the Shop of Edmund Peckover, with a Warrant from Chr. Calthorp, to strein for 15 s. for himself, his Wife, two Sons and one Servant, for three Weeks absenting from the Pa∣rish Church (so called) so Margaret Peckover went to the Ma∣gistrate, to let him know, she with her two Sons were not at home some part of the time for which they were fined, and there∣fore no Reason they should be fined: Were you at Church? (said the Magistrate) es, we were, said she: Chr. Calthop replyed, You and the Papists are all one, and you hear the Jesuits, and they deceive you; which is a manifest if not malicious Slander: Not∣withstanding the Officers came and took away seven pieces of Demity, which said pieces were brought again by a Neighbour that owed Edm. Peckover some Money. The 26th of the 10th moneth, 1678. Tho. Bretland with some other Officers came with Warrants from Chr. Calthorp for Edm. Peckover, his Wife, his Son and one Servant absenting from their Parish Church (so called) for which they demanded 33 s. be∣cause they could not pay to their Demands, they took one whole piece of Searge, and two pieces more that had but little cut off them, worth 5 l. 10 s. and some time after the said Tho. Bret∣land came and brought 1 s. and said, There was the Overplus of that which remained of the said Searges; but M. Peckover refu∣sed to receive it, saying, She would not take a Shilling for so much Goods. POSTSCRIPT. ANd now, after all this Violence used, and Spoil made upon this People, I desire the Reader honestly and consciencious∣ly to weigh and consider, What Evil has these Sufferers done, or what Law of God have they broke, or just Laws of men have they
transgressed? which is the principal matter to weigh and consi-that so thou may'st not in thy haste give a wrong Judgment, and from that draw a false Conclusion, and run with the Multitude, who deny the Truth, & persecute them that live in it, and say, That they ought to suffer because they have broke the Law: Now to say so, without distinction, is to draw a wrong conclusion, without well considering what the Law is, and what sort of people it lays hold upon; for the Law of God does not nor will not punish a righteous man, as the Apostle says, 1 Tim. 1.6. The Law was not made for a Righteous man, but for the Lawless and Disobedient, &c. So also the just Laws of men, that are instituted & made according to that equal and reasonable Principle which God has plac'd a mea∣sure of in every man, which would, if it be adhered unto, teach & guide people to do unto others even as they would be done unto; such Laws preserve men in their Liberties and Properties, and not de∣stroy them; that every man has an equal share, according to his place and degree of Preservation by them, or ought to have, that is honest; but those Laws that are or have been made to deprive men of their just Liberties, which God allows them, and requires them to use to his Glory, and afflict their Bodies, and spoil their Goods, & ruin them because they take that Liberty that the Lord allows them, which is, to worship him in that Way as he is pleased to reveal and make known himself unto them; that Law is not accor∣ding to the Law of God; and it is under such Laws, or the rest∣ing of good Laws, that the Righteous in Ages past & also now do suffer; and them are the Laws that envious people boast of, as said the envious Jews of Christ, John 19.7. We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye; and so said bloody Bonner and the rest of his persecuting Brethren to the faithful Martyrs of Jesus in Q. Mary's days, who put so many to death because they could not bow to the Popish Superstition, who upbraided those worthy men and women because they were not subject to the Queen's Laws, which if they had, they must have defiled their Consciences, who those rather to lose all and obey Christ, than to sin against the Lord, and thereby bring destruction upon their own Souls: And we would have all people take notice, that this is and has been our case, that are concerned in
this Relation of Sufferings, so far as the Lord has been pleased to suffer our Persecutors to proceed; for their Words and Actions have been of the same nature; for say they, We have a Law (as say Chr. Calthorp and others of them) and we are Sworn to put it in execution: but I hope he is not sworn to exceed it in Cruelty, as it appears in this Relation he has sometimes done egregiously. Also the Informers they say to the Sufferers, You break the Law, and therefore your Sufferings are just upon you; as it was an Argu∣ment Will. Watt the old Informer used very much, with many o∣ther taunting & unsavoury Speeches unto the Sufferers, on whom the Lord laid an heavy Judgment long before he dyed, which might have been as a Warning unto the rest of them that had an hand in this evil work of persecuting their honest Neighbours; but, say they, we have a Law; but if the Law-makers did really in∣tend, that none should suffer by this Law, but such persons as they say were the cause for which they made this Law, then Christoph. Calthorp, and the rest of his Brethren, have very much exceeded their bounds in what they have done against their innocent and peaceable Neighbours. And Cook in his Institutions, who is said to be the Oracle of the English Law, in his first part, cap. 2. §. 3. Book 11. Ever the general words are to be intended of a lawful Act, and such interpretation must be made of all Statutes, that the Inno∣cent, or he in whom there is no Guilt, may not be damnified. For the Preamble of the Act, which expresses the Reason or sole Cause why this Law was made (if we may believe the Law-ma∣kers) is thus exprest, An Act to suppress Seditious Conventicles, & Disloyal Persons, who at their Meetings Plot and Contrive Insur∣rections, as late experience has taught, &c. Now the Question is, whether or no any thing of that kind can be proved against Joseph Harrison, and the rest of these Sufferers? and whether any of these Informers did ever swear, that they found Joseph Harrison and his Friends at their Meetings plotting or contriving Insurre∣ctions, for the preventing and punishing of which Persons the Law was made? No, there were never, nor could be such things pro∣ved against them; for the Principle which they have received, & do obey, which is the Grace of God, teaches them better things,
which is, to obey Christ's Doctrine, to do unto others as they would have others do unto them, which is but equal. And although they have made use of those words in the Act, of Five and upwards meeting together besides the Family, under pretence of Religious Ex∣ercise, in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy, to inflict the Penalties of Breach of that Law upon us, yet the Five and above the number must have Relation to such as be seditious and contrive Insurrections, and are Meeters but in Pretence of Religious Ex∣ercise, &c. But our Meetings are really to worship God in Spi∣rit and Truth, and the contrary has not been proved against them, neither can he; and therefore the Law in that case that is made and provided does not lay hold on them; for the Reason why this Act was made we are wholly clean of, both in the sight of God and all men; for neither in our Meetings nor out of them, we never did, or is it in our hearts to do, to contrive any thing that is or may be hurtful either to Prince or People; but we do say, that our Meetings are for no other End or Cause, but to wait upon God, and to call upon his Name for his Power to keep us and to preserve us, and for his Grace to teach us and instruct us, that so we may alwayes worship him in his own Way, which is in Spirit and Truth, which all Plotters and Contrivers of Insurrection are out of. And if the Liturgy does allow, that God should be wor∣shipped in Spirit and Truth, then the Informers have Forsworn themselves, who swore, [That our Exercise of Religion is in other manner than the Liturgy allows.] And I am ready to believe, that the Leading-men of the Church of England will acknowledge, that they are to worship God in Spirit and in Truth; which if so, why should it be accounted a Crime for us to confess the same, and so great a Crime, as if for it there was neither Mercy nor Pity, E∣quity nor Justice to be extended towards us, as appears by this fore-going Relation, in which Chr. Calthorp, with the rest of his Brethren, the persecuting Magistrates and Informers, have so fu∣riously persecuted their honest Neighbours; as if God had made them, their Wives and Children to be made a Prey upon, and to be oppressed; as if it were Religion enough to Ruin and Undo others, and to take the Bread from the Poor, and Clothes from
the Needy, whilst these Magistrates themselves live in Fulness of Bread, who (like Dives) fare deliciously, and clothed with Rich Attire (like the Rich Man spoken of by Christ) have not only re∣fused and neglected to relieve the Poor, but have been Instrumen∣tal, by encouraging these evil-minded Informers to take away poor peoples Clothes they wore, and their Beds they lay upon, and their Bedding, and expose them to the Cold, without either Mercy or Pity to old or young, or sick; for when the Officers went to Chr. Bedingfield, one of these Magistrates, and told him, that there was nothing to be had of one Mary Larder for her fine, but her Bed on which she lay at that time sick, & more like to dye than to live, the said Chr. Bedingfield bad them Go and take the Bed from under her; which said Mary dyed that Night: Oh great Cruelty! and if this be not to over-pass the Deeds of many of the Wicked, I know not what is; for Christ does not render Dives himself so bad. And now I question not but both Magistrates & the Officers and Informers, who have done these things, would judge it hard dealings if any should do by them as you have done by these your honest Neighbours, and for no other Cause than for their Obedience to the Lord; then out of your own Mouthes you are judged, and that you have not done by them as you would be done unto; and therefore you have no cause to blame me and other sober men that hear of your Actions although we do say, that the Informers, Officers and Justices, that encourage such Proceedings as these are, are to blame, and the Sufferers have just Cause to complain of the great Oppression that so long has lain upon them, and to give the World an account of your unmerciful dealing with them and behaviour towards them, who have exer∣cised your Cruelty upon them these many years, by spoiling their Goods from time to time of them that are alive; and yet it ap∣pears that all this Cruelty does not satisfie your unreasonable Minds, that you have done to the Living, but you have shewn your Cruelty to the Dead, in that some of you in the Town of Fa∣kenham have pulled the Dad out of the Grave in an inhumane manner, more like Beasts of Prey then People that fear God, after the Body was decently buried, whereby you discover your selves
to be far worse and more Cruel than those accounted Heathen, that Abraham lived among, who offered him a piece of Ground to bury his Dead in; but your Envy is so great against the Peo∣ple of God, that you will not let them live at quiet amongst you whilst they live, nor let the Body lie quietly in the Grave when it was dead. And now I having viewed your Works, and taken no∣tice of your Actions, which are scarcely to be parallel'd for Cru∣elty in this Nation, considering the long continuance of your Op∣pression, for which you have a large Account to give to the Lord, from the highest of you to the lowest, that have had any hand in persecuting your innocent Neighbours, without any just Cause by them given you. And now it is upon me from the Lord, to Warn you all that have had any hand in this Work, to Repent of this your Cruelty, and Abuses offered and done unto his People, before it is too late, and the Day of your Visitation passes over, and you be shut up in utter Darkness, and the Lord ceases to strive with you, as he did with Jerusalem of old, in whose steps you have walked in oppres∣sing his Children, and evil-entreating his Servants and Messengers that he has sent amongst you, to exhort you to turn from the Evil of your Ways, and the Violence that is in your Hands & Hearts; but instead of receiving them and their Testimony, you have cau∣sed them to suffer; and them that did receive them and their Te∣stimony, you have from time to time evilly required them, so that you would not receive them your selves, nor suffer them that would, if by all the Violence you could use hinder them. The Lord give you Repentance before it be too late and you be cut off, is the Desire of him that chooses rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to live in the Pleasures of this World. S. Cater. THE END.
