L1448 R30962 11748200 48555
A LETTER FROM AN OFFICER Belonging to the ORDNANCE On BOARD the FLEET Lying in the BAY before the ISLE of MAN, Giving an ACCOUNT of the Duke of Schom∣berg's Arrival and Landing of the FORCES under his Command at Carrick Fergus IN IRELAND. From the ISLE of MAN August 15th. YEsterday seven Night, we arrived at the Camp that was formed near Highlake in Order to be Transported for Ireland, and last Saturday we shipt our Stores and Pro∣visions that we brought with us, as also two hundred and fifty draught Horses, belonging to our Train of Artillery; after which we went on Board our selves. On Monday mor∣ning very early the Duke of Schomberg our General, with Lieu∣tenant General Solmes, set Sail, having embarqued two days before, the Wind being fair at East, with four Frigats, and
about seventy or eighty Sail of other Ships, on board which there were about twelve hundred Land Souldiers for the Irish Expedition; having given Orders that the Vessels on which the Artillery, Provisions and Victuals were shipp'd, should make what haste they could after them under the Convoy of three Frigates, that were left to accompany us, and joyn him in this Bay; about eight of the Clock that morning, which was some hours after the General had been under sail, we set sail, and the Wind continuing fair, we came on Tuesday mor∣ning to an Anchor in this place, being about forty and four sail in all; it was no small surprise to us, that after we had safely, and with what haste we could come to the place of Rende∣vouz to find no tidings of our General, nor meet with any Orders from him, there being no body left to direct us what we should do, or what Course we should steer; however we were resolved to stay until we heard from his Grace, which we had the good luck to do this Morning by the Antelope Frigat, who sail'd out of Highlake with the General, and brought us Orders from his Excellency to sail with all possible speed from hence, and to come and joyn him in the Lough of Car∣rick Fergus, where the Captain said he had left him, landing the Forces in the Country on Antrim-side. The Captain tells us, that the General having fair wind did not think it needful to put in and come to Anchor in this Place being resolv'd to make the best of it, and proceed on his way, and farther tells us that the Town of Carrick Fergus was not all burnt down, but only some Fort, or Castle that was on a Rock that was blown up. Thus Major General Macarty was certainly wounded and taken Prisoner by the Inneskilling Men who had given a very great defeat to the Irish Army, as they were endeavouring to retire from the North, after the Relief of London Derry, and that it was credibly reported in those Parts, that there was hardly a Body of five hundred Irish together in all the North Counties of that Kingdom. LICENSED August th 19. J. Fraser. LONDON Printed for Ric. Chiswell. at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church Yard. MDCLXXXIX.
