m1070 12767327 93606
THE DUTY OF SUBMISSION TO Divine Providence, In all its Dispensations. Described and Recommended from the Example and Argument of JOB. By SAMƲEL MASTERS. B. D. James 6. 10, 11. Take, my Brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken in the Name of the Lord, for an example of suffering Affliction, and of Patience. Behold we account them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord: that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender Mercy. London, Printed for Awnsham Churchill, at the Black-Swan in Ave-Mary-Lane, 1689.
IMPRIMATUR, GUIL. NEEDHAM. July 23. 1689.
TO THE Right Honourable the LADY LETITIA ISABELLA Countess Dowager of RADNOR. MADAM, THe late smarting Afflictions which I have felt in my Person and Family, have made me very quick of Sense in resenting Yours; and have ingag'd my Mind on such Meditati∣ons, as may render me
capable of speaking a Word in Season to You. I dare not be so unjust to your Sorrows, as to dissemble or extenuate your Loss: All who knew the Lady Essex, found it necessary to ad∣mire her for the Beauty of her Person, the Quick∣ness of her Parts, and the most obliging Sweetness of her Conversation; but chiefly for her Reli∣gious Accomplishments, her unaffected Vertues, and her frequent Exer∣cises
of Devotion, both in publick and private. But I need not tell your Ladyship how good she was, who took so much delight in making and seeing her such; and I dare not gratify my self any farther in displaying her excellent Character, lest I should thereby sol∣licit those Tears, which your Religious Wisdom endeavours to suppress. I would rather observe to you those good things wherewith the Divine
Wisdom hath attempe∣red your Affliction, that the Sweetness of the One, may allay the Bit∣terness of the Other. The Person You be∣wail is indeed gone from You, but to her Hea∣venly Father; She died in the Youth of her Age, but not before She was capable of a Life of Glory; She left the World when it began to temp her with a New Scene of Enjoyments; but She left its Vanities,
and Troubles too, and hath gain'd by the ex∣change much purer and more lasting Joys. You have lost One Blessing, but Others continue still, which de∣serve your Esteem and Love, and which may support and consolate the Remainder of your Life, You have lost a Child, but Your Hea∣venly Father is immor∣tal and unchangeable, who will continue to dwell with you here by
his Holy Spirit, till he take you up to dwell with him Above; of which he hath given you a Pledg in advancing a part of you already thither. Let not then the evil Things You have met with, so far ingross Your Thoughts and Af∣fections as to rob God of the Honour, and Your self of the Comfort, of all those good Things he hath provided and prepared for You.
And to assist You here∣in, I humbly offer the ensuing Discourse, to perfect You in that Art, wherein You are already so well improv'd, of re∣ceiving dutifully what∣ever good or evil is dis∣pensed to You by the Hand of Providence. That You may continue long among us to recom∣mend the Power and Beauty of Religion by Your Illustrious Example: And may at last exchange Your Earthly
Honour for a far bright∣er Glory in Heaven, is the Hearty Prayer of, MADAM, Your most Humble and Faithful Servant and Chaplain, SAMUEL MASTERS.
JOB 2.10. —What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil? THese Words relate to a Passage in the Histo∣ry of Job, concerning which History it may be useful to premise a few Things, to recommend it to our serious Attention, and to predispose our Minds, by some proper Anticipations, to consider more easily and pro∣fitably this Argument of the Text. There have been some Christians of late, and some
Jews of old, who thought this History of Job to be a Poetick Fiction, and not a real History, because so extraor∣dinary in its Matter, and so artificial in its Composure; and because they observe that it was usual in those Times to teach and exemplify the Insti∣tutions of Morality and Re∣ligion by such Fictitious Para∣bles. But when we consider how positively this History doth describe and assert the Person of Job, and the several Circumstances of his Conditi∣on; also that the Holy Ghost makes mention of Job,Ezek. 14.14. as a Person in great Favour with God, and joins him with No∣ah and Daniel, of whose Re∣ality
there can be no doubt; and that St. James recom∣mends Job for an imitable Pat∣tern of Patience,Jam. 5.10, 11. which can∣not but suppose the Reality and Truth of his History: These Considerations will be sufficient to induce us to concur with the more general Testimony both of Jews and Christians, that this History, however wonderful, is yet real, that there was indeed a Man so great and good as Job, that his Trial was no less, and his Patience as great as this Book describes and asserts. And as this History is real, so it may be probably pre∣sum'd to be the most ancient now extant in the World;
for tho it be plac'd next be∣fore the Book of Psalms, be∣cause compos'd like them in Metrical Numbers, yet it is probable that this. Book was written by Moses, the most ancient Writer, and before a∣ny of those Five Books which are plac'd first in our Bibles. For there are good Rea∣sons upon which learned Men conjecture that Job liv∣ed in the time of the Patri∣archs, being a Nephew of Abraham, descended from E∣sau; and that Moses met with this History of him while he sojourned in the Land of Midian, where he translated it out of the Arabi∣an into the Hebrew Language;
and compos'd the Discourses between Job and his three Friends in that Metre in which we now read them; and that when he return'd to his Brethren in Egypt, he pre∣sented this Book to them, to teach them Patience under their Afflictions from Job's Example, and to confirm their Faith and Hope in the Divine. Mercy, from the Deliverance and Reward which God wrought for him: of which an antient Author, under the Name of Origen, is so certain, that he recites a Speech made by Moses to the People of Israel, when he publish'd this excellent Book among them.
But this History is not more considerable for its Antiquity than for its Useful∣ness, which acquaints us with several important Truths, that we could not know but by Revelation, and which are not declared so expresly in any other part of the Holy Scriptures, as in this Book; and also sets before us an eminent Pattern of Patience, to instruct and support us under the many Troubles to which we are here always obnoxious. For first in perusing this History we meet with such considerable Truths as these. 1. That God takes a par∣ticular and kind notice of all his Faithful Servants, and re∣flects
on them with Complacen∣cy, and is ready to bear an honourable Testimony of their Innocence; for thus he speaks, and even boasts of his Servant Job to Satan,Chap. 1. v. 8. Hast thou consi∣dered my Servant Job, that there is none like him in the Earth, a perfect and an upright Man, one that feareth God and es∣cheweth evil? Which is a great Incouragement to a good Man, that tho the Devil ac∣cuse him, his Friends reproach him, and the World condemn him, yet God that searcheth the Heart doth approve and commend him. 2. We are informed also from this History, how Satan dares to accuse, even to God
himself, his most Faithful Servants, if not of outward Scandal, yet of inward Hy∣pocrisy; for thus the Lying Spirit drew up a Charge a∣gainst Job:Ch. 1, v. 9, &c. Doth Job fear God for nought? Hast not thou made a Hedge about him, and about his House, and about all that he hath on every side? Thou hast blessed the work of his Hands, and his Substance is in∣creased in the Land: But put forth thy Hand, and touch all that he hath, and he will curse thee to thy Face. And when this Pretence was refuted, he again suggests, That if God would put out his Hand,Chap. 2. v. 5. and touch his Bone and Flesh, he would curse God to his Face.
Whence we may learn how Satan is call'd the Accuser of the Brethren,Rev. 12.10. who accuseth them be∣fore God Day and Night; and how great a Priviledg the Go∣spel hath discover'd to us, that we have the Son of God to be our Advocate, to justify us in the Court of Heaven, against the malicious Allegations of this Ad∣versary. This also may render an easy account of the perverse Malice of Wicked Men, who take great Pleasure in reproaching the Faithful Servants of God, if not of any apparent Wicked∣ness, yet of some latent suspected Hypocrisy,Joh. 8.44. for they being of their Father the Devil, his Lusts they will do; who is a Lyar, and the Fa∣ther of Lies.
3. We may hence also dis∣cover that those Calamities which befal Mankind, are chief∣ly wrought by the Agency of the Devil, who is describ'd in the Scripture, as the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Destroyer, a Murderer from the beginning, the great Tempter and Tormenter of Men, the chief Author of all Evil, either of Sin or of Mi∣sery: who sometimes tempts Men to mischieve themselves, sometimes to mischieve others; and who can use Fire, or Water, Clouds, or Wind, or other Crea∣tures to be the Means and In∣struments of our Ruine. Thus Job fear'd lest he might have Tempted his Children to abuse themselves at their Feast.
Thus he stirr'd up the Sabeans and Caldeans to rob Job, and procur'd a Fire from Heaven to consume his Cattel and Ser∣vants, and a strong Wind from the Wilderness to overturn the House, in which his Children were Feasting; and those ill Humours in Job's Body which broke out in Boils from Head to Foot. Which Discovery may be of use to guard us with the strictest Caution, and strongest Indignati∣on against that Tempter, who is so great an Enemy; and may al∣so help us to conceive how some extraordinary Calamities, which sometimes surprize us, are produc'd, tho no other natu∣ral causes of them do appear.
4. We may further learn from this History that the Devil and his Legions, with all their Malice & Power, are able to effect no Mischief against us, but then only, and fo far as God gives them permission: For we find that the Devil could not hurt Job, tho eager in his Malice a∣gainst him, till God said to him, Behold all that he hath is in thy Power: And at first he could not hurt his Person, because God restrain'd him by a Prohi∣bition, Chap. 1. ver. 12. only upon himself put not forth thy Hand. And when the Devil sought to have his Com∣mission inlarg'd, God gave him Power over Job's Body, saying Behold he is in thy Hand,Chap. 2. ver. 6. yet then also restrain'd him with
this Exception, But save his Life. And this is matter of great Comfort and Incouragement to us, that we are not abandon'd to the powerful Malice of the De∣vil, that tho he goes about as a roaring Lion seeking to devour, yet he cannot go beyond the Tedder of his Chain; that an Al∣mighty Wisdom and Goodness watcheth over us in a continual Providence, and that God will be faithful to us in not suffering us to be tempted beyond what we are able to bear,1 Cor. 10.13. and will with every Temptation make a way for us to escape, that we may be able to bear it. 5. We are also inform'd from hence, that God doth
sometimes permit the Devil to afflict his Servants, not out of Wrath against them, but only to approve and exercise their Gra∣ces, for the Advancement of his own Glory and of their Praise, and for the increase of their Graces here, and of their Re∣wards hereafter. This is evident from the Cha∣racter God gives of Job, and the Favour and Delight he ex∣presseth towards him, both be∣fore and after his Sufferings; The Lord said unto Satan,Ch. 2, v. 3. Hast thou considered my Servant Job, that there is none like him in the Earth, a perfect and an upright Man, one that feareth God, and escheweth Evil? and still he hold∣eth fast his Integrity, altho thou
movedst me against him, to destroy him without a cause. This may support and in∣courage us under any Suffer∣ings, when our Consciences can attest our Integrity as Jobs did; and teach us to suffer chearful∣ly for God's sake, when we do not suffer for our own. This may also restrain us from mak∣ing any reproachful Reflections upon the Afflictions of God's Servants, as Job's Friends did on his, because God may per∣mit them for other wise and good Ends, beside that of Pu∣nishment. 2. This History doth not only teach us such useful Lessons, but also exhibits to us a very eminent pattern of Meekness
and Patience, very needful to Instruct and Incourage us in the difficult Duty of bearing, as we ought, those Calamities and Afflictions, which are our com∣mon Portion in this World. Whilst we dwell in this lower World, deprav'd with the Malignity of Sin, and Blast∣ed with the Curse of God's Dis∣pleasure, we cannot but expect to meet with a great variety of Crosses and Disappointments, Mi∣series, and Calamities, insomuch that Suffering is become at least one half of our Duty, and Pa∣tience is a Grace of as perpetual and common use as any other whatsoever. And this part of our Duty is so irksome to Flesh and Blood,
that we need the most Forcible Helps and Supports to contain us in the performance of it. Now nothing doth more sensi∣bly incourage us under Suffer∣ings, then proper and eminent Examples, which at once De∣monstrate to us, that our Af∣flictions are Tolerable, because we see them Born by others, and also excite in us a generous Emulation to acquit our selves as well as our fellow Servants, who have been in a like or worse Condition. But among all the Patterns of Patience, there is none com∣parable with this of Job (ex∣cepting that of our Saviour who was more than a Man) whom God seems to have ex∣ercis'd
with such extraordinary Trials, and to have recorded his History in the Holy Scrip∣tures purposely for our Imitation and Incouragement. And that its great usefulness herein may more appear, let us a little display and view over this illustrious Example. Be∣hold here a perfect and upright man undergoing the heaviest Calamities, falling from the height of prosperity into the lowest depth of Misery, sur∣priz'd by his Calamities on a sudden, which came upon him altogether, without Intermission, and were of so extraordinary a Nature as, at once, to deprive him of all his Comforts, and plunge him into the lowest
State of Wretchedness: For, all his great Estate, which accord∣ing to those Times and Coun∣tries, consisted of Servants and Cattel, was in one day con∣sumed by Sabeans and Caldeans, and a Fire from Heaven. And as soon as he knew himself to be reduced to per∣fect Poverty, he is told also that he is become Childless, and that his Children perish'd to∣gether, by an unusual Death, under the Ruins of the House in which they were Feasting, Nor was he only strip'd naked of all his outward comforts, but the Calamity seizeth on his Person too, and spreads over him a most Noisome and Pain∣ful disease. And that the good
Man might have nothing to sup∣port him under all this Mise∣ry, but God and his own Con∣science, his Wife, who should have been his Helper, became his Tempter, and his Friends did but Aggravate his sorrows with harsh Censures and unjust Re∣proaches. What Estate on this side of Death can we conceive more Calamitous than this? Let us now reflect on this Worthy wretched Man, and be∣hold his Behaviour, and admire his invincible Patience. When Job had heard that he was de-Priv'd of all his Estate and his Children too, he indeed Rent his Mantle, and shav'd his Head, and fell down on the Ground, as o ne that was not
stupidly insensible of such extra∣ordinary Events; but withal he worship'd toward Heaven, and expres'd his Resentments in this Pious Devout acknowledg∣ment. Naked came I out of my Mothers Womb,Chap. 1. v. 21, 22. and Naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken a∣way; blessed be the Name of the Lord. And the Holy Ghost makes this Reflection on his behaviour in the next Verse, In all this Job sinned not, neither charged God foolishly. When af∣terwards his Body was af∣terwards his Body was af∣flected with the anguish and stench of unusual Boils, he contentedly sat him down a∣mong the Ashes, and reliev'd himself, as well as he could
with the broken Potsherds that lay about him. And when his Wife could no longer suppress her Passions, or lengthen out her Patience, but in a transport of Fury call'd on him to curse God and Die; He replies, more angry with Her then with his Condition, Thou speakest as one of the foolish Wo∣men speaketh; and that he might Convince as well as Rebuke her, he suggests to her considera∣tion this reasonable Argument, What? shall we receive Good at the Hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil? And here the Ho∣ly Ghost hath thought fit to bear his Testimony a second Time that, in all this Job sinned not with his Lips.
This is a pattern that we cannot enough admire, but let us also labour to imitate it; And that we may attain to such an excellent frame of Spirit, let us study well this short Ar∣gument wherewith Job go∣vern'd his own Heart, and in∣deavour'd to restrain the impa∣tience of his Wife, What? shall we receive Good at the Hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil? The Argument is propos'd in the form of a Question, and accented with an unusual earnest∣ness, that it might enter the Mind with a greater Force, and produce in it a more speedy and through Conviction. We may resolve the Argu∣ment into these two parts.
I. An Antecedent suppos'd, That we receive our Good from the Hand of God. II. A Consequent thereupon inferr'd, That we ought to receive any Evil from the same Hand. The plain Sense and Design of the Argument is this, That as we receive all our Blessings from God's bountiful Hand; so we should be ready to accept any Afflictions from his correcting Hand. In discoursing on this Argu∣ment, I design to do these three Things.
First, To explicate its Sense, that we may fully understand those things which are express'd or implied in it. Secondly, To discover the Force of the Argument, that we may be convinced by it. Thirdly, To apply it, for di∣recting and containing us in the Discharge of so necessary a Duty. First, I begin to explain the Argument, That we may un∣derstand those Things which are express'd or implied in it: And this may be sufficiently done by inquiring into these three Things. 1. What is that Good and Evil which are mention'd in the Argument?
2. What that Hand is by which this Good and Evil is dispens'd? 3. How we should receive both Good and Evil from that Hand. 1. Let us consider what that Good and Evil is which is ex∣press'd in the Argument? It is plain enough from the Con∣text, that Job did design by Good and Evil, nothing else but those Temporal Blessings and Calami∣ties, of both which he had so great a share, as this History describes. And tho most Men are quick enough of Sense in the things of this World, to distinguish between Good and Evil; so that they need not be told that Riches and Ho∣nours,
Health and Long-Life are good Things, and that Po∣verty and Disgrace, Sickness and Death are evil Things; Yet they are perchance very few who understand the Nature or Degree of that Goodness or Evil which are ascrib'd to the things of this World, and therefore it may be needful to teach them this piece of Sacred Philosophy: That Man being compounded of such different parts as a Spi∣rit and a Body, he hath conse∣quently very different Interests, such as are Spiritual, and such as are Carnal, and that those excel these, as much as a Spirit doth excel a Body: from whence we should infer, that those things are Good or Evil to a Man
in the highest sense, which can promote or destroy the noblest Interests of his Spiritual part, and those things are Good or Evil but of an inferior Kind or in a lower Degree, which con∣cern the welfare only of the Body. Now the things of this low∣er World about us, do not in their Natures import any Good or Evil to that Soul which is the chief part of the Man; for a Man may abound in Riches, and yet be destitute of true Wis∣dom; he may cover a deformed Mind with a beautiful Body: or the more the outward Man de∣cays, the inward Man may be renewed. Yea these Temporal things are indifferent of them∣selves
to become either Good or Evil to us, according as they are blest by God, and improv'd by us: for Riches, Honours, and Pleasures may prove very evil Things, if they debauch our Minds with Vanity and Pride; and Poverty, Disgrace, and Sick∣ness, which we make the in∣stances of Adversity, may be∣come very good Things to us, if they render our Minds more Sober & Teachable, and our Hearts more Meek and Submissive. Wherefore the Stoicks, who in Matters of Morality came nearest to the Institutions of our Holy Religion, were Unani∣mous and confident in this Maxime, that there was no Good or Evil but only Virtue
and Vice. So Tacitus describes Helvidius Priscus,Doctores sapientiae secutus est, qui sola bona quae honesta; mala tan∣tum quae turpia, potentiam nobilita∣tem, caete∣ra{que} extra animum ne{que} bonis ne{que} malis annume∣rant. Tacit. Hist. lib. 4. That he fol∣lowed those Masters of Wisdom who taught that those Things only were Good which were Honest, and only those things Evil which were dishonest, but Power, Honour, and other such things which affect∣ed the outward Man, they ac∣counted not to be either Good or Evil. And tho we Acknow∣ledg that they went too far in this Assertion, and that Ac∣cording to the style of the Ho∣ly Scriptures we are allow'd to call Temporal things Good or Evil, and there be this plain Reason for it, because these things respect the Interests of the Body which is a part of the Man, tho the ignoblest part in
the Composition; yet after all we must assert that these out∣ward things are not Good or Evil in an Absolute sense with re∣spect to the whole Man, or in the highest Sense with respect o his more valuable Interests; and that in the strictest Sense hose things only deserve to be accounted good or evil to a Man, which can affect the Spiritual interests of his Soul. These notions will be very useful to us for Proportioning our Estimations and Affections toward the things of this World; for allowing them to be in some degree Good or Evil, we shall be dispos'd to thank God for Temporal Blessings, and to humble our Selves under his
Temporal Corrections; but know∣ing withal that there are other things which relate to our Spi∣ritual Interests, which do comparatively far exceed them in their Goodness or Evil, we shall be induc'd to regard these with our highest Estimations, and our strongest Affections. 2. We are next to consider what that Hand is, which dis∣penseth to us both our Good and Evil things; the Text asserts it to be the Hand of God, which can import nothing else but the Power and Instuence of his conti∣nual Providence, whereby he sustains the Beings he hath given us, and disposeth of all Events and Circumstances about us, so that nothing doth or can befall
us, without, or contrary to the Council of his Will. This hand of providence deals out to e∣very Man that proportion of Good or Evil, which the divine Wisdom thinks fit to assign to him, so that nothing happens to us by a blind Fortune, or an unaccountable Fate, but by the Conduct of that good God, who is the great Creator and Sovereign of the whole World. If therefore there be any Creatures about us which are Good or Hurtful to us, it was the Hand that made them, which put those Qualities into them. If any Good accrue to us thrô our own Skill and In∣dustry, or by the Care and Fa∣vour of our Friends, we must
acknowledg that We, or our Friends, are but Instruments in the Hand of God, for conveying such Blessings to us: Or if we suffer thrô our own Default, or the Injury of other Men, we are to account of our selves or our Enemies, as Rods in his Hand, whereby he inflicts such Pu∣nishments upon us. Thus the pious King of Is∣rael acknowledged to God: All that is in Heaven or in Earth is thine;1 Chron. 19.11, 12. thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted above all; both Riches and Honour come of thee, in thy Hand is Power and Might, and in thine Hand it is to make great, and to give Strength unto all. So on the other Hand the Prophet demands, Shall there
be Evil in a City and the Lord hath not done it?Amos 3.6. and with respect to both kind of Events, God him∣self declares, I form the Light,Isa. 45.7. and create Darknesss; I make Peace, and create Evil; I the Lord do all these things. And the Hand of God doth thus concern it self not only in the greatest and most important Events, but also in those which may seem most slight and inconsiderable to us: for our Saviour assures us that God numbers our very Hairs,Luke 12.6, 7. and that a Sparrow cannot fall to the Ground without his Knowledg. A right Apprehension, and firm Perswasion of our entire Dependence on the Hand of Di∣vine Providence, in managing and ordering our Conditions in
this World, would have a very great influence on our Religious Devotion; for who would not be careful to please him who hath the dispensing of all Bles∣sings and Curses? to whom shall we direct our Prayers for what we want, or our Thanks∣givings for what we enjoy, but to that bountiful Hand which is the Fountain of all our Bles∣sings? Or what can make us more Meek and Patient under Correction, than the sight of that Almighty Hand which holds the Rod and lays on the Stroke? 3. We are in the last place to consider how we should receive both Good and Evil from the Hand of God. Job hath used but one word with
respect to both sort of Events, and that word, Debemus accipere sive exci∣pere cum affectu, lubentiâ reverentia & acquies∣centia; id enim  sig∣nisicat, nempe  acipere quod ad Donum sua natura re∣fertur. Cocceius in locum. doth properly denote such an Acceptance as that wherewith we entertain a Gift from a Superior, with a chearful Reverence, and a grace∣ful acquiescence. Now tho the design of the Argument would require only to explain how we ought to receive our evil Things from God's correcting Hand, yet inasmuch as we are equally concern'd in the Duty of receiving Good as of receiving Evil; I think it will be worth our while, to Study out the right Art of doing both; in order to which I shall take both parts of this Duty under a distinct Consideration.
1. The right manner in which we should receive our good Things from the Hand of God, doth consist chiefly in this threefold disposition of Mind, viz. that we receive God's blessings with a contented, thankful, and an honest Mind. (1.) We should receive our good Things from God with a contented Mind, i.e. with a Mind that can contain it self within those Injoyments which God thinks fit to allow; so as to be well pleas'd with his Blessings of whatever Kind, in whatever Degree, by whatever Means, or at whatever Time confer'd up∣on us; not to despise our Bles∣sings, or to be dispise our Bles∣sings, or to be dissatisfied with them because they are not of
such a sort, or not so much, or do not come in such a way, or so soon as we would have them, and that we do not look askew on them with an evil Eye, or receive them awkardly with an unwilling, Hand. And to promote so good a Disposition of Mind, we should consider that God is the absolute Lord of all his Blessings, and may do with his own as he plea∣seth; that his Hand is guided by an unerring Wisdom, so as to dispense them in an exact Pro∣portion to every Mans Capacities and Necessities; that he is not stinted by any Penury of Bles∣sings, or Envy of our Happiness; that he could and would give more or sooner if he saw it fit for
us; that therefore it becomes us to contain our Desires within the same Bounds, which his Wisdom hath prescrib'd to his own Bounty, to accept of our Share which the great Master of the Family of the World hath a∣lotted to us among the rest; lest by any dissatisfaction we reflect on God, as if he err'd in giving too little, or on our Selves in desiring too much. If them God thinks fit to give us only Necessaries, let us stop our Desires there, and not han∣ker after Superfluities; if God gives us Health and Strength, let us be contented if we are not also Rich; let us be pleas'd and satisfied with the Children he gives us, the Friends he raiseth up for
us, the Station he assigns to us, and the Competency he provides for us. And if he think fit to send us any good Things thrô our unw Industry, or the Cha∣rity of others, let us not be dis∣conteneed, thô we must labour or be beholden for them: and if our Blessings come not so soon as we desired, yet let it satisfy us that they come in that Season which Infinite Wisdom thought most fit. Let us learn with St. Paul, How to want,Phil 4.11. and how to abound, and in all estates to be con∣tented; and practise that Duty which he prescribes to all Chri∣stians, Let your Coversation be without Covetousness,Heb. 13.5. and be con∣tent with such Things as ye have.
(2.) We should receive good Things from God's Hand with a Thankful Mind, i. e. with a Mind dispos'd to acknowledg with grateful Affections God's great Bounty toward us, and the Returns we owe to him for it. To this end, we should keep on our Minds such Apprehensi∣ons of God, and our Selves, and of the Blessings we receive, as will promote and cherish in us the most grateful Resentments. We should take care that we do not injuriously deny, or carelesly overlook our great Benefactor, lest we withhold his Praises, or ascribe them to a wrong hand. We should consider how high a Priviledg it is, that the great God of Heaven will condescend
to take care of us in a continual Providence. We should consi∣der also how unworthy we are of the Blessings we enjoy; or rather how much we deserve the seve∣rest Punishments. We should also rate the Blessings we receive with a just value and esteem; none should sem small to us which come from so great a God, to such worthless Persons; we should also consider how innumerable they are; how con∣stantly and continually they flow into our Bosoms; and how seasonable, useful and delightful they prove to us. And such Considerations as these should not only start up at the Receipt of some new Bles∣sing, but should dwell in our
Minds, to affect them always with a grateful Sense of the im∣mense Goodness & plenteous Bounty of our great Benefactor. If God's Blessings find us thus dispos'd, they cannot fail of a most affectionate Entertainment; for the Thoughts which acknow∣ledg and admire the Riches of Divine Goodness, will easily inflame the Heart with a strong Love to God, as to the best of Patrons, the kindest Friend, and most indulgent Parent; they will melt us into sorrow for the inexcusable ingratitude of affron∣ting and grieving so good a God in time past, and excite in us the most earnest Resolutions of an entire Devotion to him for the time to come.
And out of the abundance of the Heart thus dispos'd, our Mouths will speak forth his Praise, and our own Thankfulness. We shall not forbear to boast of God and his Favour towards us, to declare his Goodness, and to bless his Name both in our private and publick Devotion. And these Cords of Love which ingage our Hearts will easily contain us in our Duty to so good a Lord, and oblige us to be dili∣gent, faithful and cheerful in his Service, and make us very zea∣lous for his Glory. Every Blessing receiv'd by such a grateful Mind will fall like Rain on good Ground, and bring forth much Fruit to the praise of him that sent it.
With such Returns of Praise and Thankfulness we should al∣ways correspond with our great Benefactor, sending up to Hea∣ven our Tributes of Gratitude, in some proportion to the Bles∣sings God sends down to us; which is not more our Duty than it is our Interest; for as our God doth infinitely excel us in Goodness, so he regards more kindly the unprofitable Re∣turns we make to him, than we do all the invaluable Blessings he bestows on us, and will not fail to exceed our Gratitude with his Bounty. After this manner have good Men dispos'd themselves for re∣ceiving the Blessings of Hea∣ven; among whom we need
no better Pattern than the Royal Psalmist, whose devotional Ad∣dresses consist chiefly of returns of Praise and Thanks, who had fix'd his Heart, and turn'd his Lyre purposely to this Duty, and resolv'd to continue in it as long as he had a being; who also of∣ten invites all other Men, yea all the Creatures of God, to join in Consort with him, as sharers with him in the Blessings of Divine Bounty. (3.) We should receive our good Things from the Hand of God with an honest Mind, i. e. which a Mind honestly dispos'd to acquire God's Blessings in his own Way, and to imploy them only to that End for which he designed them.
If we project to obtain any Blessings by indirect Courses and unlawful Means, we shall not receive, but rather snatch them out of the Hand of Pro∣vidence; for he defrauds or robs God of his Blessings, who procures them by Injustice, Vio∣lence, or Deceit; and if God suffer him to succeed therein, he must at last expect a Mix∣ture of Sorrow with them; as Jacob's Blessing was imbitter'd which he fraudulently wrested from his deluded Father. We shall also greatly abuse God, if we Use his Blessings to any other purpose than he in∣tended. How loud an Impiety must it needs be to make our Holy God a Caterer for our
Lusts, by making his Blessings a Provision for the Flesh, to fulfil the Lusts thereof? To imploy the Riches he bestows, to enter∣tain our Luxury; the Honour he confers, to feed our Pride; the Power he intrusts us with, to revenge ourselves, or oppress our Neighbour; or the Health and Strength he preserves to us, to sin against him more presumptuously? What blacker Ingratitude and Injustice can we be Guilty of, then to fight a∣gainst God with his own Wea∣pons; to serve the Devil with the Blessings of Heaven; and to make those things to be∣come Evil, which God sent for Good?
If we do thus, we not only forfeit God's Blessings, but even necessitate him to take them from us, in his own Vindica∣tion; as he threatned Israel by the Propher Hosea, Hos. 2.8, 9. She did not know that I gave her Corn and Wine and Oyl, and multiplied her Silver and Gold which they prepa∣turn for Baal; therefore will I re∣turn to take away my Corn in the Time thereof, and my Wine in the season thereof, and will recover my Wool, and my Flax, given to cover her Nakedness. Whenever we receive a Bles∣sing, we should consider that he is the Lord who gave it, and we are his Servants or Stewards that receive it; that therefore we cannot honestly put it to
any other Use than our Lord hath Appointed or Allowed; and must expect to be one Day call'd to an Account of the Bles∣sings we have receiv'd; and if we have not put them to a good Use, or perverted them to a bad one; we shall be con∣demn'd as Wicked or Slothful Servants; Matth. 25. as our Saviour hath Taught us in his Parable of the Talents. If then God in his bounty bestows Riches on us, let us receive them with an honest Resolution to abound Proportion∣ably in good Works; If he ad∣vance us to Honour, let us be∣come thereby more illustrious Patterns of Piety to the World; If he confer Power and Authori∣ty
upon us, let us use it to maintain his Cause, protect his Servants, and suppress the Ene∣mies of his Religion; If he bless us with a long Life, and a convi∣nued Health, let us be more Abundant and unwearied in his Service; let us receive every Blessing with no other design, than to imploy it in the Service and to the Honour of him that sent it. And as God intends to en∣gage us more closely to himself by all the Obligations he lays upon us; so upon the receipt of every Blessing, especially of such as are most remarkable, we should solemnly and heartily devote our Selves to God, as Jacob did in that pious
Vow. If God will be with me,Gen. 28.20, 21. and will keep me in the way that I go, and will give me Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on, so that I come again to my Father's House in Peace, than shall the Lord be my God. II. Let us pass on to consi∣der how we ought to receive our evil Things from God's cor∣recting Hand. The design of the Argument is not that we should barely partake of these evil Things, for that is not in our Power to prevent; but that we should receive or accept them in a right Manner; and the Art of doing so, doth con∣sist chiefly in this threefold Disposition of Mind, viz. that
we receive any evil Things from God's correcting Hand, with Meekness and Humility; with Patience and Long-Suffering; and with a Cheerful and well-pleased Mind. First, We should receive any evil Things from the Hand of God with Meekness and Hu∣mility, i. e. with a Spirit so lowly and Submissive, as to yield quietly and easily to the Correcti∣ons God inflicts, without re∣coiling in angry Passions, or re∣flecting in discontented Murmurs, or returning any sort of Re∣venges against God, or the In∣struments he useth in correct∣ing us. Meekness and Humility are those passive Graces, which
render our Spirits soft and gen∣tle, yielding and impressive, and thereby susceptive of Correcti∣ons; but the stroak that falls on a hard Heart, rebounds in the Face of him that strikes, and a proud Heart will rise up a∣gainst the weight of Affliction, like a Spring against the Hand that depresseth it. The Man whose passions are not broken and tam'd by Disci∣pline, must be nail'd to the Cross which he is to suffer, but he will never submit to take it up and bear it; he will kick and roar under his Corrections, and of∣ten accuse and blaspheme the Au∣thor of his Troubles. The murmuring Israelites hen di∣stress'd in the the Wilderness
spake against God,Psal. 78.19 saith the Psalmist. Such the Prophet describes, Isa. 3.21. who when hungry would fret themselves, and curse their King and their God. Of such we read in the Apocaylipse, Rev. 16.9, 11. who would blaspheme the God of Heaven, that had Power over their Plagues, because of their pains and sores. But the Servants of God who had other Spirits, could receive their evil Things after another Manner. When old Eli heard the heaviest Doom from God, he meekly entertain d it, saying, It is the Lord,1 Sam. 3.18. let him do what seemeth him good. When David was flying before his rebellious Son, whom God, according to his Denuntiation, had rais'd up
against him, he humbly submit∣ted, saying, Behold, here I am,2 Sam. 15.26. let him do to me as seemeth good un∣to him. The evil Things which our blessed Saviour receiv'd, and the Meekness and Humility wherewith he receiv'd them, transcend all other Patterns. He endur'd the contradiction of Sin∣ners, the most and worst that e∣ver was, with such Meekness, that when he was reviled,1 Pet. 2.23 he revi∣led not again; when he Suffered, he threatned not, but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously. When he was to receive from his Fathers hand that cup of Fury, at the apprehension of which the human nature stagger'd; thô he deprecated it, if possible, to be avoided; yet, if not, he humbly
submitted to it, Mat. 26.39. saying, Never∣theless, not as I will, but as thou wilt. With a like meekness and lowliness of Spirit should we be always dispos'd, to receive easi∣ly, to resent mildly, to suffer quietly any stroaks of Correction from the Hand of God. We should consider the Greatness and Authority of him that strikes, with whom we may not, we can∣not contend; and we should re∣flect impartially upon our own Guilt, which hath made us just∣ly obnoxious to greater Evils than this World can produce. We should thus reason which our selves; Will it become us to be provok'd by a Punishment, who have much more provok'd
God by our Sin? Shall we think much of the smart of his Rod, who have so often griev'd his holy Spirit? Dare we in one Thought or Passion to oppose that Almighty Justice, which we can∣not conquer, but may farther irritate by our rebellious Opposi∣tion? When therefore we receive any Cross or Loss, or any other sort of Affliction from the Hand of God, we should immedi∣ately look within, give a charge to our Hearts, set a guard on our Passions, and a watch before the door of our Mouth, that we fall into no Disorders or In∣decencies; either, with David, we should be dumb,Psal. 39.9. and not open our Mouths, because it is God's doing:
or, with Job, take care that we do not sin with our Lips by charg∣ing God foolishly. And let me add, That we should take care to suppress all proud or angry Passions against the Instruments that God useth in correcting us, because they will ultimately strike at God him∣self. When we curse our Stars, or fret against the cross Events that befall us, we reflect upon that Providence by which all things are manag'd; If we ma∣lign and pursue the Enemy that hath done us a Mischief, we wound God thrô his Side, who thought fit to order and permit that we should be Corrected by such an Instrument; However therefore the Affliction comes,
let us humbly and meekly submit, without contending or quarrelling with God or Man, or with the World about us. So David when most malici∣lously and reproachfully Curs'd by Shimei, govern'd his Spirit, saying, So let him curse,2 Sam. 16.10, 11. because the Lord bath said unto him, Curse David; let him alone, let him curse, for the Lord hath bidden him; it may he that the Lord will look upon mine Affliction, and requite me Good for his Cursing me this Day. With such meekness could this humble King receive so great a Provocation, from one of his Subjects, out of reverence to Al∣mighty God who was the supreme Author of his Sufferings.
Secondly, We should receive our evil Things from the Hand of God with a proportionable Pa∣tience and long-Suffering, i. e. with such a passive fortitude or firmness of Spirit, as will not sink under the Burden, or faint under the Anguish, or grow weary under the continuance of our Sufferings. As soon as the Affliction seizeth us, we should immedi∣ately apply our Care to put our selves into a posture of Bearing it; we should recollect our Spirits, and summon up all our spiritual Forces; we should for∣tify our Minds with the strong∣est Arguments, and fix our Hearts with the firmest Resoluti∣ons, and so buckle to the Burden
we are to bear, and put out our strength in assoiling the Difficulties which encounter us. We should watch over our Spirits with a prudent Jealousy; and with a generous Indignation suppress any base Thoughts or mutinous Passions, that may en∣feeble and dishearten us, or tempt us to seek a Redress by any un∣lawful Means. And we must beware of li∣miting our Spirits with any fond Conceits, that we can bear but so much, or so long; and think of providing no less Patience than what may be equal to the Evils we are to bear. If God call us to bear a heavy Cross, we must receive it with a proportiona∣ble strength of Patience; if he
visit us with a long Sickness, we must endure it with a no less long-Suffering? if he try us with the loss of a dear Child or Friend that is never to be retrieved, we must provide a Patience that will be as endless and perpetual. We should consider, that God sends us such Evils, not only to punish us, but also to exercise and try us; which there∣fore we should receive as be∣comes good Souldiers and Ser∣vants, approving our ability and readiness to sustain them for his Honour, and our own Commen∣dation. We should encourage and con∣firm our Patience, by placing before our Eyes the brave Ex∣amples of our Fellow-Servants,
who have approv'd their Forti∣tude in as great Trials as those with which we are exercis'd; and by calling to mind those Divine Promises, which assure us infallibly of a sufficient Assi∣stance here, and a golrious Crown in Heaven. We should with our evil Things, receive also those Ad∣monitions and Exhortations, those Directions and Encouragements which God hath given us in his Holy Word, to enable us to bear them, viz.Luke 21.19. Jam. 1.4. That in Pati∣ence we possess our Souls; that Pa∣tience should have its perfect work, That, Prov. 3.11. we despise not the chastning of the Lord, neither be weary of his Correction;Prov. 24.10. that if we faint in the day of our Adversity, our Strength is
small: For as it is a sign of a weak Body, to be disorder'd by every ill Accident; so it is no less of a weak Mind, to droop or fret under the Afflictions which be∣fal us. This History presents us with great Instances both of Prowess in Job, and of Weakness in his Wife; for he bore up with a strength and length of Patience, that the Devil could not over∣come, with all the Loads of Mi∣sery he heap'd upon him; but she, thô she suffer'd less, yet being of a weaker and shorter Spirit, was soon overcome; and to that degree of Impatience, that she advis'd her Husband to seek Ease, thô in Death it self; and by cursing God, to provoke
him to put an end to a miserable, Life. Thirdly, We should, receive any evil Things from the Hand of God with a cheerful and well-pleased Mind; so as to approve of God's dealing with us, to justifie and bless him while he is correcting us; to consent to, and accept kindly his fatherly Chastise∣ments; and to keep up a hopeful confidence in his Mercy, amidst our greatest Distresses. The former requisites were chiefly Negative, which only restrain'd us from resisting or fainting under God's correcting Hand; but this is positive, and imports somewhat higher and greater, even a voluntary and cheerful Concurrence with God in
the Corrections he infflicts. We should like dutiful Chil∣dren reverence the Crowns of our Father's Displeasure, ac∣knowledg his just Authority and our own Demerit; and render Thanks to him for his Paternal Care and Discipline over us, who in very faithfulness afflicts us. We should not only, not reject and nauseate the evil Things which God despenseth, but receive them kindly and thankfully as the most useful Physick prescrib'd by the wisest and best Physician. We should be so far from flying out, or snarling against the Instruments of our Correction, as even to Kiss the Rod, to bless them that Curse us, and to Pray for them that Despitefully use us.
Our evil Things should not be forc'd upon us, but receiv'd by us with a willing Hand; we should not only endure the Temptation, but overcome it; not only bear it patiently, but cheerfully rejoyce under it. Thus St Paul prays for the Colossians that they might be strengthned with all might according to the glorious Power of God, unto all Patience,Col. 1.11. and long-Suffering, and that even with Joyfulness. And in such a manner have God's Servants been able to re∣ceive the worst Dispensations from him; Heb. 10.34. 2 Cor. 6.10. they took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, they were as grieved, yet always rejoycing. Thus particularly did David receive the many evil Things with
which he was Exercis'd, still Acknowledging that God was Righteous in all his ways, that all his Paths are Mercy and Truth to them that fear God; that in very faithfulness God afflicted him; and that it was Good for him that he was Afflicted. Thus also did Job worship the God who permitted him to be so severely treated, and justified, and bless'd the Author or his Sufferings, saying, The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken a∣way, blessed be the Name of the Lord. And however strange and difficult this Rule may seem, yet it is not more than the wiser Heathens had learn'd. There is nothing that befalls me,
saith Seneca,Senec. Ep. 96.75. that I would receive with a sad look or a lawring Coun∣tenance: every Thing should please Men that pleaseth God. I always, saith. Epictetus, will that which comes to pass;Epictet. l. 4.6. Ta for I account that better which God willeth, than what I will for my self; I adhere to him as his Servant and Disciple, I pursue, I desire, I entirety will with him, And the Royal Philosopher de∣scribes a good Man to be one that will with all his Heart embrace any Events that Providence dis∣penseth to him.Antonin. l. 3. sect. 4. The Christian hath much more reason to receive kindly and cheerfully any Events, which he believes are dispens'd to him by the wisest and kindest care of his Heavenly Father: He is assu∣red
from the Word of God, that an Almighty Spirit shall help his Infirmities; and the Di∣vine Blessing shall make all things work together for good to him.Rom. 8.26.28. He is told, Job 5.17. that the Man is happy whom God correcteth,Prov. 3.12. and that whom the Lord loveth he chastneth, even as a Father the Son in whom he delighteth.Jam. 1.12. That the Man is bles∣sed that endureth Temptation: for when he is tryed, he shall receive the Crown of Life. How well may this satisfy and please the Christian, that he is happy in God's account, when he seems most wretched in the Eye of the World? How cheer∣fully may he receive those evil Things, which are the Pledges and Tokens of God's Fatherly
Care and Favour towards him; which he knows are sent not to hurt, but cure him, to promote his Spiritual Life here, and his Eternal Life hereafter. Let us therefore aspire to this excellent frame of Spirit, that we may be able to accept our evil Things as well as good, with a grateful Satisfaction. That we may be able to welcome Poverty, Sickness, or Death it self, as coming from so good a Hand, and tending to so good an End. Secondly, Having now at∣tained to a competent under∣standing of those things, which the Argument imports; let us proceed to consider its Force and Weight, that we may be
convinc'd and persuaded by it. It was wisely design'd by Job, to recommend to us those evil Things to which we are natu∣rally averse, by those good Things which attract us with Delight; that our receiving of the latter, may more easily in∣duce us to accept the former. The Consequence of one to the other may be sufficiently evinc'd and confirm'd by several Rea∣sons: of which I shall mention these Four: 1. That Supreme Authority of God over us, which is plainly manifested by the good Things we receive from him, should oblige us to receive dutifully a∣ny evil Things, which he thinks fit to dispense to us.
What other account can we give of the care of God's conti∣nual Providence over us, but that He is the Parent of those Beings he so indulgently cherisheth, and the Master of that Family, for the Members of which he so bountifully provides; and that con∣sequently we are his Children and Servants, by whom we were made and are maintained?Psal. 100.3 Know ye, saith the Psalmist, that the Lord he is God, because he made us, and not we our selves; and we are his People, because the Sheep of his Pasture. This Relation we stand in to God gives him a supreme and absolute Authority over us, where∣by we are oblig'd to receive whatever he dispenseth to us,
and to submit our selves not only to be fed and maintain'd, but also to be disciplin'd and em∣ploy'd by him. As therefore the Blessings we enjoy, are Proofs of God's Au∣thority, and Badges of our De∣pendance on him; so they should be forcible Arguments, for submitting us readily to his Dis∣cipline and Disposal. We expect no less from our own Children and Servants, than that they acknowledg our Au∣thority, as well in correcting as maintaining them; and indeed we seem to collude with God, or over-reach him, when we share in his Blessings as part of his Fa∣mily, and yet deny his Authority, when he thinks fit to correct us;
for in Equity, if God hath no right to send us evil Things, we have no right to his good Things; and if we receive these, we oblige our selves thereby to accept the other also. With this Argument from Authority, the Servants of God have usually contain'd and qui∣eted their Minds, under the sharpest Afflictions.1 Sam. 3.18. It is the Lord, saith old Eli, let him do what seemeth him good.Psal. 39.9. I was dumb, saith David, and opened not my Mouth, because thou didst it. Job blessed the Name of that Lord, who had not more right to give than to take away; and contented himself with this Consideration, which the Septuagint have added to the
Text, Job 1.21. , as it seemed good to the Lord, so it came to pass. 2. If we receive all our good Things from God, we are ob∣lig'd in Gratitude to him, to re∣ceive any evil Things he may require us to suffer for his sake. If our Gratitude bear any pro∣portion to the Bounty of God, we shall be as ready to receive any evil Things from him, as he is to bestow good Things upon us; and be very willing to ac∣complish his Will, and glorify his Name by our Suffering, who at first made and doth still main∣tain us for his Honour and Ser∣vice. He is a very ill-natur'd Ser∣vant, who can endure no Ha∣zards
or Hardships for a good Ma∣ster; he is not worthy the name of a Souldier, who will only receive his Pay, but declines all the Difficulties and Dangers of his Warfare. We should think him a very disingenuous Friend, who, after many considerable Kindnesses done for him, refuseth to bear with us in any thing that is cross to his Humour, or to undergo any trouble in doing for us some ne∣cessary office of Friendship. How then can we deal so perversly and frowardly with God, as to receive daily so many good Things from him, and yet to murmur against him and his Providence, upon every cross E∣vent he dispenseth to us!
And our Ingratitude herein is so much the worse, as the good Things he bestows on us, are always more and greater than the evil Things he inflicts; for there is no Man wants so many Blessings are he enjoys, or can in this World meet with a Cross that is not out-weigh'd by some other Blessing he possesseth; at best Life is more considerable than any Temporal Blessing we want, or any Calamity we suf∣fer, for otherwise it could not be supported. Why then should a living Man complain?Lam. 3.39. saith the Prophet. How basely ingrate∣ful are we, if we cannot suffer a little from him, from whom we have receiv'd so much?
3. If we receive good Things from God which we no way Deserve, it is very reasonable that we should receive evil Things which are justly Due to us. The blessings we enjoy are the free-gift of God which we can never merit or exact from him; but the Punishments we meet with, are the Fruit of our own Doings, or the just wages of our Sin. How absur'd then must it be for us to expect on∣ly good Things of which we are most unworthy; and to refuse or quarrel at those evil Things, which we have justly deserv'd and procur'd to our Selves. Shall a Profligat Criminal who hath forfeited his Life, expect
only the Caresses of his Prince's Favour, and think much of in∣during the confinement and hard∣ships of a Prison? If God denied us all his Blessings; and allotted only evil Things to our share, we could not charge him with any Injustice, or have any just exception against his Providence; but when our merciful God dispenseth to us a mixture of both, it would be a most un∣reasonable piece of Fondness, to accept only the good Things which he frankly gives, and to refuse the Punishments which he justly inflicts; or to quarrel at him for not giving us those good Things which he owes us not, or for sending us those evil Things which are of right
due to us. Thus the Prophet Jeremiah expostulates in his La∣mentation; Why doth a living Man complain,Lam. 3.39. a Man for the Pu∣nishment of his Sin? He hath more than his due by being a living Man, and not more in bearing the Punishment of his Sin. 4. If our evil Things come out of the same kind Hand which dispenseth our good Things, we have reason to think well of them, and to re∣ceive them with a contented cheer∣ful Mind. That our God is very kind and merciful, appears from the many good Things we daily re∣ceive from him; and if he al∣so afflicts us, yet we may re∣joyce in this, that we are in good
Hands; that we are under the Discipline of one that doth not afflict willingly, or take pleasure in grieving the children of Men; that he will not correct us immo∣derately but in Judgment; that his merciful Hand will support us, while the Hand of his Justice chastiseth us; and that he sends us evil Things, only to make us more capable of receiving the good Things he hath prepared for us. If then all the Blessings we have receiv'd, can be but enough to assure us of the Good∣ness and Faithfulness of God, we shall never murmur or despond, but rather hope and rejoyce in his Mercy, under the worst Dis∣pensations.
What is good should never be unwelcome to us, and nothing but what is good can come from our good God; for thô we distinguish and call things Good or Evil, yet they are all good as they come from him, and may be improv'd by us. God who is not led by Passion, saith, St. Chrysostome, ,Chrysost. . Tunc maxime est opti∣mus cum tibi non bonus. Tirtul in Marc. 2.2. whether he bless or correct, he is equally Good; Yea he is then best, saith Turtullian, when we think him best. Good. Whatever there∣fore is dispens'd to us by the Hand of God, we ought to ap∣prove and embrace as Good; as Hezekiah did that heavy Doom brought by the Prophet, say∣ing, Good is the Word of the Lord which thou hast spoken.2 Kings 20.19.
Thirdly, I come in the last place to make some useful Ap∣plication of the precedent Dis∣course, which may serve to ex∣hort us to yield to this reasonable Argument of the Text; by resign∣ing and submitting our selves en∣tirely to the conduct of Divine Providence, for whatever good or evil Things shall fall to our Lot. That we may more easily learn this general Duty, we may conveniently divide it into these two particular Lessons. 1. That by an entire resig∣nation of our selves to God's disposal, we allow him to choose and order for us the Good or E∣vil which shall befal us; he being the Lord who hath the right of disposing both.
2. That we contentedly and cheerfully acquiesce in his choice; when he hath made, and de∣clar'd it to us in the course of his Providence, receiving either Good or Evil from his Hand, as he hath thought most fit for us. 1. Let us be exhorted to resign up our selves entirely to God's disposal, to choose and allot for us whatever good or e∣vil Things, he shall think fit∣test for us. Almighty God hath an un∣questionable right to dispose of us, and he will certainly make use of it whether we allow it or not; but it will best become us, and be most pleasing to God, that we should by our own Act deliberately and voluntarily resign
up our selves to his Conduct, and constute him the disposer of us, and of all our Concernments, whereby we may make a great vertue of Necessity, discharge a necessary Duty, and give much Honour to God. This self-Resignation imports many pious Acts of the Mind, our Acknowledgment and ap∣probation of God's right and Au∣thority, of his Wisdom and Faith∣fulness in disposing of us; our choice of him for our Guide; our consent to his Conduct; yea our Hearty desire and humble Prayer to him, that he would condes∣cend to manage and order our Condition for us; and it will by consequence restrain us from intermedling in that Affair we
have entirely committed to his Ma∣nagement, by any anxious Cares, or eager Desires, or vain Curiosi∣ty of our own about it; so that we shall imploy our care only in doing what God hath made our Duty, leaving it wholly to the great Master of that Family to which we belong, to pro∣vide for us and dispose of us, as he shall think fit. This we are taught in those Scriptures which require us to commit our selves,Psal. 31.5. and our ways unto the Lord;Psal. 37.5. Psal. 55.22. 1 Pet. 5.7. Psal. 37.3, 5, 7. Philip. 4.6. to cast our Burdens and our Cares upon him, to trust in him, to rest on him; to be care∣ful for nothing, but in all things by Prayer and Supplication with Thanksgivings to make our requests known to God.
Thus David when he fled out of Jerusalem, resign'd up himself most submisively to God's disposal, saying to Za∣dok, Carry back the Ark of God in∣to the City:2 Sam. 15, 25, 26. if I shall find favour in the Eye, of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it and his Habitation; but if he thus say, I have no delight in thee, behold, here am I, let him do to me as seemeth Good to him. And our Blessed Saviour, in a more extraordi∣nary Case, suppress'd his own desires, and submitted himself entirely to his Fathers disposal, saying, Mat. 26.39. Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt. Yea, we find this Duty excel∣lently taught by a Heathen who thus adviseth; Dare to look
up to God and bespeak him after this Manner:Epicter. l. 2. c. 16. Use me for the future as thou pleasest, for I am of the same Mind with thee, I refuse no∣thing that seems Good to thee; cloath me as thou wilt, appoint me what Station thou thinkest fit, whether Publick or Private; to abide at home, or go into Bannishment; to be Poor or Rich, I will not only comply my self, but will justifie thy Providence by Apologies to the World. Into such a submissive Frame, should we bring our Spirits, that we may leave off to carve and choose for our selves, and be well content to be at God's allowance and disposal, and al∣ways ready to receive from his Hand whatever good Things he thinks to be Food conventient
for us, or whatever evil Things he thinks to be needful Physick for us. 2. Let us be exhorted also to acquiesce contentedly and cheer∣fully in whatever Choice God makes for us, when he declares it to us in the course of his Pro∣vidence, whether it be of good or evil Things, or of whatever kind or degree they are. We should shamefully af∣front God and contradict our selves, if after we have so∣lemnly chosen, and consented to his Conduct, and by our Prayers besought him to take the care and charge of us, we should al∣low our selves to censure his Providence, to dislike his Manage∣ment, and refuse our Lot; where∣by
we reflect on God's Wisdom or Goodness, or Power or Faith∣fulness, as if he could not, or would not do so well for us as we expected; or else discover our selves to be very weak and vain, froward and inconstant, like Chil∣dren, never long of a Mind, difficult to be pleas'd, whom God himself is not able to sa∣tisfy. We justly condemn the per∣verse Spirit of the Israelites, who after they had put themselves under God's Conduct, and pro∣mis'd to be very obsequious to it in their passage from Egypt to Canaan, yet murmur'd against him upon the slightest Occasions; dislik'd his Provision, thô he cater'd for them by Miracles, and
chose rather to return back to their House of Bondage, than to continue under the care and safe-guard of his Providence. And St. Jude,Jude 16. reproves such in his Time who were , Murmurers, who com∣plain'd of the Lot which Provi∣dence had drawn for them. We should be very cautious of dealing humourously or fro∣wardly with the great God of Heaven, that we do not tempt or limit him, provoke and grieve him, as he sometimes com∣plain'd of the People of Israel, lest he should cast us out of his Presence, and refuse to take any farther care of us; for how helpless and forlorn, how wretch∣ed and miserable must we needs
be, if God should abandon us to our own Impotence and Folly. When therefore our wise and good God declares to us in the course of his Providence, that he hath appointed such a state or con∣dition of Life for us in general, or hath allotted such good or evil Events to befal us in particular; we should forthwith, without disputing or contending, accommo∣date and conform our Will to his, accept thankfully the Blessings he sends, or bear patiently the Corre∣ctions he inflicts, being satisfied with this, that it is God's ap∣pointment, who hath right to dis∣pose of us, and who knows bet∣ter than we, what things are fit for us; that we have often in our Prayers resign'd up our selves
to his disposal; and that it is a high Priviledg that he will vouchsafe to take care of us; that his Promise is a sufficient Se∣curity, on which we may rely, even when we cannot compre∣hend the design or reason of his dealing with us. In such a manner did pious David conform himself to the Will of God, when declar'd to him in the course of his Provi∣dence. When his Child was sick he besought the Lord for it, and fasted, and lay all night upon the Earth; but when the Child was dead, he arose, washed, anointed, changed his Apparel, and came into the house of the Lord and worshiped. And he gives this accountn of his Behaviour, 2 Sam. 12.22.23. While the Child was yet
alive, I fasted and wept: for I said, Who can tell whether God will be gracious unto me, that the Child may live? But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. While the Child was sick he recommended him to God by Prayer, and when God had dispos'd of him as he thought fit, David acquiesc'd. Abraham the Father of the Faithful, was no less obsequious to the Will of God, who without disputing the divine Command, left his Native Country, and follow'd Providence, thô he knew not whither; and offer'd up his only Son a Sacrifice to God, as soon as he was demanded, without any discontented Murmurs.
And our Blessed Saviour when disswaded by St. Peter from submitting to the Suffer∣ings which God had appointed for him, he rejected the fond advice with Indignation, saying, Get thee behind me Satan,Mat. 16.23. thou art an offence to me, for thou savour∣est not the things of God, but those that be of Men. And when the same Apostle would have rescued him by violence from those Sufferings, our Lord for∣bad him, saying, The cup which my Father hath given me,John 18.11. shall I not drink it? To all which I cannot but add those excellent Sayings of an honest Heathen. In all Af∣fairs this should be our wish,Epictet. c. 77, 78, 79. Lead me O God, according to thy Decree, whi∣ther
thou wilt, and I will follow cheerfully; and yet if I should be so wicked as to refuse to follow, yet fol∣low I must of necessity. He that can accommodate himself to the necessity of Events is a wise Man, and under∣stands the things of God. If then God will have it so, so be it. Such then is the Duty we are exhorted to that we would choose no more than this only, that God would choose all things for us; and that we approve and accept of whatever choice he makes for us. To inforce this Exhortation, I will subjoin a few Considerati∣ons, which may incline our Hearts to such a submissive com∣pliance, with the conduct of Di∣vine Providence. 1. It is our necessary Duty to do
so, and the contrary practice will involve us in a great deal of Guilt. We may beconvinced of this, not only from those express Precepts which frequently occur in the Holy Scriptures, but also from a self-evident Law inscrib'd upon our Natures. For inasmuch as we are Creatures, we are by Nature dependant both on the will & power of God from whom we receiv'd our Beings; and are consequently oblig'd to render him both active and passive Obe∣dience, and do become as guilty in rebelling against his will, by not suffering what he inflicts, as by not doing what he commands. If we attempt to dispose of our selves, or of the Circumstances of
our Condition, we usurp upon God's Prerogative, we invade the Scepter of his Government, and become guilty of High-Treason against the Majesty of Heaven. For we thereby confront his Will with ours, we take upon us to dispose of his Creatures, to dis∣pense his Blessings, to withstand his Corrections; which is in short to depose him from the Govern∣ment, and to assume it to our selves. 2. It is our great Priviledg that we need not do more, than quietly commend and commit our selves to the care of Divine Pro∣vidence. It would indeed be very ill for us, if God should leave us, like Orphans, to our own care and
disposal, and should make our carking Sollicitudes, and toilsome Labours as necessary as we think them to be; How madly should we order our selves? How mi∣serable should we soon make our selves? We understand not our own Wants or Ca∣pacities, or the fitness and useful∣ness of the things about us; we should be ready to choose any Evil that appears speciously, or to reject any Good that is not atten∣ded with fair and easy Circum∣stances; so foolish and humour some are the wisest Men, that if God left Events to their manage∣ment, they would but disturb and destroy themselves, and the World about them. Is it not therefore much bet∣ter
that we may sit still, and not disquiet or mischief our selves with our unwise Cares, and rash Projects; and that the infinitely Good, the only Wise, and Al∣mighty God, who is the Master of the great Family in which we live, our Father, and Guardian, will vouchsafe to take care of us, and order all things about us for our good? Why will we toil and cark for our selves, when we need not? What can we desire better than to be under the conduct of infinite Wisdom, and at the disposal of infinite Good∣ness? 3. It is in vain for us to at∣tempt to do more, for after all our projecting, wishing and striv∣ing, thô with never so great Ear∣nestness,
it is not in our Power to attain the good Things which God denies, or to refuse the evil Things which God appoints. God hath fitted our Nature with faculties for doing so much as he intended to make our Du∣ty, and therein we should assi∣duously imploy our selves; but as he never design'd to trouble us with governing the World, so he hath capacitated us with no Powers for so vast an Undertak∣ing, but hath reserv'd it to him∣self, who hath most Right, and is best able to perform it. We may as well make an attempt at God's work of Crea∣tion, as of Providence, for both greatly transcend our Skill and Power; or try if we can alter
the frame of our Natures, as well as change the circumstances of our Condition; but, as our Saviour says, we cannot make one Hair White or Black,Mat. 5.36. so neither can we of our selves make our Condition better or worse than God hath appointed. If our Experience hath not long since convinc'd us of this, let us make an Experiment of our Power, in changing the Wea∣ther, in preventing Sickness and Death; and if we cannot com∣mand these ordinary Events, why should we think of ordering o∣thers! or rather why should we not leave off the folly of at∣tempting what is impossible for us to perform. 4. There is great Peace,
Pleasure, and Satisfaction in the performance of this Duty. He that hath heartily resign'd up himself to God's conduct and disposal, is become a happy Man, and leads the most easy, safe and delightful course of Life; for he hath unloaded his Mind of all his burdensome Cares, and dis∣maying Fears; he takes no thought what he shall eat, or drink, or where∣withal he shall be cloathed, much less doth he distract himself with future Wants or distant Dangers, because his heavenly Father takes Care of him: He can wake, or sleep securely, and at∣tend on his Duties without dis∣traction; he can injoy his Bles∣sings with the greatest Cheerful∣ness, and bear his Afflictons with
the greatest Ease, and be at all times well pleas'd, and fully satisfied, because the wisest and best of Beings hath undertaken to manage and order all Things for him. And he that can contentedly acquiesce in the Dispensations of Providence, is free from the un∣easy passions of Grief and Shame; he is never disappointed, never discontented; he never envies the good Things which are dis∣pens'd to another, or frets at the evil Things which are allotted to him: He never murmurs at God, or quarrels with Men, or disquiets himself however the World moves about him; for all things come to pass as he would have them, because he
would have them come to pass as God appoints them. How very sweet and pleasant must such a state of Life needs be, wherein is fulfill'd that saying of the Prophet, Thou wilt keep him in perfect Peace whose Mind is stay'd on thee,Isa. 26.3. because he trusteth in thee? 5. Great Benefit and Advan∣tage will accrue to us by a sincere and constant discharge of this Du∣ty. By resigning up our selves to God's conduct, we effectually ingage the care and favour of his Providence over us; for it will not consist with his Honour or his Promise to suffer any who re∣pose their trust in him to be ashamed.
And how great an advantage must it needs be, to have the Wisdom of God to contrive for us, his Goodness to supply us, and his Power to protect us? Is it not a much greater priviledg than if we were receiv'd under the Patronage of the greatest, wisest or best Man in the World? for what can we want, if fed from the Hand of divine Bounty? what Evil can hurt us, if shelter'd under the Almighty wings? By submitting to God's Conduct we shall escape many Sins and Dangers, which they usually fall into who would be at their own disposal; Yea hereby our evil Things will be turn'd into Good, for we shall receive a Blessing with them, which
will sanctify and sweeten them to us. And if we continue always to implore and rely on God's Con∣duct; he will never leave or forsake us, till he hath brought us past all our Fears and Dan∣gers, up to that Heaven where we shall receive good Things only, and shall be able to thank, and praise God for those evil Things wherewith he disci∣plin'd us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his Holiness here, Heb. 12.10. and of his Glory here∣after. This Argument may be far∣ther improv'd by considering more particularly some of the chief Advantages, which will accrue to us by submitting our
selves to the conduct and disposal of God's Providence. 1. In following this Divine Conduct, we shall always walk in ways that are right and law∣ful, and thereby escape those sinful Courses, which defile our Souls; wound our Consciences, and inthral us in manifold Mise∣ries; when we walk in the Light of our own Eyes, and after the Lusts of our own Hearts, we run our selves into many dangerous Errors. So the Apostle ob∣serves . They that will be rich [and follow their own will therein] fall into Temptation, and a snare, and in∣to many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction and Perdition. For the Love of Money
is the root of all Evil; which while some coveted after, they have erred from the Faith, and pierced them∣selves through with many sorrows. But if we follow this Heaven∣ly Guide, he will never mislead us into any crooked ways, not betray us into any Temptations, which may prove too strong for us. This David mentions as a considerable Advantage of having God for his Shepherd o∣ver him. He restoreth my Soul, he leadeth me in the paths of Righ∣teousness for his Namesake.Psal. 23.3. And elsewhere the Psalmist observes it to be the Priviledge of him that relies on God's Conduct, that, The Law of God is in his Heart,Psal. 73.31. none of his steps shall slide. We find also the Royal Preacher
largely insisting on this Argu∣ment! The Lord giveth Wisdom;Prov. 2.6, &c. and out of his Mouth cometh Know∣ledg and Understanding. He layeth up sound Wisdom for the Righteous; he is a Buckler to them that walk uprightly. He keepeth the paths of Judgment, and preserveth the way of his Saints. Then shalt thou under∣stand Righteousness and Judgment, and Equity; yea, every good path. Discretion shall preserve thee, Un∣derstanding shall keep thee: To de∣liver thee from the way of the evil Man, from the Man that speaketh froward Things, who leave the paths of Uprightness, to walk in the ways of Darkness. And in the next Chapter he exprefly asserts this to be the Priviledge of those who acknowledg God for their
Guide, and follow his Conduct. Trust in the Lord with all thine Heart,Prov. 3.5, 6. and lean not unto thine own Understanding. In all thy ways acknowledg him, and he shall di∣rect thy paths. He cannot but be in the right way who hath God to direct him; and no wise or good Man, but will highly value so great a Priviledg. 2. If we follow the Conduct of God's Providence, our way will be smoth and plain, not incumber'd with such perplexities, or obstructed with such impediments as they meet with who are led by the ignis fa∣tuus of their own uncertain Under∣standings. We sometimes complain of Dif∣ficulties in our Affairs which our skill cannot extricate, we cark in our thoughts, are dubious and fluctuating in our Resolutions, and after many fruitless Attempts and
toilsome Indeavours, are forc'd to let go the fond Project, and sit down in a hopeless despair: But if we were under the Conduct of Divine Wis∣dom; if we would stay till God o∣pen a way to us by the course of his Providence, and follow his conduct in using those means and opportuni∣ties he provides; we should find favourable Circumstances about us conspiring to facilitate our designs, the course of God's Providence would suggest to us prudent Thoughts, and the Events that hap∣pen to us would concur with our Indeavours; whereby our Affairs would proceed easily and steadily; and thô God may sometimes per∣mit some rubs or delays for our spi∣ritual exercise and improvement, yet he will not suffer us to be puz∣led with any inextricable Difficul∣ties, or to be defeated in any extra∣ordinary Disappointments; Thus some interpret that Apho∣risme of the Wise-Man, Commit thy
ways unto the Lord,Prov. 16.3. and thy thoughts shall be established; that by commit∣ting our Affairs to the Conduct of God's Providence; our thoughts shall be established in prudent and steady Resolutions; and be supported in an honest design against all Obstacles and Difficulties. 3. If we are under God's Conduct we shall be under his Safeguard too, and our way will be always safe and secure. He that hath no better Guide then himself, is like the Blind leading the Blind, which, according to the Jewish Proverb, falls into a ditch; and indeed most of the Mischiefs and Troubles we meet with proceed from our own ill con∣duct of our selves. But if God be our Guide, his Hand that leads us, will also support us, his Prisence that conducts us will also protect us; He will give his Angels charge over us to keep us in all our ways, into which his Providence leads us. Psal. 37.23, 24. The steps of a good Man are order'd by the Lord,
and none of his steps shall slide; Tho he fall he shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him with his Hand. Thus we read that Israel travel'd with safety in an uncouth Wilder∣ness amidst all their Enemies, while they obsequiously follow'd the sign of God's Presence conducting them; but when they would go on their own Heads against Amalek, they were easily vanquished. We like∣wise find that Abraham who re∣sign'd up himself to God's Conduct, met with no considerable Troubles in the whole ocurse of his Life; But Jacob who follow'd rather the Conduct of his subtile Mother, then the Guidance of God, in procuring his Blessing, procur'd thereby many Crosses and Troubles, which follow∣ed him all his days. 4. If God be our Guide, we shall not fail of Success; for he that can do whatever pleaseth him in Heaven and Earth, will prosper the work of our Hands; He will certainly lead
us to that Good which is most con∣venient for us, if not to that parti∣cular Good which we, by mistake, design'd. Delight thy self in the Lord,Psal. 37.4, 5. and he shall give thee the desire of thine Heart. Commit thy way un∣to the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass. As God con∣ducted the Children of Israel safe through the Wilderness, and at last brought them to the Land of Pro∣mise: So will he conduct those who Trust in him, amidst all the changes and chances of this mortal Life, and at last put them in possession of that Heavenly Canaan, toward which every good Man is tending in all the passages of his Life. He will guide them by his Counsel while they are on the way, and at last re∣ceive them to himself in Glory. FINIS. ERRATA. P. ▪ l. 20. f. then r. when. l. 21. dele the. P. 75. l. 7. r. glorious. P. 78. l. 3. for Crown. r. frowns. P. 90. l. 11. f. hist. r. lest. P. 95. l. 14. f. best .r. lest.
