M1677C 99829543 33983
A Memoriable Song on the unhappy hunting in Chevy Chase between Earle Piercy of England and Earle Dowglas of Scoland. To the tune of Flying Fame. GOd prosper long our Noble King, our lives and safetyes all, The wofull hunting once there did in Cheevy chase befall, To drive th Deer with hound and horne Earle Piercy took his way, The child may rue that is unborn the hunting of that day. The stout Earl of Northumberland a vow to God did make, His pleasure in the Scottish woods thrée summers dayes to take: The chiolest Harts in Chevy-chase to kill o bear away, These tidngs to Earl Dowglas came, in Scotand where he lay, Who sent Earle Prc present word, h would prevent his sport, The Enlgish Earl not fearing this, did to the woods resort With fiféen hundred Bowmen bold, all choen men of might Who knew full wel in time of néed to aim their shafts aright. The galant Gray-hounds swiftly ran to chase the Fallow Deere, On Munday they began to hunt. when day-light did appear, And long before high noon they had an hundred fat Bucks slain, Then having din'd the Drovers went to rowse them up again. The Bowmen mustred on the Hils well able to endure. The backsides all with special care that day were guarded sure: The hounds ran swiftly through the woods the nimble Deere to take, And with their cries the Hils and Dales an Eccho shrill did make. Lord Piercy to the Quarrey went To vew the tender Deere, Quoth he Earle Dowglas promised this day to meet me here: But if I thought he would not come, no longer would I stay, With that a brave young Gentleman thus to the Earle did say, Lo yonder doth Earl Dowglas come, his men in armour bright, Full twenty hundred Scottish spears all marching in our sight. All men of pleasant Tividale fast by the Rivers Tweed. Then cease your sport Earl Piercy said, and take your Bowes with speed. And now with me my Countreymen your courage forth advance, For never was there Champion yet in Scotland or in France, That ever did on horseback come, but if my hop it were durst encounter man for man with him to break a Spear. Earl Dowglas on a milk white Steed, most like a Baron bold, Rode foremost of the company, whose armour-shone like gold. Shew me he said whose men you be, that hunt so boldly here, That without my consent do chase and kill my fallow Deer? The man that first did answer make, was noble Piercy he, Who said, we list not to declare nor shew whose men we be. Yet wil we spend our dearest blood, thy chiefest Harts to slay Then Dowglas swore a solemn Oath, and thus in rage did say: Ere thus I wil out-braved be, one of us two shall dye, I know thee well an Earl thou art, Lord Piercy so am I: But trust me Piercy pitty it were, and great offence to kill Any of these our guiltlesse men, for they have done no ill: Let thou and I the battel try, and set our men aside, Accurst be he Lord Piercy said, by whom this is deny'd. Then stept a gallant Squire forth, Witherington was his name. Who said he would not have it told to Henry our King for shame, That ever my Captain fought on foot, and I stood looking on: You two be Earles said Witherington, and I a Squire alone: Ile do the best that do I may, while I have power to stand, While I have power to weild my sword, Ile fight with heart and hand. Our English Archers bent their Bows, their hearts were good and true, At the first flight of Arrows sent, full four score Scots the slue. To drive the Deer with hound and horn Dowglas had on the bent, A Captain mov'd with mickle pride, the Spears to shivers went. They clos'd full fast on every side, no slacknesse there was found, And many a gallant Gentleman lay gasping on the ground; O Christ it was great grief to see, and likewise for to heare, The cryes of men lying in their gore, and scattered here and there. At last these two stout Earles did meet, like Captains of great might, Like Lyons mov'd they laid on load and made a cruel fight: They fought until they both did sweat, with sworde of tempered steele, Vntil the blood like drops of rain. they trickling down did feele. Yeild thee Lord Piercy Dowgla said, in faith I will thee bring Were thou shalt high advanced be, by Iames the Scottish King. Thy Ransome wil I freely give, and thus report of thee, Thou art the most couragious Knight as ever I did see. No Dowglas quoth Earle Piercy then. thy proster I doe scorn, I will not yeild to any Scot that ever yet was born, With that there came an Arrow keen out of an English Bow, Which struck Earle Dowglas to the hear a deep and deadly blow. Who never spake more words then these Fight on my merry men all, For why my life is at an end, Lord Piercy lees my fall. Then leaving life Earle Piercy took the dead man by the hand, And said Earle Dowglas for thy life would I had lost my Land. O Christ my very heart doth bleed with sorrow for thy sake, For sure a more renowned Knight mischance did never take. A Knight amongst the Scots there was, which saw Earl Dowlas dye Who straight in wrath did vow revenge upon the Earle Piercy
SIr Hugh Mongomer was he cal'd, who with a Speare full bright, VVel mounted on a gallant Steed, ran fiercely through the fight, And past the Engish Archers all, without all dread or feare, And through Earle Piercies body then he thrust his hatefull-Speare. VVith such a vehement force and might he did his body gore, The Speare went through the other side, a lage cloth yard and more. So thus did both those Nobles dye, whose courae none could stain, An English Archer then perceiv'd the Noble Earle was slain▪ He had a Bow bent in his hand, made of a trusty tree, An Arrow of a cloth yard long unto the head drew he: Against Sir Hugh Montgomery, then, so right his shaft he set. The gray-gse wing that was thereon, in his heart blood was wet This fight did last from break of day, till setting of the Sun, For when they rang the Evening Bell, the Battel scarce was done. VVith the Earle Piercy there was slain Sir Iohn of Ogerton. Sir Robert Ratliffe and Sir Iohn, Sir Iames that bold Baron, And with Sir George and good sir Iames both Knights of good account, Good Sir Ralph Fbby there was slain, whose prowesse did surmount: For Witherington néeds must I wall, as one in dolefull dumps, For when his legges were smitten oft, he fought upon his stumps. And with Earle Dowglas there was slain Sir Hugh Montgomery, Sir Charles Murrel that from the Field one foot would never flye. Sir Charles Murrl of Ratliffe too, his sisters sisters Son was he, Sir David Lamb so well esteem'd yet saved could not be. And the Lord Markwel in likewise, did with Earle Dowglas die Of twenty hundred Scotish péers scarce fifty five did flye. Of fiftéen hundred English men went home but fifty thre The rest were slain in Chéevy Chase under the greenwood tree Next day did many widows come their husbands to bewail, They washt their wounds in brinish teare but all would not prevail: Their bodies bath'd in purple blood, they boe with them away, They kist them dead a thousand times when they were clad in clay. This news was brought to Edenburgh▪ where Scolands King did reign, That brave Earle Douglas suddenly was with an Arrow slain. O heavy Newes King Iomes did say, Scotland can witnesse be, I have not any Captain more of such account as he. Like tydings to King Henry came within as short a space That Piercy of Northumberland was slain in Chevy-chase. Now God be with him said our King, sith twill no better be, I trust I have within my Realm five hundred as good as he. Yet shall not Scots no Scotland say, but I will vengeance take, And be revenged on them all, for brave Earle Piercies sake: This vow full well the King perform'd, after on Humble Down, In one day fifty Knights were slain, with Lords of great renown. And of the rest of small account did many hundreds dye, Thus ended the hunting in Chevy Chase, made by the Earle Piercy. God save the King nnd blesse the Land▪ in Plenty, Ioy, and Peace, And grant henceforth that foule debate twixt Noble-men may cease. FINIS. Printed for F. Coles. T. Vere. and W. Oilbertson.
