m2041 99829461 33901
THE Countrymans Friend, AND No circumventing Mountebanck But a rare method of Chyrur∣gery and physick, teaching the coun∣try people excellent cures, the like was never laid open in any age before. Besides here are four arts, three of them concerning horses, and the fourth an art to keep a Field of corn from any manner of Fowles, that devour grain, this art is only by anointing a few Crow feathers, for nei∣ther Pidgeon, Sparrow, Rook nor Crow will en∣dure the Field where they stick. By ABRAHAM MILES, London printed for E. Andrews at the White Lyon neer Pye-corner, 1662.
The Epistle to the Reader. FRiends, whosoever you are that shall ob∣tain the rules of my practice, which are laid open to the view of people, and not hid and kept close as it is the use of some Physitians, and Chyrurgeons, because they love darknes rather then light, & many peo∣ple there are who are lost for want of help, that have not a great deal of mony to give for a smal cure; these corrupt wretches will in no wise help the sick nor the lame, no more then Dives did help Lazarus in the time of his necessity; if we would but regard, we have the holy Scripture to enlighten our hearts to charity, and to be pitiful-hearted one towards another, Mat. 24. but we are in cruelty one towards ano∣ther; Sure the Judgment day is drawing near at hand; is not this one of they most e∣vident signs? For as much saith he, as iniquity
shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold; when did iniquity ever so abound? when was the love of men ever so cold to∣wards the poor? how many now in so great a multitude do cloath the poor, naked creatures of God with canvas and rugg; they give shooes of silver and gold, and set with rich stones, to dumb Ma∣homets; but who now giveth shooes of lea∣ther to the poor? O too much unmercifulnes! can these things escape unplagued? re∣member well this saying is truth, He that is well needs not the Physitian, but he that is sick; But they may be sick and recover as they can, for any help they shal have, with∣out great store of mony to pay for the cure: But here is an easie way for thee to work by to help thy self in time of necessity of any desperate impediment, and at a very easie rate to help thee or thy friend, and thou mayst gain both love and profit; and the purer thou dost lead thy life, the more God will bless that which thou doth under¦take. And these are the diseases a follow¦eth in the next pages.
A Catalogue of the diseases cured in the Book following. TO prevent sickness. For convulsion fits. For falling-sickness. For corns in the feet. For old sores, For broken bellies. For a Timpany. For melancholy. For the stone in the kidneys. For the Stone-colick. For the Rickets. For the Thrush in the mouth. For a Cancer in the mouth. For a Quinzey, or sore throat. For difficultie of breath. For a Rhume-Meager. For hot watery rhumes in the eys. For sore eys.
For a green wound. For the running of the reins. For the Falling of the Fundament. For the bleeding at the Nose. For the Spleen. For a Plurisie. For the Worms. For the Warts. For the Joynt-evil. For the French Pox. For the Chin Cough. For the Dropsie. For the Wind-collick. For a Wolf in the breast. For the Itch. For to preserve a horse from any disease. To cure a horse of the red water. For to cure a horse of the Mourning of the Chine. For to scare fowls, that devour grain in the field.
The Country mans friend, and no circumventing Mounte-bancke. Here is a rare way to prevent any manner of sick∣ness whatsoever. TAke milk new from the Cow, about the quantity of a halfe pint porringer full; and if it be not warm enough of it self, set it a little while upon some warm embers, and then you must have the quantity of halfe a penny worth of Saffron, tyed up in a little holland rag, and that end of the rag as the Saffron lieth in, dip it into the milk, and squeez the end of the rag that it may drop into the milk, so dip the Saffron rag into it six or seven times, one after another; every time you squeez the rag, you must do it with your thumb and fore-finger, and when you have so done, lay your Saffron
rag aside, and put a spoonful of life hony into it, and stir it with a spoon, and when your ho∣ney is dissolved, let the party that is ill drink it up, and this take when they find themselves first amiss; it prevents almost any desease and drives away evil humours from the heart and is a rare desensiive, it prevents either Pox or Plague, or any other cruel diseases; taking this potion but three mornings and three evenings. Probatum est. A rare way to cure the convulsion Fits. YOu that are troubled with convulsion fits, observe this rule; that it is the best time at the new of the Moon, or after the full, to begin to take any thing against the convulsion fits, take your Elethergie of gold as much at a time as will lie on a groat; after you have made it into a powder, and put it into your broath, into any manner of broath, or milk, or posset-drink; always when you go to meals, or to your diet; And if the the party be curable, this cureth either man, woman, or child in a short time. Probarum est. A certain and sure way to cure the falling-sick. BEgin to take this, which I shall prescribe here for the Falling sickness, much about
the same time, as is above mentioned concern∣ing the convulsion fits; Let the party that is afflicted, have a pye, and three young Ravens baked in it, or a pye with three young Jeas baked in it; and let the party so afflicted, eat of it three times a day, a little quantity at a time: take a handful of Sage, red Sage, and a quart of white Wine; if you cannot have it, take a quart of fair spring water, and boyl the Sage in it very gently, until it be boyled half away; They take it off, and set it a cooling, and when it is cold, put it into a glass, and if you can have it, put to it two grains of the Countess of Kents powder, & that you may have at the Apothecaries; and when you go to use it, you must shake the glass a little, and drink the quantity of a quarter of a pint of it at a time, in an evening; this cured several of the Falling-sickness. Probatum est. A rare and easie way to cure corns in the feet. IN the first place soak your corns in warm water, that will soften them, that you may cut them with ease, spread a plaister of Flossunguentorum on a little thin bit of lambs leather, And so many corns as you have, make so many little plaisters to cover the places where the corns are; the plaisters will stick fast, and in one day it will soften them, that you
may cut them at your ease, then you must have a little unslact Lime, and the best crown soap mixt together; a little quantity of each will serve the turn; then lay a little of this on each corn that is ready cut, and open a Raisin of the Sun, to lay over each place; where you have laid your soap and Lime, then wrap a linnen cloath about your foot, and make it fast; and this art kils the corn to the very root, and makes a perfect cure. Probatum est. Here is a rare way to make a salve to cure old stink∣ing sores, Rotten and putrified, as old sore legs, loath som-like gouts, or old sores in other parts of the body. TAke the quantity of a wine pint of Sallet oyl, and Linseed oyle, and put them to∣gether, then take a peny worth of red head and a peny worth of white Lead, and a peny worth of soft sealing wax, and a peny worth of verdi∣grease, put these with the other oyles into a pot that is well leaded; stir it about a little before you set it to the fire, then you should have a spotellet; it is at one end like a spad; then your pot of salve being set to the fire, you must stir it constantly; it will change of several colours as it stands against the sire; but when you preceive black spots arise in your salve; then it begins to be enough,
stir constantly, and when it is black all over, and riseth all frothy, it is enough, then you must have a little bole or bason almost full of fair cold water, to set the bottome of your salve pot into; this is to cool the heat of the salve, by setting the pot into the water, and still you must keep it stirring, until it be cold; then it is ready for your use. You may spread this salve upon dry oaken leaves, or Primrose leaves, or fine holland rags, or fine writing pa∣per; and if the sore be very broad, or long, you may spread it on London brown paper, and apply it to the sore. There was of this salve sent to the Hospital, and it cured such sores that the Cyhrurgeons did admire at the vertue of it, & proffered many peices of gold for the receipt of it; But the authour of this book obtained the art in making this salve, by keep∣ing a gentleman company, that used much to frequent the gentlemans house where this salve was made; this hath cured sore legs that should have been cut off. Probatum est. Here is an excellent and rare way to cure broken∣bellied children, either male, or female. TAke half a handful of five-leaved grass, and the roots with it, and half a handful of comferry roots, and half a handful of polli∣podum, and half a handful of Sallowmans seal,
Pollipodum is fearn that groweth in an Oak tree; and halfe handful of knot grass, and half a handful of webroad planten leaves; boyl these in five quarts of the strongest wort, of the first shot, and let it boyl gently, until it be boyled halfe away, then take it off and set it a cooling, and when you see time put barm, yest, or quickening to it, call it what you will the thing is all one, and when it is ready to tun, as they do beer or ale, put it up into a pitcher or two Jug bottles, or what you have most convenient to keep it in, you must give it room to work, and afterwards keep it close from the air, it will be the stronger; If it be a young child, give it this diet drink, as often in the day time as the child will take it, three spoonful at a time, if the party be of riper years let them take it three times a day, after break∣fast, after dinner, and after supper, the quanti∣ty of a quarter of a pint at a time, then you must anoint the privy parts of the body twice a day with Oleum extrensi, and you must have a Chaffing dish of coals, stand neer to the bro∣ken place of the belly, that the heat of the coals may dry in the ointment, you must use but lit∣tle of your ointment at a time, and chafe it in with your hand very gently, do this twice a day, morning and evening, then fold up a double cloath, a linen cloath I mean, heat it hot and lay to the place defected; or if you will you
may bruise a little hemp-seed, and sew it up in a cloath like a little purse, heat it hot and lay it flat upon the place, tie it fast up with a swade and if you will lay the party to bed, let the middle part of the body lye some thing higher then the head, and when they sit up, let them sit very soft, and you must have some little soft thing made with feathers, or wool to lye under the belly, as they sit by the fire, or in any other place, you need not question this curing either old or young with Gods help for the Author of this booke hath cured them that have been broken, and broken fifteen years, and by thy art hath made a perfect cure. Probatum est. A rare way to cure a Timphany in the belly of Woman or Maid. TAke half a handful of Sentary, and boyl it in two quarts of strong Ale, until it be boyled to one quart, and drink halfe a quarter of a pint at a time, and follow this constantly, and in a short time this will do the cure. Pro∣batum est, To cure Melancholy. TAke a little quantity of Pollipodum or Fern of the Oak, and boyl it in a little new milk,
and make a Posset; skim off the curd, and sweeten the Posset-drink with a little hard Su∣gar, and drink this often; and you that are trou∣bled with Melancholy it will drive it clean a∣way, and make you as jovial as ever you were melancholy before, Probatum est. A very gallant way to cure the stone in the Kid∣nies. TAke a quart of spring water, and put into it a pound of the best life honey, and let it boyl until almost half of it be boyled away, keep this in a little earthen bottle or glass, and drink five spoonful fasting, and five after diner, and five after supper, and in a short time this will give you ease, and cure you of that impediment. Probatum est. Here is a rare way to cure the Stone-colick. FIrst you must take a pint of white Wine and have the back bone of a red herring beat to powder, and the weight of six pence in Holly∣berries, beat to a powder, and the kirnels of Ashen-keyes, beat to powder, and take as much of it as will lie on a groat, and put these powders into a pint of white Wine, and put into it an indifferent spoonful of the juice of Camomile, new prest from the hearb, and let
the party either man or woman drink this at two or three draughts; if they can, let them drink the whole pint at one draught; this hath cured those at three times taking, that hath spent ma∣ny a pound in seeking far and neer for help, yet never could be eased of this cruel impedi∣ment the Stone-colick, until they took this before mentioned, and this hath cured them in eight and fourty hours space, to the admi∣ration of many people. Probatum est. Here is an excellent, and rare way to cure the Rickets in little children. TAke halfe a handful of the middle peil of the bark of Sallowes, and half a handful of Tamerisk, and half a pound of Raisins of the sun three halfe peny worth of Liquorish, and a halfe peny worth of Aniseeds, and a quarter of a handful of Maiden hair; boyl these in four quarts of st ong Wourt until it be boyled to two quarts, then strain it out very clean, and set it a cooling, then barm it as you do beer, and when it is worked skim off the barm, then tun it up into a closs Vessel, a Pitcher of two quarts, or two Jugs, and at three day end it is for you use, give it the child, either boy or girl, morning and evening, the quantity of a quarter of a wine pint at a time, and give the child a little of this diet-drink often in the day time, after any maner of diet.
Another for the same. TAke three or four peny worth of Parma∣ceti, and half an ounce of the oyl of Cap∣has and two peny worth of Muskadine, put these into a Viol-glass, and when you go to a∣noint, the child shake that which is in the glass well together, and anoint the breast, the bow of the armes, the wrists, the Reins of the back, the hams, and the anckles, every morning and every night. This diet drink and ointment, hath cured poor lame and weak children, that could nei∣ther stand nor go; The Author of this book hath proved it in practice on a hundred seve∣ral children. Probatum est. Here is a rare way to cure either Thrush or Cancer, in the mouth of a child. TAke a quarter of a pint of fair spring wa∣ter, and put as much Roman-viteral as the quantity of a white pease, break it to powder in a little white paper, & put it into the water, and having a rag, or linen tide about a stick not so big, as a hand-cudgel, a little stick, I mean dip the little stick with the rag tide about it, into the water, and stir the water, and Romanvite∣ral together, and then rub then childs mouth,
but not so hard as a man would rub a horse heels; but rub the mouth of the child very gently and this will cure it. Probatum est. You may have this Romanviteral at the Apothecaries, four peny worth, or six pe∣ny-worth will serve the turn, and do the cure, this cure is performed, at halfe a dosen times dressing, the time is every morning and every night. A most sure way to cure a swelling in the throat, called the Quinzy. TAke halfe a handful of Mugwort, and heat it between two tilsors in a fire Showel and lay it as hot all under the throat, as the party can suffer it, if there be any swelling betwixt the ear and the throat which is called the aumuns of the ears falling down, spread two plaisters of Burgany pitch, upon two little holland cloaths, an inch and halfe long, and halfe an inch broad, and then lay one end to the lower part of the ear, and the other end toward the throat; so likewise lay a plaister on the other side, just up∣on the place that is swelled, which is called the aumuns of the ears, then lay on the Mugwort as hot as you can suffer it; do this at a night when you go to bed, then wash and gargle the mouth
throat with a little Romanviteral, called the Celestial stone, and this will cure you in two or four hours space, keeping your self warm. Probatum est. A rare and excellent way to cure the difficulty of breath or the heaving of the Lungs. THere is a long herb, or plant that grows common almost in every hedg; it runs long like a vine, but the leaves are very broad, of a dark green colour, it is called amaradulsis and some cals it woody-might shade, it is govern∣ed under Mercury; take a pound of the leaves and stalks together, and bruise them a little, then put them into three pints of White wine, and let it stand and infuse by the fire very gent∣ly in an earthen pot covered with embers a∣bout it; it must infuse twelve hours, then take it off, and if you will you may put a quarter of a pound of Sugar candie; and when it is cold, you may use it; you may take the quantitie of a quarter of a wine pint morning and evening, and once at noon after dinner; this hath cured several men and women of the heaving of the lungs, that could not get help from any before. Probatum est.
Here is a rare way to cure the Rhume Meger, or wind Meger; which is a dizng giddiness in the head of man or woman, or younger people. TAke fine Flaxen cloath, new Flaxen cloath, and make it just the compass of the fore∣head, from temple to temple, and when you have so done, then take your Flax cloath, and spread it on a board, then spread a quarter of a handful of Flax-hurds, or Flax-tow on the top of your Flax cloath, just the same compass, and with your hand pat it down together ve∣ry close upon the flaxen cloath, and wipe in any loose hurds that you see round the edges of the plaister, with the back of the knife, then having the white of a new laid egg, ready beat in a dish with a spoon, spread with the spoon the white of the egg all over the Flax hurds; then having your Sanguis draconis beat to powder, strew the Sanguis draconis all over the white of the egg, then lay this plaister to the forehead, and pin it on with a cloath, and let it lie twenty four hours on the forehead, then if it be not loose, let it lie untilit beloose, then take it off. Two of these plasters one after ano∣ther hath cured some that have been blind with Rhume. Probatum est.
Here is a rare medicine for hot watry Rhumes in the eyes; or sore eyes. TAke a bit of Roach-allum about the big∣ness of a Pigeons egg, or a smal walnut; then take a new laid egg, and break the white of it into a clean dish, then take your Roach-Allum, and stir the white of the egg about in the dish very lustily for a quarter of an hour until it be very thick and curdled, it will seem like white bread and milk beat together, take this, and with your finger wipe it upon your eye, and into your eye; and lying on your back; let it disolve in the eyes for a quarter of an hour at a time; in the morning, and at noon, and at night; you may use the plaister before mentioned, with this if you please, or this of it self, according as you see occasion. Friends, whosoever you are, that shall make use of this art, it will by Gods blessing help you; and the Author of this book hath cured them with this art, that hath been almost blind with Rhume. Probatum est.
Another rare medicine for the eyes. TAke the juice of plantan the herb is govern∣ed under Venus; and a peny worth of eie∣bright water; take of each a like quantity, and put these into a little Vial-glass, and then put therein a little Romanviteral, or the Celestial stone; as much as the quantity of a gray pease, and put it into the glass or vial, and let it dis∣solve in the juice and water; then when you go to dress your eyes, shake the Vial a little; dress your eies as occasion shall serve, and your own discretion uide you; you may dress your eyes at morning, and at noon, and at night, if your eyes be very hot; dress them more oft; this is a curing sovereign medicine for the eyes, and hath done good to many both men, women, and children. Probatum est. A rare way to cure a green wound. TAke two peny worth of good sack and wash the sore with it twice a day, mor∣ning and evening, and dip your lint into the oyl of St. Johnswort, and bind it up, and this will heal a green wound that is cut deep, more firm and sound then balsum, Probatum est.
Here is a rare way for the curing the Gonorhea or Running of the reins. IN the first place, if you mistrust, you have caught the Running of the reins by keeping company with any foul or unclean person; go this way to work, first, either to help your selfe, or your friend, Take a dram of Pulvus-sanctus, In English, holly powder; and put this pow∣der into half a pint of dear posset drink, and sur it about with a knife; and then drink it up, and then take good store of posset drink after, that it may cause the purge to work lu∣stily; you must begin alwayes to take a purge in a morning fasting, but if you are of a strong constution, I would wish you to take a dram of Extractum rudi, and make it into four or five little pils, and drink either posset-drink, or strong Ale, or Beer to cause it to work, then after it hath worked well, take some warm broath made on purpose; these purges purge choller from the chest, and slime from the guts, and wrinseth and washeth the reins of the back, & prepares the body fit for that which is restraining or restringing. Now in the second place if you would seek to stop this flux, called the Running of the reins; take a good hand∣ful of Yarow, Milfoyl, Nose-bleed, or Thou∣sand
leafe, it hath all these names, but it is com∣monly called Yarow, take a good handful of this green herb, and put it into a Morter, and bruise it with a pestle, and when you have well beat it, or bruised it, put to it the quantity of a pint of good fresh small beer, and stir it al∣together, then take a thin cloath, and strain it thorow, and then put it into a Vialglass, or a little close jug bottle, and put to it two oun∣ces of the best hard Sugar, and let the Sugar dissolve in it, and when you go to use it, shake it together, and the quantity that you must take is as followes; if the day be very hot take a spoonful at a time often in the day time, or otherwise three times a day; The Author of this book, hath applied this medicine as fasting in a morning three spoonfuls, three spoonfuls at noon, after diner, and three spoonfuls after supper, this hath cured men and women; that several noted Physiti∣ans hath left, and could not cure. Probatum est. Here is another way for to cure the Gonorhea, or the running of the reins. TAke Cipress Turpentine, or Venus Tur∣pentine, to the quantity of two ounces and put to it the quantity of three measured
spoonful of clear spring water; and then stir it well together with the point of a knife, until it be white; this is called washing of Turpentine or if you be so well provided, instead of wa∣shing it with water, wash it with the juice of Lemond, and you must wash it in a little white Gally pot, and let it stand in the same pot co∣vered with a white paper; so you may take it three times a day, at the end of a knife point, an indifferent quantity at a time, or you may take it in little pils, rolled in Sugar, upon a trencher; and if you will you may add to it Sanguis draconis, or the blood of a Dragon beat to powder, and so you may mix it with the pils, and these pils worketh a gallant effect in man or woman, and it will do the cure. Probatum est. Another way to cure the Gonorhea, or running of the Reins. TAke every Morning fasting, and every Evening after supper, as much as will lie on a shilling of the hard row of a red Herring dried, and beat to powder, and put it into a quarter of pint of beer, and drink it up; and often in the day time, drink your black double refined Rosin, it is clear like a glass, let it be beat to powder, and drink it; this hath cured
the foul disease, of the running of the Reins it self. The Author of this book giveth notice to all people, both men and women, to observe this rule; those that shall have occasion to make use concerning this cure, if it be in win∣ter to wear a warm red cloath next to the reins of the back; and if it be in Summer, wear next to the Reins of the back a plaister of Dioc∣cula, spread upon a linnen cloath, about the length of your hand, and four fingers broad one plaister will stick on a week; this plaister is drying, and by Gods help performeth the cure. Probatum est. Here is a most excellent and rare way to cure the falling at the fundament, never the like laid o∣pen before for the good of the Country. IN the first place, for either man or child or what party soever that hath the impediment of the fundament falling down when they go to stool, they always void a great deal of blood; take the hearb knot grass, it is as common as the high way, because it groweth by the high way side, but the herb is as honest as if it grew in a Ladies garden, and as full of vertue; there is another herb groweth close by; it is called Planten, not Bucks-horn Planten, but Webroad Planten, it is governed under Venus,
and under the sign Libra a very honest herb; and helpeth Venus girls of many a loose disease: But concerning our cure before men∣tioned; Take Planten and Knot-grass, and beat them in a morter with a pestle; then strain out the juice, and put it into a vial-glass, then that is ready for use; then the party afflicted with the disease before mentioned, let them take two spoonful of the juice, and a spoonful of good strong sack; mix them together, and drink this quantity morning and evening, and after dinner; if the party be past sixteen, take it oftener in the day time; And likewise take three thin rashers, or slices of Martelmass-beef And put, these three slices of Beef upon the Chaffing-dish of coals, and the Caffing dish in∣to a close stool and so it over it, and this is so strong, and of such vertue, that it will go quite through the body, when you breath, you will tast the sent of it in your mouth; do this of∣ten, and with the help of God you will not miss of the cure; The Author of this book hath cured them that hath been far and near before, and could get no help, and this hath cured them. Probatum est.
An excellent way to cure desperate bleeding at Nose. IF you be passing along on the high way and  bleed at Nose, by reason of heat of travel, or by the heat of the Sun, take green nettles, or the roots, and bruise them, and put them to your Nose, and snuf up the juice, or sent in∣to your head, and this will stop it; but if you be at home, and at no hard work or labour, and your Nose do fall a bleeding, take the herb above mentioned, and apply first to the Nose and if that will not stop it, tie thy left finger for thy right nostril, and thy right finger for thy left nostril, if an occasion serve tie both; if that will not do let the party lie down back∣ward, and have a cloath dipt in fair spring wa∣ter and applie to the private parts of the body;  mean to lay it close too. If that will not do, take a toad dried in the sun, and lay it on the bare chest of man or woman, if the party be a little fearful, as some maids are to loose their maidenheads, but very few; wrap the toad in a fine thin white rag, and if it be for a woman or maid, they will like it the better, my rea∣son is, the female sex delighteth in clean lin∣nen. But friends whosoever you are that makes use of this book; these rules before
mentioned, will not fail you in time of need Probatum est A rare way to cure the Spleen or stiches in the side, TAke black double refined Rosin, it is clear like glass, when you hold it against the light; take a little quantity of it a time and beat it to a powder, and take up as much of the powder at a time as willie upon a four peny piece, called a groat, and put it into a quarter of a pint of sack, or strong beer, or ale, and drink it quick, and it will give you ease imme∣diately after you have taken it; and it will cause you to break wind immediately, and give you case; and this helpeth either man, or wo∣man at a convenient time, with speed. Probatum est. Here is a sure and speedy way to cure the Plurisie in man, woman or child. THE impediment of the Plurisie is despe∣rate, and will kill either man, woman or child, without they have a speedy remedy; but this which I shall here prescribe, it is most certain and true; Take Stone-horse dung press forth the juice of it, and take one spoonful of it
and two spoonfuls of Aniseed water; and stir them together in a little ear∣then cup, or porringer, and let the arty drink it up presently, and it will give them ease, and taking of it three times one after another it cureth either man, woman or child of a Plurisie speedily without leting blood. Probatum est. A most sure and speedy way to cure chil∣dren of the worms. TAke a handful of the young buds of Ashen∣trees, you may know them from any other buds, for the outside shews as black as Seacoal; take a handful of the buds before mentioned and a handful of unset Hysop, and half a hand∣ful of wormwood, mix these together, and heat them very hot in a Fire-shovel, or between two tyles; then lay it to the childs belly, as hot as the child may suffer it; and bind it on with a cloath at night, and let it lie till the morning, and in the morning give the child three spoonfuls of new milk, and put a little of the seeds of Worm-wood into it, and bruise it before you put it into the milk; and stir them together; then give the child the milk and worm-seed, stirred together, the quantity
of three spoonful I mean the seeds of the com∣mon worm-word, that growes almost in eve∣ry place; this art cures children of the worms and cleanseth the body, and causeth children to thrive very lustily after the taking of it. Probatum est. A fine art to cure and kill all manner of Warts that groweth on the hands of men, women, or children. THere is an herb grows by the high wayside, it is called Arssmart; one sort of it hath a little black spot grows on it, I judge that the Planet Saturn hath some influence over it, but I mean the Arssmart, that bears a green leafe, and it bites; if you bruise it, and it toucheth a∣ny sore; all you that have Warts, bruise the herb, and rub the Wart with it, and this will kill all Warts whatsoever. Frobatum est, A rare way to cure the Ioynt-evil, or other foul running sores. TAke a handful of the buds of Broom, and halfe a handful of Fenel, and half a hand∣ful of Thime, mother Thime, or field Thime, and
half a handful of unset Hysop, and a quarter of a handful of Balm, and half a handful of Sage; boyl these in five ale quarts of fair spring wa∣ter, until it be boyled to five pints, and let it boyl gently over a wood fire, and when it is cool, put it into some manner of Vessel, that will keep it closs; as a small Firkin or closs Pitcher, and take of this five spoonful in the morning, and three at noon, and five at night after supper. This hath cured three or four in a house, that have the disease they call the Kings-evil, before his Majesty came into the Land; and now it doth cure the Joynt-evil, the Gout in the Joynts, and other foul disea∣ses in the body; this hath cured several of these impediments, that never could get any help before. Probatum est. A rare art to cure the Morbus Gallicus, or the French Pox. IN he first place purge your self; and that you may do, and take but a dram of pulvus sanctus, in halfe a pint of clear posset-drink, and the quantity of five pints of clear posset-drink, to to drink after; and if you are of a stronger con∣stitution, take a dram of the extract of Rudi, and make it into five or six pills, acording
as you can Swallow them; and drink about five pints of good strong beer luke warme, or as warm as milk from the Cow; that you may easily do, and set it against the fire; now after purging your selfe, do this, take the barke of an Ashen tree, and pare off the outside, and take the middle bark, as the Tanners do of Oake bark; if it be winter dry your bark in an Oven, but if it be Summer, dry it in the heat of the sun; and when it is dry, sweep your hearth clean, and set the ends of the bark upright, leaning one against another, then with a can∣dle, or a peice of paper, set your Ashen-bark on fire, and if you looke to the burning of it well, it will burn as white as chalk; and take these Ashes, and have them ready about you in a box in your pocket; and you must have Apples, any manner of Apples ready rosted, and ever and anon, then dip an Apple into the ashes and eat it, and in a short time this will cure you of the French Pox, and none can tell for what disease you take it, this art hath cured them of the foul disease, the French Pox; that hath been at the Hospital, and could not have cure. Probatum est.
For a Hoarse cough, or a hooping cough, or other chin cough. THere grows a stone very common on ma∣ny plowed lands, some call it a hauk-bill stone, some call it a hod-mondod, some call it a kicks-foot stone; it growes in the manner of an oyster shell, like to the great welflead oy∣ster-shel, take this stone and burn it in the fire, for the space of five or six hours; then take it out, and beat it, and sift it to a pure fine pow∣der, and put to it half a penyworth of horse spice, and put to it three half peny worth of white sugar, and mix these together, and let the party that is afflicted with the cough, ei∣ther man or woman, or child, take this and eat of it as often in the day time as you will, and it will cure them in a short time; this is far bet∣ter then a Apothecaries Lohosamim, that they sell for eight pence an ounce. Probatum est. A rare way to cure the dropsie. TAke a wine quart of the ashes of broom, and boyl them in four quarts of wormwood beer, or ale, and let it boyl until it comes to
two quarts, then let it settle, and let the clear be poured out from the thick, and put to it two peny worth of the power of Cinamon and take five spoonfuls fasting in the morning, and five spoonfuls at night; if you be very far gon take likewise three at noon, and this will cure you in a short time. Probatum est. For the Wind-chollick. TAke Lozanges Rute, or Dietrionpepe∣rion, it is in English Lozenges three pop∣pers aet these and you wild quickly find ease. Probatum est. A rare way to cure a womans breast of a Wolf. TAke a little Romanviteral, and beat it to powder, then take a live Pidgeon and slit it in two, then take your celestial stone being beat to a power, & strew the Romanvi∣teral all over the inside of one half of your Pid∣geon, and lay that presently to the Wolfe to feed on, let it lie about an hour, and then take the other half of the Pidgeon, the feathers be∣ing pickt off clean, and lay it on a Chaffin dish
of coals, then hold the brest over it, and the Wolfe will sever immediately from the breast, by vertue of the Celestial stone, and drop into the Chaffin-dish; then after this you may soake a little of the same Romanviteral in a little fair spring water, and wash the breast morn∣ing and evening, and lay a primrose leafe to it, dipt in the oyl of St. Johns-wort, and Sallet oyl mixt together; and you must be sure to keep your breast warm; and when you try this art, think of the Author of this book; for this hath cured many of this impediment to the admiration of many people. Probatum est. A fine art to cure the Itch. TAke one peny worth of the Oyl of Roses and two peny worth of Sallet oyl, and mix these both together in a little gally pot, or drinking pot, take green glass, and beat to a pure smal powder, and mix this with brim∣stone beat to a powder; take these two pow∣ders, and tie them up fast in a little holland rag together; and let the powders tyed up in the rag, lie and soak in the oyles, and when you go to dress your selfe, take out the ball or rag tied up round like a ball, and gently rub the
wrists and the bow of the arm, and the share that is betwixt the lower part of the belly and the upper part of the inside of the thigh, and anoint under your hams; do this morning and evening, and this will kill an itch in a very short time, if it be to the bone. Probatum est.
Remedies for Horses. Here is a rare way to make a drink to keep Horse or Mare from any disease. TAke three or four penyworth of squch in∣greale, and in small brass morter, bruise it a little, and put it into a Skillet of strong beer the quantity of a quart; take a little Rose∣mary and Hyope and a little green balm, and a little Fennel and Time, and shred all these to∣gether, and put them into the Skillet, and half a pennyworth of Anniseeds; let these boyl together, for the space of half an hour, then take it from the fire, and when it is cold e∣nough give it to horse or mare; it prevents the Plague in the guts, or any other diseases if they have stood in stables that are infected: All
you that are masters of horses, and shall make use of this, you will have little need of the Far∣rier to drench your horses, after you have made trial of this a little while; this is approved of by some gentlmen to be the best drink now in England, and a sure defensive for the heart. Probatum est. A rare art to cure a horse of the Red-wa∣ter, some cals it the stronge gullion. VVHen you see the horse have this dis∣ease, he will lie on his back, and kick with all four of his legs, and very much swell in his body; take two quarts of Cham∣ber-lye, our stale, and bruise some Burdock-seeds, as many as will lie on a shilling, and put into the Chamber-lye, and give the horse this with a horn, as soon as possible may be, then swich him up, and ride him for the space of three quarters of an hour, then set him in the stable, and as soon as he doth ftal, he hath his cure. Probatum est.
Here is a rare way to cure either horse or mare of the mourning of the chine, if they are not too far spent. TAke a pennyworth of Towsillagine, and a pennyworth of Uripigmentum, and as much of the powder of both of them as will lie on a shilling; put this to two spoon∣fils of barly flower, and make it into three kes, about the bigness of three half crowns, ay these on a chaffing dish of wood coals, and cover them with a Tunnel, that the pipe of the Tunnel may convey the smoake into his no∣strils, then ride him for half an hour; do this morning and evening, and in short time the cure will be perfect. Probatum est. Here is a rare way and necessary for country men to keep their corn from all manner of fowl that do devour corn in the field. TAke two pennyworth of Stavesacre, and one pennyworth of gun-powder, and half
a penyworth of Sulphure, or brimstone, and half a pennyworth of common Terpentine, mix all these together, and anoint it, at the end of crowes feathers, and stick here and there a crow feather at a lands end, and some tie at the end of a long straw, close under the ear of corn, and them that you stick on the ground you must stick with the quil end down∣ward: This will fright all the fowls that de∣vour corn; neither Pidgeon, Rooke, nor crow, nor Sparrow, will endure the field nor close where these feathers stand, but will flie over the place as if they were frighted. Probatum est. FINIS.
