M2675 12078536 53653
REMARKS Upon Two late Ingenious Discourses: The One, An Essay touching the Gravita∣tion and Non-Gravitation of FLUID BODIES: The Other, Observations touching the TORRICELLIAN EXPERIMENT; So far forth as they may concern any Passages in his Enchiridium Metaphysicum. By Dr HENRY MORE. . Aristot. LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops Head in St Paul's Church-Yard, 1676.
IMPRIMATUR Antonius Saunders. Ex Edibus Lamberhanis, Novemb. 13. 1675.
THE PREFACE. Reader, I Had not given thee the trou∣ble of a Preface, were it not for apologizing for a Phrase which I observe something fre∣quently to occur in my Remarks, which may seem to thee hugely Paradoxical, if not very absurd. It is Gravitation upwards: I made use of it in imitation of the Learn∣ed Authour, upon whose Dis∣courses I make my Remarks. Wherefore that thou maist the better discern how allowable or disallowable this form of speech is, and that I may withall offer to thee that which may perhaps tend to the better opening thine understanding in Hydrostatical Theories, I will lay down a sim∣ple
Hypothesis for the illustrating that natural poize, libration or Gravitation that Philosophers suppose they discover in the Flu∣id matter of this our Terrestrial world. First, therefore, Let us ima∣gine our Earth environed only with the Materia subtilis, that Des Cartes has so curiously descri∣bed; or more plainly and intel∣ligibly, with the pure subtil Aether which is a liquid body of that subtilty, that it will with ease pe∣netrate all bodies in some mea∣sure, but abundantly the pores of Glass. Secondly, Let us consider, that a Hail-shot, Gravel, Quick-sil∣ver, and the like may be poized in Water, and Corn, Chaff, Currans, Powders, and such like in the Air, and that they will subside or weigh one against another in the said Elements; so the parti∣cles of these Elements themselves,
Water and Air, and the vapours therein, are as it were weighed or poized in this more universal Liquidum of the Aether. Thirdly, That the particles of Quick-silver, Water, Vapours, Air, and, in brief, what ever is conteined in that which they call the Atmosphere, if there be no lett nor new emergent mutation, are in this poizing placed according to their solidity, chiefly of the very particles they do consist, suppose Air, Water, Quick-silver, accord∣ing as I have declared in my first Hydrostatical Axiom, Enchirid. Metaphys. cap. 13. sect. 10. Fourthly, That in some sense all the parts and particles of the Atmosphere, even the thinnest Air at the Convexity thereof, are heavy, namely thus; That if they were upon some occasion raised higher than the convexity, those thin parts of Air would descend again to the said convexity as
sure as the vapours do in Dew on the Grass, or raised Dust does upon any pavement or floor. Fifthly, That this we call hea∣viness is nothing else but a ca∣pacity in the parts or particles of the Atmosphere to be placed according to their solidity, by that, what ever it is, that moves them, or disposes them. Sixthly, That when these par∣ticles of Fluids in the Atmosphere are so disposed, with regard to their different solidity, as is ac∣cording to the Laws of this mov∣ing Principle, they press not then on one another, but, as to any a∣ctual Gravitation on one another, they are at rest. Seventhly, This diversity of so∣lidity in the particles is the cause why we see Elements and liquids in such different places, and of such different Consistencies. As Quick-silver below water, water below, air, the thicker air below
the thinner, and their Consisten∣cies accordingly. Eighthly, That the more solid the particles are in fluids, the more strong their consistency is, as well as they are thereby more heavy. Ninthly, That as the moving or disposing Principle brought the several Liquids to such various differences of consistency by a po∣sitive action, so it keeps them in the same consistency by a like po∣sitive action or force, though upon occasion mutable or vinci∣ble. Tenthly, That there may be a very strong consistency in Liquids without any elasticity or springi∣ness at all, as in Quick-silver and Water which are not compressi∣ble. Elevently, That there may be a compressible consistency conside∣rably strong where there is little or no elasticity of parts. A thing
easily discernible in the wring∣ing or pressing in a mans hand a wet Handkerchief; and of such a compressible consistency may be our lower Air, stuffed with thick vapours, as also consist∣ing of the grosser Aëreal Par∣ticles. Twelfthly, That all poizings, suspensions or librations of hea∣vy liquid bodies, are not by a mere counterpoize of perpendi∣cular pressure of another body, but may be by the firmness or force of its consistency. I speak this in reference to the Torricel∣lian experiment, and the stand∣ing of the water in Pumps and Syringes, which is thus solved with the greatest ease and in∣telligibleness that may be, by sup∣posing so strong a consistency in this lower Air, that the firmness thereof will resist the weight of suppose 29 inches of Mercury in a Tube, or of 34 foot of water
in a Pump, but will be broke by the weight of 30 or 31 inches of Mercury, and 35 or 36 foot of water, and suffer compression, to the letting in the subtil li∣quidum or Aether (in which the whole Atmosphere is poized in∣to the Glass or Pump, whereby the Mercury or Water is made capable to descend. And 29 inches of Mercury being of one weight with 34 foot of water in a Tube of the same diameter, it is plain, that this is the poize that equals either the firmness of consistency, or else the weight of the Air. Thirteenthly, But here now I say lies the curiosity of the The∣ory, whether this suspension, sup∣pose of the Mercury in the Tube, be to be conceived to be by per∣pendicular pressure or actual Gra∣vitation of the Air upon the re∣stagnant Mercury; or else, as I intimated before, by the firmness
of its consistency, it being not compressible, by no greater weight than that of 29 inches of Mercury, and so there being no vacuum, nor penetration of di∣mensions, the circle of motion is necessarily stopt, and the Mer∣cury stands at that pitch. To which I conceive is most safely an∣swered, That when the Mercury is fallen to 29 inches, that there is a kind of libration betwixt the air jointly with the restagnant Mercury, and the Mercury in the Tube. For upon the infusing of water upon the restagnant Mer∣cury, that in the Tube will pro∣portionably ascend. And this the Learned Authour upon whom I make the Remarks, will call Gravitation upwards, because its tendency is towards that more subtil matter in the derelicted space in the Glass. And this Li∣bration is not much unlike that in a Siphon with one leg much
higher than another, into which putting some quick-silver (which will presently poize it self into an equality in each shank) if you pour water into the longer shank, the quick-silver in the other will ascend accordingly: which is again a kind of Gravitation upwards a∣gainst the thin Air, and answers to the ascending or gravitating of the Torricellian Mercury in the Tube against the subtil Aether there. But that the parts thus librated in this liquidum subtilis∣simum, (in which the whole at∣mosphere is poized by the mov∣ing or disposing Principle) when they are settled in their poize, press or gravitate one upon ano∣ther, I do utterly deny. But then secondly, I say, the firmi∣tude of the consistence of the Air is as it were the string of this ba∣lance, which if it break, or so far forth as it breaks or relaxates, the Mercury in the Tube will fall
down. And thirdly, that the Mercury is kept up by this string of firmness of the consistency of the Air, and not by the actual gravitation of an Atmospherical Cylinder of an equal diameter on the restagnant Mercury, ap∣pears from that experiment of the Mercury in the Tube not fal∣ling, though the Vessel of Mer∣cury be close covered in a Glass, and so the supposed pressure of the Atmospherical Cylinder inter∣cepted, and a commodious Valve made, that upon the falling of the Mercury would let the Air out, though there be none let in by it; which Valve the weight, suppose, of ten pounds of Mer∣cury would be sure to fling open, if it were the weight of the At∣mospherical Cylinder that held up that ten pound of Mercury in the Tube before. Nor fourthly, can it be the spring of that Air included in the Glass that up∣holds
the Mercury in the Tube, since it must be so great, that it must hold up no less than the weight of ten pound of Mercury; and if the elasticity of the Air be so great or strong, considering the subtilty of the parts of the Air that make this spring, which are hugely more subtil and thin, and consequently more cutting than the edge of a Razor, it is impos∣sible but that they should cut with all imaginable ease into the Quick-silver, and so piercing in∣to it prove unserviceable for the pretty feat they are intended. To say nothing here of the ex∣cellent arguments of this Learned Authour upon whom I remark, by which he seems to me quite to have defeated that modern Pa∣radox of the monstrous elasticity of the Air, which yet some exi∣mious Wits have so favourably entertained.
Wherefore lastly, to detain my Reader no longer in a less need∣ful Preface, From what has been said he may easily discern, that this Phrase of Gravitation upward is not destitute of all good ground, since such libration up∣ward terminates on a thinner Ele∣ment, as true and proper Gravi∣tation always does; and he may in the mean time observe there is no proper Gravitation but in such cases, when a heavier fluid sways upon a lighter, but that the parts of the heavy fluid do not press or gravitate one upon another at all, nor a lighter up∣on an heavier, but are moved jointly by that Principle which disposes them according as we have above described; and final∣ly consider with himself, whe∣ther it be not more likely there should be such a subtil Element penetrating all Bodies, in which they, or (to speak more compen∣diously)
the whole Atmosphere is librated, and that there is like∣wise that vincible consistency of the lower Air, than that there should be that Tension this Learn∣ed Authour stands up for (which cannot be without penetration of dimensions, nor is it conceivable how such an extended Funiculus should hold together) or (which this Authour is as much against as for the other) that there should be such a monstrous elastick pres∣sure of the Air, and actual gra∣vitation of the parts of the same elements one upon another, when the Particles are of the against more solid and searching Reason, that enquires after the final cause of things, and duely relishes that ex∣cellent Aphorism of Aristotle, Natura nihil agit frustra: So is it manifestly against common sense and experience. Methinks the Hypothesis I have here briefly
described, is far less obnoxious than any of the other. But if any one be otherwise minded, I know right well, that liberty of philosophizing is the common right of all that in good earnest profess themselves free Philoso∣phers.
On the Essay touching the Gravitation and Non-Gravitation of Fluid bodies. REMARK the First. OF Gravity and Gravitation, that it is nothing but Mo∣bility and Actual Motion, and up∣on what terms it is fit to conclude actual motion to be in a body. REMARK the Second. Whether Motion downwards belong to solid bodies as such, and whether some fluids have not a stronger tending of that kind than some solid bodies.
REMARK the Third. The true reason why the parts of solid bodies do not gravitate one upon another. Upon Chapter the Fourth. THE attempt of supplanting my demonstration in En∣chirid. Metaphys. Cap. 13. Sect. 4. by introducing a Cap or Cone of water only gravitating on the La∣mina lignea, succinctly explained. REMARK the Fourth. The disparity betwixt the Cap or Cone, and Cylinder of Water and the Pyramid of Bricks. REMARK the Fifth. That the former instance of Ma∣sonry in the Pyramid of Bricks,
will not so much as hold in Wheat, Sand, and Hail-shot. REMARK the Sixth. The suspended Sand in the top of the body of a Cylinder no ar∣gument for any such supposed Ma∣sonry in the element of water. REMARK the Seventh. The Mechanical Incumbency of the particles of Sand on the Egg∣shel in the manner of an Arch, whence to be enervated. REMARK the Eighth. Of the lateral Direction of the parts of Sand and such like bo∣dies. REMARK the Ninth. Four Arguments to show the in∣validity
of this pretended Mason∣ry in water against my demonstra∣tion from the round Lamina lig∣nea in my Enchiridium Metaphy∣sicum. REMARK the Tenth. The intrinsecal Gravity of wa∣ter how to be understood. REMARK the Eleventh. That water in its fluid consi∣stency gravitates, and in what sence it so does, infused on Quick∣silver, into which a Tube is immit'ted, &c. REMARK the Twelfth. That a Bucket of Water is not as much one continued body as a Bucket of Pitch, and wherein the nature of Fluidity does consist, and how eminent in water.
REMARK the Thirteenth. The Learned Authour's mistake touching the Principium Hylar∣chicum, with a brief description thereof. REMARK the Fourteenth. The distinction of considering water as a solid body and a flu∣id body examined. REMARK the Fifteenth. A twofold Mechanical account of the Non-Gravitation of the particles of water on subjected bo∣dies, viz. from the Continuity of the particles, and from their Architecture or Masonry, with a confutation of both.
REMARK the Sixteenth. That the Learned Authour him∣self at last admits, that the parts of water are not continuous but contiguous. His refuge to the Masonry of the particles also con∣futed. REMARK the Seventeenth. Whether the Cartesian aqueous particles be more fit for this sup∣posed Masonry, than those of Wheat, Hail-shot, and Sand. REMARK the Eighteenth. Whether water be quid conti∣nuum or contiguum. REMARK the Nineteenth. A Column of water gravitating on a Rundle upon a perforated
bottom of a Bucket, how reconci∣lable with this supposed Masonry of the Arch. REMARK the Twentieth. An experiment of two Rundles urged against this supposed Arch∣itecture, together with an experi∣ment that clearly takes away both his Mechanical accounts at once, that of Continuity and this of Masonry. Upon Chapter the Eighth. THat the Authour lays his main stress on his natural account of the Non-Gravitaion of water, &c. REMARK the Twenty first. Intrinsecal Heaviness of a body, how ex pacto to be understood from my first Remark.
REMARK the Twenty second. The Authour's description of his Natural Account of the Non-Gra∣vitation of Fluids, &c. REMARK the Twenty third. The Authour's distinction of the terminal motions of water as a heavy body and as of a fluid body examined by our Agreement in the first Remark, and conlud∣ed, That all the directions of Mo∣tion in water as to Primitiveness and Intrinsecalness are of one kind. REMARK the Twenty fourth. That the Learned Authour has abundantly well proved the vari∣ous tendencies and pressures of water every way, but not every way at once or the same time.
REMARK the Twenty fifth. The usefulness of the conjuncti∣on of primitive Gravitation with the motion of water downwards, as to the Authour's scope; this primitive Gravitation of the aque∣ous particles remaining, as if it were alone, the motion of water upwards defeating that down∣wards; and primitive Gravitati∣on taken away making a Bucket of Air and Bucket of water aequi∣ponderant. So that either way this natural account is subverted. REMARK the Twenty sixth. That the various lines of dire∣cion of motion, beside the per∣pendicular, can contribute no∣thing to the abating of the intrin∣sick Gravitation.
REMARK the Twenty seventh. That the imagined continuity in water more than in Callis-sand, nor the motion per declive, can abate the Intrinsick Gravitation of water if there were any in it. REMARK the Twenty eighth. That the tumbling of the Callis-sand per declive, does not prove, that when the granules rest, they press per declive but downwards. REMARK the Twenty ninth. How from the supposition of just 12 l. stock of intrinsick weight in a Cubick foot of water to be dispen∣sed to all the various lines of mo∣tion in water, and yet there being felt just 12 l. weight still, it is de∣monstrable, that all the other mo∣tions are merely imaginary not real.
REMARK the Thirtieth. The ineffectual Answer of the Authour to this difficulty; with a further Confutation of this natu∣ral Account of his from a Bucket of Ice. Upon Difficiles Nugae, or Observations touching the Torricellian Experiment. THE Transition from his Re∣marks upon the Essay touch∣ing the Gravitation of Fluids to this other touching the Torricel∣lian Experiment. REMARK the First. Of Rarefaction and Tension, and of Condensation and Resti∣tution
in the Authour's sense. The groundlessness of them proved, by proving there are subtiler parti∣cles in the Air than those that are properly Aëreael. As also their re∣pugnancy to reason & experience. REMARK the Second The distinction of Gravitatio ad motum, and Gravitatio ad pon∣dus. And that it is unconceiva∣ble, how the latter should be with∣out the former; if there be any intrinsick Gravity in heavy bodies so called, together with the true reason why the parts of lead do not gravitate one upon another. REMARK the Third. That the increase of Renitence or Pressure of the water against its being raised higher in B, more than in A, and in C, more than in B, is not the reason that the Oil in
the Tube does not go out at B, and ascends at C. Also why a Peuter Porringer full of Hail-shot weighs alike in water from the bottom to the top. REMARK the Fourth. Smaller particles in the Air ac∣knowledged by the Authour him∣self, together with a disprove∣ment of his supposed continuity of the greater. REMARK the Fifth. Compressed Air appearing hea∣vier no proof that it had innate Gravity in it before, but rather that there is no such thing as in∣trinsick Gravity in the world. REMARK the Sixth. The Cohaesion of the parts of wa∣ter weaker than that of Air, ac∣cording
to the Authour, a mani∣fest Argument against his pretend∣ed Masonry in the parts of water. REMARK the Seventh. His experiment of the Glass∣siphon with Quick-silver and Wa∣ter, and his mistaken conclusions therefrom: And what excellent use there may be made of it against his imaginary Architecture in the element of water. REMARK the Eighth. His invention of the Cap or Cone enervated from Stevinus his experiment of a Rundle on the bot∣tom of a Vessel with an hole in it. REMARK the Ninth. The Gravitation of the water in that case on the Rundle whence it is, whether simply because of
the Air underneath, or because the Air is in the state of Abituri∣ency. Where something by the by of the Spirit of Nature. REMARK the Tenth. Why an empty Glass-bottle care∣fully stopt and sunk into the Sea is broken, and why in some cases Oil drives Water, and Water Quick-silver upwards, and what shroud insinuations such Phaeno∣mena are, that there is no such thing as inward Gravitation in bodies, but that mater is ranged according to the Laws of the Spirit of Nature. REMARK the Eleventh. That the reason why a small Glass-Tube filled up with water, and immitted into a Vessel of wa∣ter, the water in the Tube will sink till it be even with the superficies
of the water in the Vessel, is not from the force of the water in the Tube to press downwards, but from some higher Principle. REMARK the Twelfth. The pretended obscure solution in Enchirid. Metaphys. cap. 13. or reason of the falling off, and sticking to of the Obturaculum in a Tube with a Valve, according as the Tube is more or less immersed in the water, more fully explica∣ted. REMARK the Thirteenth. That the sticking of the Obtu∣raculum to the Valve, is not sim∣ply from the Tubes pressing up a portion of water of a greater weight than it, because if the Abi∣turiency of the air in the Tube be in a due measure sufflaminated, the Obturaculum at the same
depth will fall. Together with a farther confutation of this reason from Glass-bottles well stopt and immitted into the Sea. Whence the operation of the Principium Hylarchicum is farther discovered▪ REMARK the Fourteenth. A notable Experiment of the Authour's in a Tube of Quick-sil∣ver, which if he had rightly im∣proved, might easily have led him to an acquaintance with the Hy∣lostatick Spirit of the world. REMARK the Fifteenth. Two more Experiments out of Honoratus Faber, a farther con∣firming of our solution of the for∣mer. REMARK the Sixteenth. The Authours's mistake in mak∣ing
all bodily motion to be wrought by the contact of some active body, whenas most bodily motions in the world are not Me∣chanical but Vital. REMARK the Seventeenth. The Authour's mistake conceiv∣ing that there are no pores in Glass, and that if the Aether pass those pores it must pass freely. REMARK the Eighteenth. His mistake further discovered from his own Experiments and Observations made in a Glass-Tube of Mercury inverted in the Air, and the Mercury in the Tor∣ricellian Experiment. REMARK the Nineteenth. And further still detected by de∣monstrating the incredibility of
the ascending of any vapours or steams from the Mercury into the derelicted space in the Tube. REMARK the Twentieth. A notable Objection of the Au∣thour's against the Opinion of Mercurial effluvia occupying the derelicted space of the Tube, and such as himself does not answer. REMARK the Twenty first. A sound and ingenious demon∣stration of the Authour's against the Hypothesis of an Atmospheri∣cal Cylinder suspending the Cy∣linder of Mercury in the Tube, from the Tube of Mercury hung up∣on a Balance, with its mouth some half an inch immersed in restag∣nant Mercury.
REMARK the Twenty second. His ingenious obviating that evasion of a Cylinder of Air pres∣sing on the top of the Tube of Mer∣cury so hung, as if that supplied the place of the Mercury in the Tube, whose weight was discover∣ed in the opposite Scale of the Ba∣lance. REMARK the Twenty third. His dextrous defeating as weak a subterfuge, whereby they would e∣lude the force of his former Answer. REMARK the Twenty fourth. Two neat Experiments of the Authour's, whereby he meets with all such elusions, and unexcepti∣onably demonstrates, that the pressure of an Atmospherical Pillar in such like Hydrostatical Experi∣ments is a mere mistake.
REMARK the Twenty fifth. Another ingenious demonstra∣tion against the pressure of Atmo∣spherical Cylinders from the standing of the Mercury in the Tube, when the surface of the re∣stagnant Mercury is not passing one fourth part of the Basis of the Cylinder of Mercury in the Tube. REMARK the Twenty sixth. His Argument from the Torri∣cellian Experiment succeeding as well in a closed Receiver as in the open Air not imputable to the elasticity of the Air which suppos∣es pressure; it being already con∣futed here, and more particularly in his sixth Chapter by the two Brazen Cylinders in the water.
REMARK the Twenty seventh. His Experiment of the Bottle and heated Bolts-head, how well it is levelled against the elasticity of the Air, but his solution of the Phaenomenon unsatisfactory. REMARK the Twenty eighth. The Authour's Opinion that all those Experiments which the Vir∣tuosi would give an account of from the pressure and elasticity of the Air, are performed by suction and attraction, more strictly to be examined, in reference to that Ex∣periment of the weight hung at the Embolus of the Air-Pump. REMARK the Twenty ninth. The various standing of the Mercury in the Tube, according to the change of weather, or placing
it in higher or lower Air; how that Observation is manageable against the opinion of Tension and Mercurial effluvia. REMARK the Thirtieth. The unexpected motions and agitations of things (put into the Receiver) upon a strong exhausti∣on of the Air-Pump, that it is not from Tension of the rarefied Air, but from some such Principle as the furious and rapid motion of winds is, raised from the dissolution of the aqueous particles of the clouds. REMARK the Thirty first. That Experiment of Regius, of drawing Tobacco smoak through water in a covered Cup, by two pieces of a Tobacco-pipe, can be no instance of such an Attraction and Rarefaction as this Author stands for, but will serve to illustrate
some of the Phaenomena in the foregoing Remark. REMARK the Thirty second. A description of the Torricelli∣an Experiment in the chiefest ex∣ample. The groundlesness of the Authour's reasons of this Phaeno∣menon from the tension of the Mer∣curial effluvia in the derelicted space, discovered. REMARK the Thirty third. A discovery of the Repugnan∣cies of his solution of this Phae∣nomenon. His ingenuous confes∣sion touching the Phaenomenon of Gravity, that mechanical reasons are in vain attempted thereof. That Aristotle's Philosophy implies a Spirit of Nature.
REMARK the Thirty fourth. That the suspension of the Mer∣cury is not to save the Vniverse from Discontinuity, but to preserve the Air in its due consistency. And that it is not Air but one common Spirit that is the Cement of the Universe. REMARK the Thirty fifth. That Attraction is not to be proved from Cupping-Glasses, or the expansion of squeezed Bladders at the top of the Torricellian Tube. REMARK the Thirty sixt. What account is to be given of the jointly weighing of a Tube and Mercury, of a Tube and Water, and of a Glass and Water invert∣ed on Mercury and Water.
REMARK the Thirty seventh. The Authour's plain declarati∣on, that the Laws of Nature are not mechanical, together with the consequences of that concession, and the necessity of introducing a Spirit of Nature. The fond hu∣mour of the Philosophizers of this Age, who whenas their Nature consists of Spirit as well as Body, take all their measures of Philoso∣phizing from Body, none from Spi∣rit. REMARK the Thirty eighth. Of the sticking together of two Marbles; and that Fuga Vacui is but the final cause thereof: and what may be the Efficient. REMARK the Thirty ninth. Stevinus his Experiment of a
Rundle of wood lighter than wa∣ter laid upon the hole of a bottom of a Vessel to be filled with wa∣ter, &c. What an Argument it is against the Gravitation of water on water, and against that mon∣strous Elasticity (by some suppos∣ed) of the Air. REMARK the Fortieth. Of the close sticking together of the Magdeburg Hemispheres. That neither Tension of the in∣ward rarefied matter, nor the Ela∣sticity of the outward Air is the cause of it, as also what in all like∣lyhood is. REMARK the Forty first. The Authour's ingeniously con∣trived Pump, and his mistake in attributing a Phaenomenon in it to inward Tension, which is ra∣ther to be referred to the strength
of the Consistency of the outward Air. REMARK the Forty second. Other Phaenomena observable in the Authour's Pump, and how there is no need of Tension for the solv∣ing of them, but that they are no∣table intimations of the necessity of an Hylostatick Spirit in the world. REMARK the Forty third. An Argument from the Author's own Pump, that water is not sus∣pended in Pumps by Tension, but by Gravitation upwards, more ex∣presly here explained, and at last resolved into the Hylarchick Principle, together with a parti∣cular reason why in the proposed case of the Authour's Pump, upon the elevation of the Embolus, not one drop of water comes out.
REMARK the Forty fourth. The uncertainty of success, if the Pump were longer, or heat ap∣plied to the Glass; but certain, Tension would find no place there∣in. REMARK the Forty fifth. The raising water and suspension of it in a Pump how it is effected. REMARK the Forty sixth. The insinuation of the Air into the Cavity of a Well, whether it be the effect or the cause of the re∣cession of the water, or whether not rather both. REMARK the Forty seventh. Whether the protrusive force in a Pillar of free Air add any thing
to the Elastick pressure thereof, and whether the least proportion of Air has the same strength of spring that a greater. As also a notable Argument from the elasti∣city of Air not raising the water in the Authour's Pump one inch, when∣as it is pretended, that it will su∣stain 10 l. of Mercury 29 inches high; that there is no such Ela∣sticity at all. The Conclusion. Errata sic corrige. PAGE 9. line 21. read bodies. p. 37. l. 17▪ r. intrinsecalness. p. 107. l. 21. r. Tube. p. 146. l. 6. r. ordered. p. 177. l. 1. l. r. considerate,
Remarks upon two late in∣genious Discourses, THE ONE An Essay touching the Gravitati∣on and Non-Gravitation of Fluid Bodies, THE OTHER observations touching the Torri∣cellian Experiment. On the Essay touching the Gravitation or Non-Gravitation of Fluid Bodies, &c. Upon Chapter the Second. The first REMARK. IN this Chapter there are things said that are repugnant one to another. For in the very entrance of the Chapter the learned Author asserts that Gravi∣ty
is an intrinsecal quality of bodies whereby they tend Downwards to or towards the Center of the Earth; and yet afterwards toward the end of the Chapter, he affirms that fire may rightly be said to gravitate Upwards, &c. Now if that Definition be true, That Gravity is an intrinsecal quality of bodies whereby they tend to∣wards the center of the Earth; whether by Gravity be under∣stood a faculty or capacity of so tending, or the actual exercise thereof, we cannot avoid a re∣pugnancy. For if an actual ex∣ercise thereof be understood, that is Gravitation: Which here be∣ing affirmed to be the tending downwards of bodies towards the center of the Earth, it is a contradiction that the tendency of them upwards should be Gra∣vitation, but rather Levitation. But if by Gravity be understood only their Capacity of tending
downwards to the center, yet the actuality thereof will be Gra∣vitation, as that of Levity, Levi∣tation; and therefore according to this Notion of Gravity, can be only downwards, when as the learned Author after asserts that Gravitation is also upwards, which, I say, seems a contradicti∣on. But I rather interpret it an emendation of his former asserti∣on, and by after affirming that Gravitation is upwards as well as downwards, that he would insinuate, that it is really and in truth, (against that sense that Gravity and Gravitation is un∣derstood in the Schools) as well upwards, transverse, oblique as downwards, there being no way such Gravity or Gravitation as the Schools dream of, that is, from any inherent quality of the body it self, that may be called Gravi∣ty, but that it is a mere Idolum Fori, as My Lord Verulam would
call it, a false Notion sticking to the vulgar use and sense of that word, which me thinks this learn∣ed Author does apertly acknow∣ledge, and consequently explode that usual Notion, in these words where he says; That Gravitation is nothing else but Motus, or Ni∣sus ad motum secundùm lineam directionis ejusdem; and a little be∣fore, That Gravitation is nothing else but motion, or at least Cona∣tus or Nisus ad motum: Which in my judgment plainly takes away that false notion of Gravity and Gravitation, entertained by the Vulgar and the Schools. For it as plainly follows, by denying all intrinsecal nature to Gravita∣tion saving motus or nisus ad mo∣tum, that that Scholastick Gra∣vitation, or the specifick nature thereof is taken away, as by de∣nying that Homo is any thing but Animal vitâ sensú{que} praeditum, would take away the specifick
nature of man out of the Uni∣verse. The first part therefore of this my first Remark shall be, That, even according to the judgment of this learned Author, there is nothing in bodies but mobili∣ty and actual motus or Nisus ad motum, however they may be disguized under the vulgar Phra∣ses of Gravity and levity, of Gra∣vitation or levitation, &c. Secondly, That the Author, though in processe of his dis∣course he use these vulgar Phrases of Gravity and Gravitation, he is to remember that the true and Philosophical sense of them is no∣thing else but Mobility, and actu∣al motion, or actual Nisus ad mo∣tum; which if it be considered in its direction towards the Cen∣ter of the Earth, is more special∣ly noted with the name of Gravi∣ty or Gravitation. Thirdly, That if we will cau∣tiously
and severely Philosophise, we are not to imagine this actual motion or actual Nisus ad motum to be in any body, unless it be discovered there to be, by clear sense or reason; but rather not to be when we have diligently used these two faculties for to discover them, and yet they ap∣pear not. Fourthly, It is deprehensible neither by sense nor reason, that because water, for example, will nimbly run up a Tube let down into water, stopt with ones fin∣ger at the neather orifice, and then opened, that there was be∣fore any actual motion upwards in the water, or any actual Nisus ad istiusmodi motum, but that as to any such motion, it was at rest. Fifthly, That if the quick run∣ning up of the water into such a Tube be a solid argument of an actual Nisus of the water up∣wards,
even then when it has no such occasion to discover it self, the quickness of the ascent of the water is so great, and so equal to the descent of water in a crooked Tube of water opened at one end in the Air, after it is immersed into the water, I mean the other orifice stopt also with ones finger and them open∣ed again when it is let down at a sufficient depth, that the actual Nisus of the water, (suspended, suppose in a Bucket) downwards and upwards will be in a manner equal. So that the water will have no weight at all; in so much that another Bucket of the same weight and size, without any water in it, would be equipon∣derant to it. From whence Sixthly and Lastly it would follow, That we finding so great a weight from the wa∣ter in the full Bucket, with an actual Nisus downwards, there
must be a Being distinct from the water, that directs its moti∣on thitherward. But this is an Observation beyond my present scope. The rest, at least, will be useful for the better understand∣ing our selves in our following Remarks. Upon Chapter the Third. The second REMARK. IN the beginning of this Chap∣ter the Author seems to affirm that it belongs to solid bodies as such to have an actual pres∣sure, or Conatus ad Motum to∣wards the Center of the Earth, but to fluids onely as they are reducible to solids by being put into some Vessel; when as yet it is evident that some fluid bodies have a stronger pressure towards the Center of the Earth than many solid bodies. Thus bulk
for bulk water presses more strongly towards the Center than most kinds of Wood, and Quick∣silver than most kind of metals. Whence it is plain that Gravity is not to be esteemed from the fixedness of parts, but from the solidity of the particles, which that Principle that orders matter ranges accordingly. REMARK the Third. That also I conceive is a mi∣stake, in that he says, p. 15. l. 3. That though solid bodies do actu∣ally gravitate, yet the parts there∣of do not gravitate one upon ano∣ther because mutually and me∣chanically sustained one by ano∣ther, and in a state of continuity. For first, the continuity and fix∣edness of solid dodies in Nature is not Mechanical but per . And then that the parts do not gravitate one upon another is
not from their continuity, but Homogeneity or equal solidity of particles rather. Whence it is, that in fluids of an homogeneal Nature, the parts do not gravi∣tate one on another; but in so∣lid bodies and continued, if one side be pumiceous suppose and the other metalline, the metal∣line will gravitate on the pumi∣ceous or spungie side. Upon Chapter the Fourth. IN this Chapter and in the eight are laid down the two main Principles, which seem to be in∣tended against the force of my Demonstration in my Enchiridi∣um Metaphysicum, in which I so much exult, Cap. 13. Sect. 4. Both which therefore I shall more care∣fully examine. The Principle in this Chapter aimed at is: That in liquid bodies, suppose in wa∣ter, that a whole Column of wa∣ter
from the subjected body to the surface of the water does not gravitate, but only a Cap or Cone of it, at a little distance from the subjected body. Whence it might seem hopeful, That my Lamina lignea in a bucket, be∣ing pressed upon but by such a low Cone, and that the rest of the weight of the water discharg∣ing it self betwixt the sides of the Bucket and the lamina, might well raise it up, &c. But that this is only a witty phancy, I hope I shall make appear from these following Remarks. REMARK the Fourth. That the Residue of the Pyramis (p. 23. l. 13.) would stand without any gravitation upon the Cavity left by the subsiding of those sixteen stones and those that are meerly sup∣ported on them can be no ar∣gument,
that only a Cone or Cap of water gravitates on the round Lamina lignea, both be∣cause the Lamina lignea does not subside from the rest of the column of water above it, but bears against it, and also be∣cause if it should be imagined a little to subside, the particles of water being flexible would still lean toward the subsiding Cone, and being so infinitely small would certainly tumble after it if the Cone subsided to any di∣stance. So unfit is this compari∣son, though in other respects suf∣ficiently ingenious. REMARK the Fifth. And whereas this Learned Au∣thour saies, (p. 24. l. 8.) That this Instance of Masonry which he has given in square Stones, will hold in smaller and more irregu∣lar bodies, Experience will prove
they will not in those he instan∣ces in, Wheat, Sand, and Hail∣shot. For if there were an Hole made at the bottom, that that Cap, he imagines, might really subside and be taken away, the expected Arches in each experi∣ment would prove ill built by their sudden tumbling to the ground. Nor would the Egg-shell and its little Cap or Cone of Wheat stand as under an Arch supported by the rest of the Grains in the whole heap, as he affirms p. 26. l. 6. And therefore that the Egg-shell scapes so well is to be referred to some other cause. As for that lateral pressure per declive which may refract the perpendicular Gravitation of the grains of Wheat, I shall examine that conceit in itsRemark 8. 28. due place. REMARK the Sixth. That the Sand remained su∣spended
in the body of the Cy∣linder, is to be attributed to the weight of Lead that had cram∣med the Sand together, that espe∣cially toward the top, next to which it was, that it stuck by re∣nitence of its irregular parts, one against another, p. 27. l. penult. But what is this to the nature of water, where all is so infinitely glib and passable, one particle by another, not the least show of stuffing and cramming? A man might make a pair of Pinsers that set into a bed of Sand, (though the Pinsers be open above and beneath and Tube-like) which would pull up more sand than stuck in this Tube. And it is all one whether the Sand be pinched by such Pinsers or be pinched by cramming into such a Tube. That's all the Mystery of Mason∣ry that I can discern in this expe∣riment.
REMARK the Seventh. But that there was not any such Mechanical Incumbency of the particles of the Sand as left the Egg-shell as it were under an Arch, so that from thence it was that only a small Cap or Cone of Sand gravitated upon it, seems to me to be manifest, in that if there were an hole made of the same diameter with the Egg-shell, and the Egg-shell taken away, not only the Cap of Sand but the Arch would come tumbling down to the ground, and there∣fore that the Egg-shell is not damnified must proceed from some other cause. The Sand a∣bout the sides apparently protects it from the weight of the Lead. REMARK the Eighth. That the lateral direction in
the parts of Sand or such like bodies, p. 29. l. 3. should refract the perpendicular Gravitation, when as it self is but a lateral Gravitation or an hindred perpen∣dicular direction, in a Tube sup∣pose or Vessel, may justly be que∣stioned. For the Particles once checked by the sides of the Tube or Vessel, in all likelihood spend then all their direction down∣ward, or may be reflected more dangerously from the sides to the hazard of the Egg-shell: If the reason of things lay this way. REMARK the Ninth. That the Non-Gravitation of the small bodies, p. 31. l. 3. of Sand, Gravel and Shot, do not sufficiently prepare our minds to apprehend one of the Reasons of Non-Gravitation of Fluids, is manifest from that so often in∣culcated instance of the tumbling
down of the Arch at the real re∣moval of the Cone or Cap with the body subjected, and an hole made of equal bigness on an up∣per flore or table. Besides, though in such gross particles as Sand, and Wheat, and Shot, one part may help a little to sustain another: yet as in a Tube of Physical Monads, if they were imagined heavy, this would not at all be; so in water whose parts are so infinitely little in compari∣son of Shot, Wheat, or Sand, this Masonry of parts leaning upon parts would have no effect at all. Thirdly, If there were any such Masonry in the lying of the parts of water as might answer some way to the Figure, p. 21. all that artifice would be spoiled in boyling water or in water jumbled, in which notwithstand∣ing there is as little Gravitation of the parts as in that which is quiet.
Fourthly and lastly, Supposing there were this Masonry in water, this will not destroy the firmness of my demonstration from the round board at the bottom of the Buc∣ket, since the Diameter of the bot∣tom of the Bucket may bear such a proportion to the altitude of the Bucket, and so little distance left betwixt the round board and the sides of the Bucket, that there will be a great Horizontal section of the Cone in the Air above the Bucket or surface of Water in it, whence the residue of this supposed hollow Arch im∣pendent on the residue of the Cone must needs fall to it, and consequently the whole Cylinder of water over the board gravi∣tate on it, which shall be, suppose, 30 times more than that hollow Cylinder which is contained be∣twixt the convex of this Cylin∣der of water and the concave of the Bucket. And yet shall the
round board ascend. This is plain enough already, but if there could be any scruple, I could so encrease the proportion of the diameter of the bottom of the diameter of the bottom of the Bucket to its height, that the ve∣ry remainder of the Cone shall be, suppose, 30 times bigger than the remainder of the Vault that en∣virons the Cone, besidesSee Re∣mark 20. other ways by which this invention of the Cone or Cap in the subjected body in the water will be plainly deprehended to be only a witty Invention. Upon Chapter the Fifth. REMARK the Tenth. THose words p. 30. l. 9. [That it is certain, water hath an intrinsecal Gravity of its own as it is an heavy body] these words are the most clearly un∣derstood. Whether they be true
or false, from what I thought we were agreed on in the first and second part of my first Remark, That Gravity is nothing else but mobility, and Gravitation no∣thing else but motion or nisus ad motum. Gravity therefore be∣ing nothing else but mobility or a capacity of being moved down∣wards; this capacity is most cer∣tainly in it intrinsecally, and in∣deed in all other bodies besides. But if by Gravity should be un∣derstood such a principle in wa∣ter or any heavy body else, as by virtue whereof they would up∣on occasion move themselves downwards, That I make ac∣count not at all certain but raer false. REMARK the Eleventh. Water so long as water, p. 34. l. 21. is ever in its fluid consi∣stency, and therefore sometimes
does gravitate in its fluid consi∣stency, that is, has an actual mo∣tion or an actual nisus ad motum ad centrum Terrae. But that pres∣sure it seems to have, p. 35. l. 1. upon Quick-silver in a Vessel, is but ex accidenti towards the cen∣ter of the Earth it aims at the thin matter in the Torricellian Tube, or rather to reduce the matter to a due aequilibrium. Nor does it press upon the Quick-silver but with it, and vis unita fortior, as appears by the rising of the Mer∣cury in the Glass. Upon Chapter the Sixth. REMARK the Twelfth. THat a Bucket of Water should be as much one continued body as a Bucket of Pitch or Wax, is a me a Para∣dox, p. 42. l. 10. This cannot be unless the water were frozen.
And Pitch, and Wax, and Butter, and Ice, applyed to the fire, and so having their parts put upon motion, and thereby being made fluid, show plainly the nature of fluidity that it consists in smal∣ness of parts and the slippery mo∣tion of them one by another, which in water is very eminent; and their discontinuity is notably discernible also in that they are so exhalable by the Sun, and do so easily convey themselves into piles of Wooll, a Vessel of Wa∣ter placed in the room, if that experiment be true, as I never heard it contradicted. REMARK the Thirteenth. I only take notice here, p. 42. l. 14. that this learned Authour is mistaken in his Notion of the Principium Hylarchicum, which so oft occurrs in my Enchiridium MetaphysicumSee Dif∣ficiles Nu∣gae. Re∣mark 9.. For I do not
understand thereby any intelli∣gent Nature, but vital only, or at least mainly: I mean a Spirit indued with the plastick power of ordering the matter accord∣ing to certain general Laws which the Divine Wisdom hath vitally and essentially, though not intel∣lectually implanted in this Spirit of Nature as I else-where call it. For that there is no life but what is Cogitative, is a conceit taken up but yesterday, and I believe will as soon expire. That it is Plastical, and that it is not intel∣ligent, these two things I think I can and have demonstrated; but whether it may have some more sleepy drowsie sense in it also, I have not yet determined, and for the present think it hard to prove either one way or other, and I am loth to assert any more than I can prove.
Upon Chapter the Seventh. REMARK the Fourteenth. THE distinction of consider∣ing water as a solid body and as a fluid body (p. 49 & 50.) does not go well down with me. For Water so long as it is Water and not Ice, is always fluid, even then when it is enves∣selled; and if its entire tendency then towards the earth argue its solidity, it is a solid body also out of the Vessel, for it also then tends entirely and directly to∣wards the earth, as is seen in the drops of Rain. Wherefore we see no reason of reducing of en∣vesselled water to the nature of a solid body, that upon that pre∣tence the problem of its parts not gravitating one upon another may be thence solved.
REMARK the Fifteenth. The Non-Gravitation of the particles of water (p. 52. l. 1.) upon subjected bodies, is resolv∣ed into two Accounts. The first Mechanical, the second Natural. The Mechanical is proposed and applied in this Seventh Chapter, the Natural in the next. The Mechanical account is two-fold; The first from the Continuity of the particles of Water, the se∣cond from their Architecture or Masonry, supposing they were not continued. Now that that Account from the continuity of parts, whereby the Learned Au∣thour would have it to be a kind of solid body, That this is inva∣lid appears from the 3. and 12. Remarks. And indeed discon∣tinuity of the parts of water is palpable from their extreme soft∣ness to our very fingering: as
when any thing is ground, the samller the Powder is the softer it feels to our fingers, and conti∣nuity is nothing else but the fixt∣ness of part to part, whence hardness would necessarily arise, as appears in Water turned into Ice, which is nothing else but the fixing the aqueous parts one to another. REMARK the Sixteenth. And therefore this Learned Authour does well (p. 52. l. 21.) to admit at length, That water has the nature of separate bodies, and that its parts are only conti∣guous. But then when he flies for a solution of the present pro∣blem (why a whole column of water does not gravitate on the subjected body) to his Instances (p. 53. l. 8.) of a Pyramid of square Stones, a heap of Wheat and of Callice-sand, wherein an
Arch is made over the subjected bodies, &c. the invalidity of this Reason I have abundantly disco∣vered in my 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. and 9. Remarks. There is no compari∣son betwixt those gross parts in Rest, and these infinitely small particles of water, which are in Motion. REMARK the Seventeenth. The Authour seems to affirm that the Cartesian aqueous par∣ticles are infinitely more improve∣able (p. 53. l. 8.) for making an Arch for the ease and security of subjacent bodies,See Dif∣ficiles Nu∣gae. Re∣mark 6, 7. than those of Wheat, Hail-shot or Sand, when∣as doubtless they are infinitely less improveable, as being in pro∣miscuous motion according to Des-Cartes, the materia subtilis∣sima and the globuli interming∣led, nor are they in any order but what they perpetually slip
from; and how perfectly they are dis-intangled one from another, and slippery, is manifest to our ve∣ry senses, as I notedRemark 9. 15. before. REMARK the Eighteenth. He supposes (p. 54. l. 6.) that the union of the parts of water are much more close than that of the Monads of Callice-sand, because the water is quid conti∣nuum, though fluidum. But I haveRemark 12. 15. offered reasons that I hope are sufficient to evince, that it is not quid continuum but contigu∣um; and I farther add, that the parts of Sand being crammed so hard together and at rest, come nearer to the nature of continuity, than where the parts are in mo∣tion and come closer together, as it is in water.
REMARK the Nineteenth. The Learned Authour (p. 57. l. 3.) does acknowledge that in a Bucket of Water with a rundle at the bottom, if the bottom have an hole in it, the whole column of Water will gravitate on the Rundle, and not only a Cap or Cone. Here I demand how this hole at the bottom of the Vessel under the Rundle, the Water not running out, can con∣cern the supposed Arch, and cause a whole Cylinder of Gravitation on the Rundle, if there was this Masonry in this Phaenomenon and it were not to be salved by ano∣ther Principle? REMARK the Twentieth. Again, upon what occurrs, l. 12. That the Water will undermine a lighter body than the like
quantity of water commensura∣ble to its bulk, I would propound this experiment: Supposing the Bucket with an hole at the bot∣tom, as before, and that heavi∣er-wood-rundle almost equal to the bottom of the Bucket pla∣ced on it, and then a lighter-wood-rundle of equal diameter with the heavier placed on it, Whether the whole Cylinder of Water does not press on these Rundles, and not a Cap only, and whether notwithstanding the upper Rundle will not ascend? which is a sign that its ascending at other times is not to be impu∣ted to the Architecture of the Arch so ingeniously excogitated by this Learned Authour. But I will appeal to one Expe∣riment more which will take a∣way both these two mechanical Accounts at once, that of Con∣tinuity, and this of Architecture; and the Experiment is this: Let
there be a Bucket, whose con∣cavity is perfectly Cylindraceous, and the diameter of the bottom 63 parts: Let there be another Cylindraceous Vessel, whose in∣ternal diameter shall be 61 parts, external 62: Let there be at the bottom of this Vessel 4 little equidistant holes in the sides slooping inwards so as to come just to the bottom, that the Wa∣ter may no otherwise go out than just from the bottom up∣wards, nor ascend at all but by pressing to the bottom first. Put this Vessel into a Bucket to the bottom thereof, and hold it there so as that the top of the Vessel shall be equal to the top of the Bucket. Then pour in water till they be full to their brims, then take away your hand that held the Vessel to the bottom of the Bucket. The Vessel in the Buc∣ket will rise up higher and high∣er till there be no more thereof
immersed in water than is equal to such a moles of water as is equal to the whole Vessel in weight. The weight of the water on the bottom of this Vessel is near up∣on thirty times more than the water betwixt this Vessel and the sides of the Bucket, which should undermine it, and yet the Vessel rises, of which no account can be given, neither from the Con∣tinuity of the water; for the water in the Vessel is not con∣tinued with the exteriour water in the Bucket, but is only conti∣guous to the sides of the Vessel: nor from that Masonry of an Arch upon the Rundle or bot∣tom of the Vessel; for the whole moles of the water in the Vessel does as much entirely press on the bottom of the Vessel, as the whole moles of water in any Bucket does upon the bottom thereof. So wholly ineffectual
are these Mechanical Inventions of Continuity, and the Arch or Cone on the subjected bodies in water, for solving the Non-Gra∣vitation thereof. We shall now examine the Natural Account. Upon Chapter the Eighth. I observe that the Authour (p. 58. l. 13.) lays the main stress of all upon this Natural Account of the Non-Gravitation of Wa∣ter, either upon its inferiour parts, or any subjected body heavier or equal in weight to the like bulk of water. For this, says he, I take to be the true na∣tural specifical reason of the Non-Gravitation of Fluids, though the Mechanical reason before gi∣ven is not wholly useless, but con∣tributes its part to it. We will therefore be more diligent in ex∣amining this Natural Account.
REMARK the Twenty first. And for the better procedure in this business, upon his men∣tioning the intrinsecal Heaviness of a body, p. 59. l. 16. we are here to remember what we were, I thought, agreed upon in my first Remark, part the first and the second; That Heaviness or Gravity in a Body, is nothing but its Mobility, nor Gravita∣tion but its motion or actual Ni∣sus ad motum, and that that No∣tion of Gravity in the Schools is but Idolum Fori. That mobili∣ty and motion upwards is as in∣trinsecal to a body as mobility and motion downwards. That there is no motion nor Nisus ad motum discernible in water to any term, but when it is mis∣placed, so that all such motion is only upon occasion in it. And therefore when water ascends in
a Tube in such sort as is descri∣bed, Remark 1. part 4. That Mo∣bility and Motion upward is as intrinsecal to the water as its Nisus downward; for that Nisus downward is not but pro re nata, when it is misplaced. These things I hope will not be stuck at, if we have but recourse to my first Remark and the parts thereof. REMARK the Twenty second. This Natural Account of the Non-Gravitation of Fluids, which the Authour lays so much stress upon; is this, p. 62. l. 5. That they have several lines of their direction of Gravitation (that is of their motion, by Remark the first) and therefore necessarily one must be refracted, impeded, and abated by the other; and con∣sequently the direction of its per∣pendicular or lateral Gravitation
(or motion downward) is cor∣rected or very near wholly suspend∣ed by the other tendencies or di∣rections of its motion. This is the Learned Authours Natural Account of the Non-Gravitation of the parts of water upon wa∣ter, &c. REMARK the Twenty third. The Learned Authour brings in again (p. 63. l. 5.) the noti∣on and distinction of the termi∣nal motions or tendencies of wa∣ter as it is an heavy body, which are perpendicular towards the earth, which he calls the primi∣tive Conatus of all heavy bodies and the effect of their intrinsick Gravity; and the other motions and directions as it is a Fluid bo∣dy. This distinction he repeats again, p. 68. l. penult. Which lan∣guage if we will uncipher ac∣cording to our agreement in my
first Remark, the sense is this, That water as it is a body move∣able downwards, or has an in∣trinsick mobility downwards, has its direction towards the earth. But here I demand, If the mobi∣lity of water upwards be not as intrinsick to it as downwards, and the one conatus as primitive as the other, since they are both on∣ly ex data occasione, by the wa∣ters being misplaced? for where the water is rightly placed, it has no terminate motion at all, and therefore all the directions of mo∣tion in water as to primitiveness or intresecalness are of the same kind. And it has, as all other bo∣dies have, a mobility every way, but their actual nisus or motus is pro re nata. REMARK the Twenty fourth. And the Learned Authour, from p. 63. to p. 66. has
abun∣dantly well proved this mobi∣lity of water or its parts, that datâ occasione it will be moved upward, downwards, horizon∣tally, obliquely, and indeed eve∣ry way, and that to opposite terms in the very same lines. That is, that this may be caused at several times, and upon seve∣ral occasions. But that water has all these tendencies or pressures at once, that his experiments will no way reach to. This I think will plainly appear to any one that considers well my first Remark, part 3. 4. and 5. REMARK the Twenty fifth. In his description of this his Natural Account (Remark 22.) he declares that by the many other directions and tendencies in a fluid body, the perpendicu∣lar is very near wholly suspend∣ed, but here (p. 68. l. 27.) that
t possibly may be, that the line of direction in a perpendicular descent may be considerably stronger and more efficacious, and consequently the Gravitation stronger, because there contri∣butes to that motion, not only the nature of water as a fluid bo∣dy, but also as a heavy body. But besides what I haveRemark 2, 14. above no∣ted, that the distinction betwixt a heavy body and a fluid, where one and the same body is both heavy and fluid at once, is not so congruous, and that there isRemark 1, 10. no such primitive Gravity or Gravi∣tation distinguishable from the mobility and actual motion or tendency of any body down∣wards: admit this intrinsick Gra∣vity or Gravitation over and above to the mobility and motion of the water downwards, yet see∣ing the mobility and motion of the water upwards is as urgent and nimble as that downwards,
they do one utterly defeat ano∣ther, and for all these the water retains its intrinsick Gravitation still, so that this invention seems utterly useless, and the parts of water would press upon one ano∣ther notwithstanding this Hypo∣thesis. But if this intrinsick Gra∣vity be a mistake of the Schools, as I doubt not but that it is, then that inconvenience will return which I mention in my first Re∣mark, part 5. That a Bucket of water will have no more heavi∣ness in it than if it had no wa∣ter in it, which is contrary to experience, which are plain indications of the invalidity of this Natural Account. REMARK the Twenty sixth. He says notwithstanding, (p. 70. l. 9.) That if the line of the perpendicular descent of the Fluid be compared with all those
vari∣ous and many lines of its directi∣on, &c. that the perpendicular motion of its Gravitation as an heavy body will be near altoge∣ther abated. But it is to be ob∣served, that take all those various motions in, whereby it may seem hopeful that the intrinsick Gra∣vitation will be abated, they will yet contribute nothing thereto, because there is no tendency in any one line of them, but there is an equal contertendency in the same, so that their force is every way utterly defeated, as I noted of the perpendiculars before. REMARK the Twenty seventh. What he is observed to say in the former Remark, he farther illustrates and confirms (p. 71. l. 13.) by a like instance of Cal∣lice- sand, where he supposes their perpendicular Gravitation so hugely abated by their motion
per declive, and repeats the ad∣vantage Water has above the Callice-sand, because the parts of water are conjoined in one con∣tinuum. But that it is quite con∣trary I haveRemark 12, 15. above proved con∣cerning the continuity, asRemark 10, 21, 23, 25. See also Difficiles Nugae. Remark 2, 10, 11. also in that kind of perpendicular Gravitation, which is not pro re nata, but intrinsick. But we will here farther add, That if there were any such thing as in∣trinsick Gravity, every upper part would press on the lower, and the greatest pressure would be at the lowest, the least at top. So little service does this conceit of Continuity. And every grain of Sand where ever sited, would ad summum virium thrust down∣wards. REMARK the Twenty eighth. But that they do not thrust so peremptorily downwards, he says
(p. 72. l. 10.) the cause is appa∣rently beyond all contradiction, that the accidental tendency of the Sands per declive doth break the perpendicular Gravitation, so that it does not gravitate upon the most fragil subjected body in its full weight. That this is no such apparent cause, besides what we have notedRemark 8. above, that in the foregoing Remark does further confirm, if there were any such thing as intrinsick Gravity; and though the Sands tumble per de∣clive, it does not at all follow when they are stopt and rest, that they press per declive, but down∣wards. That an Animal there∣fore is not damnified under an high heap of Sand, may have some such reason as the suspension of Fluids. REMARK the Twenty ninth. Touching the further explica∣tion
and enforcement of this Na∣tural Account of the Non-Gravi∣tation of the parts of Fluids in a Cubick foot of water, which he supposes just twelve pound weight perpendicular, (p. 73. l. 3.) and that it is the common stock of all its pressures (p. 74. l. 2.) to be distributed as from one common cistern through so many Pipes (l. 6.) to serve all those Gravita∣tions or Conatus ad motum, for it hath not above twelve pound intrinsick weight to serve all these Conatus or Gravitations. Here methinks it is most apparently. deprehensible, that where there is acknowledged to be no other stock of intrinsick weight but this twelve pound to be derived to those multifarious actual Gra∣vitations, Horizontal, Oblique, and directly upward, and yet the virtue of this twelve pound per∣pendicular ponderancy is felt en∣tire still, that all the other actu∣al
Gravitations are mere imagi∣nations of a curious mind and no real effects in Nature. REMARK the Thirtieth. Indeed the Learned Authour seems aware of this difficulty and propounds it as such (p. 76. l. 3.) but I must confess I understand not the force of his answer, though he says it is plain. For he says the water in the Bucket is as fluid a body as so much wa∣ter in the Ocean, but the Bucket of water is as one solid body. The Bucket of water is the water in the Bucket, which cannot be fluid and solid at once. It is a perfect repugnancy in Nature. It is therefore most certainly a fluid body even in the Bucket, and will have all that belongs to a fluid body as such, all those se∣veral Gravitations, Oblique, Ho∣rizontal, and upward, if there
were any such, and that upward especially, there being nothing to bound it or check it, which yet is of the greatest force to lessen the perpendicular Gravitation. But that there are none such, is manifest from the entireness of the Gravitation downwards in the water of the Bucket: Sup∣pose 12 pound weight still, and were the bottom of the Bucket taken out at once as it hangs, the water would not as it comes out immediately spread Horizon∣tally, but descend directly down. So that the Horizontal sallies are only pro re nata made, when the water cannot get down perpen∣dicularly, nor attempted ever but ex data occasione, when the moving Principle is invited to act, which is true also of its Gra∣vitation downwards, which is never actual, but upon the wa∣ters being misplaced. But to phansie there is such a perpetual
Conatus every way and strong pressure to no purpose, is too much a-kin to those elastick thrusts and croudings imagined by others in the air, or that furi∣ous every way agitation of the matter in the Cartesian Philoso∣phy. The Laws of Nature assu∣redly are more orderly and still. To all which we will add, That if this were the main reason why the parts of water do not gra∣vitate one upon another in the Bucket, because the perpendicu∣lar Gravitation is so refracted, mi∣tigated, and as it were brought to an aequilibrium, by the other Gravitations; it would necessari∣ly follow, that the water in the Bucket being wholly turned in∣to Ice, and so really becoming a solid body, whereby all those other Gravitations saving the perpendicular would be extinct, that the perpendicular Gravitati∣on which was 12 pound weight
before, will be well nigh doubl∣ed, when as on the contrary it is rather lighter, proportionable to that moderate rarefaction it re∣ceived in the congeling: which plainly demonstrates that those other imagined Gravitations were not actual before, but that they are only made pro re nata, as I have intimated in my first Re∣mark, part 4.
UPON DIFFICILES NVGAE; OR, OBSERVATIONS Touching the TORRICELLIAN EXPERIMENT. HAVING by the former Remarks cleared my De∣monstration of the ex∣istence of the Principium Hylar∣chicum,Enchirid. Met aphys. cap. 13. sect. 4. or Spirit of Nature, by that Experiment of the Wooden Rundle rising from the bottom of a Bucket of water, from what obscurity or uncertainty the In∣vention of the Cap or Cone and the Every-way-Gravitation, or Ten∣dencies of motion imagined in Fluid bodies as such, might
in∣volve it in: I shall now chiefly raise such Remarks on this second Treatise, namely the Authours Observations touching the Torri∣cellian Experiment, which will make good a likeEnchirid. Metaphys. cap. 12. demonstrati∣on of mine from the ascending weight hung at the Embolus of the Air-pump, against this Learn∣ed Authours solution thereof, and of all such like Experi∣ments. The cause whereof he lays chiefly on Rarefaction and Tension of matter, &c. which he supposes to be real affections of Nature: and therefore I shall take these Notions at the first Rebound, as they occur in the second Chapter of this present Treatise.
Upon Chapter the Second. The First REMARK. THE Learned Authour here takes up Principles un∣proved, p. 21. and such as can∣not be proved by any Experi∣ment or Reason in Nature, nay such as are repugnant to Reason, and absurd if we more closely canvase them, and more conside∣rately search into them. That he has not proved them but merely applied them, is plain to any one that will give himself the divertisement of perusing his Treatise. And that they cannot be prov∣ed is manifest from the very No∣tion of Rarefaction and Conden∣sation, and of Tension and Resti∣tution, p. 21. l. 12. For Rarefa∣ction and Tension is when one and the same corporeal substance
oc∣cupies a greater space than be∣fore, but Condensation and Re∣stitution when it occupies less. These are the general natures (which is enough for my present purpose) in which they agree, I mean Rarefaction and Tension, and Condensation and Restitu∣tion, which were rashly admit∣ted by some ancient Philosophers as well as by modern, because they conceited there were no bo∣dies in the Universe, at least near our Earth, whose parts were more subtil than those of the Air, or else phancied the Air an absolute homogeneous body, nor looked upon it as consisting of any particles. So confused were their notions of this natural Phae∣nomenon. But that it consists of actual particles seems to me manifest, in that it is so easily divisible. The tender thred of a Spinner that hangs on a mans Hat, being able
to divide it in any assigned part, which were a thing incredible, did not the Air consist of parts merely contiguous, and that small ones too, and yet not of an infinite smalness; for as much as Air will not pass the pores of some bo∣dies, though of other some it will. And therefore seeing there is no vacuum, as is agreed on all sides, and that the parts of the Air are exceeding yielding to the least touch, which could not be if the main parts of the Air were of such Figures as would adequately fill all the space it is conceived to occupy; For then it would be so crammed that no∣thing could move easily or with∣out forcible penetration of di∣mensions: Wherefore there must be particles to fill the little inter∣vals betwixt the parts of the Air, and those exceeding small, that motion may be easie, and that
the fluitant parts of the Air in this more subtile Fluid may nimbly yield to motion every way, as we see it does. This is one way of proving there are exceeding small particles in the Air, distinct from the main and more proper particles thereof. But there is yet a more visible detection thereof in the Phaeno∣menon of light, in that it passes the pores of Glass, which the Air cannot pass. And that light is a subtil body, besides the Autho∣rity of the Ancients, the Refle∣xion and Refraction of it makes it abundantly manifest. How can the figure of a body, as in a Burning-Glass, direct the rays so to one point, if they were a mere quality and not thinner particles of matter in the Air? And as for the conceit of Species Intentionales, which they make Lumen Solis to be in respect of his Lux: that it is an impossible
Notion, I have demonstrated in my Enchiridium Metaphysicum.Cap. 19. Sect. 2. These hints are sufficient in an Argument so easily allowed by all unprejudiced Philosophers to demonstrate, that there areSee Remark 4. smal∣ler parts of matter than those that are properly Aëreal, and such as can penetrate the pores of bo∣dies when the Aëreal parts shall be forced to stand without. From whence therefore it will plainly follow, That these Prin∣ciples of Rarefaction and Con∣densation, of Tension and Resti∣tution of the Air cannot be prov∣ed to be in Nature, in such cases as this Learned Authour and others phansie they are. Because the coming in and re-ceding of the subtiler particles we have proved to be in Nature, will salve these Phaenomena, and show that it needs not be the same substance entire when it is rarefied, but subtiler parts may come in as
wa∣ter into a Spunge; nor when it is condensated, but the subtil parts may go out as water out of a Spunge. And there is the same reason of the Tension of the Air and its Restitution; it may be salved by egress and regress of subtiler particles, and the Tension and Restitution like a Lute-string may be a mere conceit. Nor are we content with this, but we also further affirm that it is de facto a mere conceit, as ap∣pears from that we have already proved, That the Air is so well replenished with matter far sub∣tiler than it self, even such as will penetrate Glass, and from what is acknowledged on all sides, that the Air is also com∣pressible. For from hence it will necessarily follow, that upon the compression thereof, that there may be no vacuum, or by a ne∣cessary circle of motion, those smaller particles will pierce any
Glass, as suppose the Glass-Tube in the Torricellian Experiment, of which we shall speak more parti∣cularly in its due place. Besides, the very notion of such a Rarefaction and Condensation, Tension and Restitution, as this Authour would have, is contra∣ry to the nature of a body, which the ancient Philosophers defined , a sub∣stance of trinal Dimension and impenetrable. And impenetrabi∣lity of body or matter is so ge∣nerally acknowledged as a real and inseparable property there∣of, that even those Philosophers that are for such a Rarefaction and Condensation, as Aristotle has broached, and this Authour main∣tains, have laboured tooth and nail, though in vain, to defend it from that absurdity of pene∣tration of Dimensions. To say nothing how it is a mere con∣founding of the properties of
Body and Spirit. For such a Ra∣refaction and Condensation as is here supposed, is too like the Dilatation and Contraction that belongs to particular Spirits. And lastly, if we consider more punctually and precisely, That if there be this Rarefaction, it must be either by encreasing the bulk of every Particle, sup∣pose of Air, thus rarefied, or by encreasing the number of the Particles (every Particle (a won∣derful imagination!) sending Particles out of it self to occupy a greater room) both the emissi∣tious and original particles in the mean time being without pores, at least so far forth as they are thus encreased (this new acqui∣red extension being not by ope∣ning and filling of pores (as in the Cartesian way) but by new continued quantity, or at least newly emitted) It is, I say, here manifest, That if the
en∣crease of the Particles be in bulk (since there is no other imagina∣ble or at least rational notion of Solidity, but Imporosity of mat∣ter, and close continuity of parts undivided into particles (For na∣tural experience teacheth us that looseness of Particles is the Ori∣ginal of Fluidity and softness) those Particles becoming bigger, in some cases it may be an hun∣dred or a thousand times, and being likewise solid; the effect of the Rarefaction would be, that the body rarefied would feel more gross than before, which is against experience. But however in the other case where the number is only encreased, those emissiti∣ous Particles by reason of their imporosity and close continuity of parts, are as really solid as those bigger. And therefore it is as hard to conceive that they can ever enter again into the par∣ticles out of which they were
emitted. To say nothing (since there is no vacuum) how hard a thing it is to conceit upon every such Rarefaction there is necessa∣rily this crouding of hard or so∣lid bodies into the like hard or solid bodies, so that they really penetrate, not pores but the very dimensions of one another, though thus hard and solid. And this in bodies unraresied, and that upon slight occasions and small force, which I must confess to me seems hugely harsh & absurd, and plainly against experience, even in soft bodies as in water; those for∣cible experiments that disprove its Elasticity, proving therewithal the Impenetrability of its parts. To all which I shall add, That this supposed Principle of Tension takes away all starting holes that might be sought in bringing in any interspersed vacuities or empty pores in bodies, which would be a Discontinuity or
Dis∣contiguity of matter in the world, which this Tension is pretended a Fence against. And besides, if there were any such interspersed vacuities, so that matter might be driven up closer into them, that would still make my Demon∣stration from the Air-Pump more firm, and the ascending of the weight would be still the more marvellous, and require the more necessarily a Principium Hylar∣chicum, the Defence of which is the great scope of my present Remarks. But to admit so in∣credible and unconceivable affe∣ction in Nature as the mutual Penetration of Dimensions, even in hard or solid bodies, (for the littleness of them hinders not but that they are really hard or solid) is an Hypothesis so like the rude crouding and intolerable pres∣sing, in that prodigious Elasticity of the Air, that I hope this in∣genious Authour will be as
cau∣tious how he over-firmly adheres to the one, as he has been judi∣cious in exploding the other. Upon Chapter the Third. The second REMARK. THE Learned Authour says, That the upper parts, p. 30. of a Cube of Lead do not actually gravitate upon the in∣feriour parts, because the up∣per are Mechanically impeded by the lower from their actual gravitation upon them; yet eve∣ry Atom thereof contributes to the gravitation of the whole up∣on the Scale. The former he calls, p. 32. Gravitation ad mo∣tum, the latter Gravitation ad pondus. But it is very hard to conceive if there were any such thing as Intrinsick Gravity, that is, a nature in the Lead it self whereby it was carried down∣ward,
that it should not have every part of it Gravitationem ad motum, or Conatum ad mo∣tum, since no inferiour part can Mechanically hinder the superi∣our part from this Conatus, and every natural Agent is supposed to act ad extremum suarum viri∣um: And that no parts are idle, appears from the Gravitation ad pondus, if there were any such Intrinsick Gravity. Wherefore in that they do not Gravitate one upon another, as they do when Lead and Clay are conti∣nued together, and the Clay un∣dermost, p. 31. l. 16. is not from any Mechanical continuity, but from the same reason that is in Fluids of the same kind, the parts press not one upon another because they are not misplaced, but are ranged in that order that is agreeable to the Laws of that Immaterial Principle. But if the parts were not thus ordered by a
Principle distinct from them, but their Gravitation were from their own innate Gravity, it were incredible, nay impossible that there should be a Gravitati∣on ad pondus of the parts, and none ad motum. For if the in∣nate Gravitation of each part of the Leaden Cube did not bear against its fellow downwards, there would be no bearing a∣gainst the Scale at all; as is mani∣fest to any one that thinks close on the matter. The Third REMARK. He says, p. 42. l. 16. That the reason why a Glass Tube of Oyl immersed to such a depth into a Vessel of Water, will some of it go out, but immersed lower it will stay in, and if lower, will ascend in the Tube, &c. is this; because there is a greater pressure or renitence in the last place than
in the second, and in the second than in the first, and therefore less force is required to raise the superficies in this first case than in the second, and in the second than in the third. This is in∣genious, but there is this obstacle to the truth thereof: For let the first place be A. the second B. the third C. And let us consider that the Oyl going out at A. the whole body of the water from A. to the superficies is raised up at once, and there ap∣pears no hillock of water above the Oyl at A. on the superficies or on a Vessel of Oyl above the water at A. supposing water let into a Vessel of Oyl after the same manner by a Glass Tube. Now besides that it is incredible that so little portion of water or Oyl effused at A. should at all be able to-raise the whole bulk of water or Oyl in the Vessels, from the whole superficies where
A. is (though never so little) towards the tōp of the Vessels; it is also further demonstrable that the increase of Renitence or Pressure of the water against its being raised higher in B. more than in A. and in C. more than in B. is not the reason that the Oyl in the Tube put in Water, or Water in a Tube put into Oyl, does not go out at B. and ascends at C. For it would fol∣low, that a Tube of Oyl put into a Vessel of Water of a far great∣er diameter than before, suppose twice as great, and the Tube again immersed to A. that is, to an equal depth as before, the Oyl would not go out, since the bulk of the water from A. to the superficies is four times as big as it was before, and therefore the Renitence against being rais∣ed higher, should nigh hand in∣crease in proportion. And yet the Oyl goes out at A. as before,
notwithstanding this imagined Renitency. Whence it is plain it is not the force of effused Wa∣ter in the Oyl, or Oyl in the Water, that can raise the Water or Oyl one Atoms breadth high∣er, but the preventing activity of that immaterial Principle that disposes all the parts of the Li∣quors in the Vessel, orderly and at once, there being no crowd∣ing nor pressing any way, one part on another. And that the Pewter Porringer full of Hail∣shot weighed in Water, p. 43. l. 23. is found from the bottom to the top in a manner of equal weight, is not because it forces the superficies of the water no higher in one position than ano∣ther, but because the water is no heavier at one depth than ano∣ther, that is, is not heavy at all.
Upon Chapter the Fourth. REMARK the Fourth. P. 50. l. 23. IN this page the Learned Authour does in a manner acknowledge what I so diligently endeavoured to prove in my first Remark, part 4. For he compares the Air to a vast Net with small Mashes or interstitia, fitted gradually with parts more and more subtil, wherein he judges right, saving that by the comparison of the Net he would insinuate a conti∣nuity of the Air, which I have sufficiently disproved, Remark 1. part 3. REMARK the Fifth. The Compression of divers par∣ticles of the Air, saith our Au∣thour, p. 51. l. 13. may render
that compressed body of Air sen∣sibly heavy: whence he inferrs, that we may not wholly exclude those Particles from all kind of Gravity before compression. For no weighty body can arise from the coalition of such parts as had no manner of Gravity before. The conclusion bears some show of concinnity with it; but me∣thinks the Inference would be more safe, if one should argue from hence that there is no such thing as innate Gravity, since that which appeared a light bo∣dy before, without adding any real quality, but by only thrusting the parts nearer together, it got a motion downwards. Which there∣fore implies that that motion is from some other substance, not from the compressed Air it self, and that fire, if it could be com∣pressed, would also tend down∣wards. As the matter thereof does tend downwards plainly in
wood, but the parts of wood attenuated and agitated tend up∣wards in the form of fire; which is no obscure intimation that it is not any inward particular form or quality, that is that which moveth things upward or down∣ward, but a distinct immaterial Principle that is the orderer and disposer of the matter of the uni∣verse, according to the more or less solidity in its consistency. REMARK the Sixth. He asserts in this page 63. as also p. 51. l. 2. That there is not that strict cohaesion of one part of water with another, as with one part of air with another, and yet as I have above noted, the Air is dividable by the thred of a Spinner hanging on ones Hat; how dividable then and separa∣ble is one part of water from ano∣ther, that is more easily disjungi∣ble
than Air it self, and how un∣fit for such Architecture of the imagined Cone or Cap in the for∣mer Treatise? REMARK the Seventh. After an experiment made with a Glass-Siphon with Quick-Silver and Water, the longer leg of the Siphon being 32 inches, the short∣er 8. and the shorter leg having something a larger Diameter than the longer (which experiment is thus: 1. He filled the shorter leg with Mercury till it ran up as high in the longer, that is 8 inches ac∣cording to the law of Fluids, and stopping the shorter with his fing∣er filled the residue of the long∣er with water, whereupon the Mercury in the longer leg subsi∣ded to two inches and a quarter, 24 inches of water driving it so far down, though 28 inches of water is the usual counterpoise to
two inches of Mercury. 2: Hav∣ing filled again the Siphon with Quick-silver as at first, and im∣mersing it into a Tube of water 32 inches high, so that the co∣lumn of water over the shorter leg was full 24 inches, yet those 24 inches drive the Mercury in the shorter leg but one inch down, and raised it one inch in the lon∣ger. 3. Having poured water into the longer leg of the Siphon, so that the Mercury subsided two inches, and as much flowed out at the shorter, and then immer∣sing again the Siphon into the Glass-vessel 32 inches deep filled with water, the Mercury subsid∣ed near an inch in the shorter leg, and accordingly impelled the Mercury into the longer.) Upon this experiment, I say, he makes this observation, p. 67. l. 1. That notwithstanding the advantage of the larger Diameter of the shorter leg, the Gravitation of
the external water or any imagi∣nary column thereof, was not half so much as the Gravitation of the Cylinder of water includ∣ed in the Tube, he means, the longer leg of the Siphon, which I conceive to be a plain mistake; For neither is that larger Diame∣ter in the shorter leg any advan∣tage, but a disadvantage; the mo∣tion of Fluids being swifter out of a narrow passage into wide than vice versâ: nor is there any indication in all these experi∣ments, that the Gravitation of the 24 inches of water in the longer leg does gravitate as much more as the column of water of 24 inches impendent over the orifice of the shorter leg. For in the first instance, where 24 inch∣es of water drives the Quick-silv∣ver 2 inches and ¼ downward in the longer leg, it is because of the largeness of the Diameter of the shorter leg, or by reason of its
wideness. So when the 24 inch∣es of water and the Quick-silver was to balance against it, it re∣quired more Quick-silver to be at a counterpoise with it, than if it had had the same Diameter with the longer shank; and hence it is, that the Quicksilver subsides so far in the longer shank, and not the discontinuity of the wa∣ter in it from other water. And now we come to the second in∣stance, it is to be noted that the impendent column of water driv∣ing the Mercury one inch down∣ward in the short leg, and so consequently raising it one in the longer, that there will be 9 inch∣es in the longer leg, and but 7 in the shorter; so that upon the mat∣ter the column of 24 inches in the water poizes as much against the Quick-silver in this experi∣ment, as that water in the long∣er shank did in the former. For here it ponderates against 2 inch∣es
of Quick-silver, there but a∣gainst 2 and ¼, nay I may safely say against above two in this; For if it was driven down one inch in the shorter but wider shank, it must needs rise above one inch in the other; and I doubt not but a quarter of an inch or thereabout, if the Au∣thour had taken so punctual no∣tice of it. And as in these two instances in several, the column of the water in the water is found to be aequiponderant to a column of so many inches in the longer shank of the Siphon, so we shall find them in this last and joint experiment. For upon the pour∣ing water into the long leg of the Siphon there remained but 6 inches of Mercury in that leg, and 8 in the other, wherefore upon the immitting of the Siphon into the Glass-Tube, and there being found about an inch sub∣siding in the shorter leg, and
a rising as much in the longer; it is manifest that in each leg there was about 7 inches height of Quick∣silver a piece, and that the column of water in the water gravitates as much as the column of water in the longer shank of the Siphon, and not only half as much, as our Authour would have it; which is an excellent experiment against his supposed Masonry in the ele∣ment of water, and that each part of water by each part doth most glibly slip: And that there∣fore this imaginary Architecture can contribute nothing to the ri∣sing of the round wooden Run∣dle from the bottom of the Buc∣ket, on which I build that no∣table demonstration of mine in my Enchiridium Metaphysicum.
Upon Chapter the Fifth. REMARK the Eighth. THat experiment of Stevinus, that a Rundle placed on the bottom of a Vessel with a hole in it, so that the Rundle somewhat overlaps the hole, p. 94. l. 4. that the Rundle will gra∣vitate upon that hole and the in∣cumbent Cylinder of water com∣mensurate in base to that Rundle so hard and close, that it requires a weight in a pair of Scales near commensurate to the weight of the impending Cylinder of water to raise it from the bottom; I say this Experiment is an Argument against that Invention of the Cap or Cone, and the rest of that Ar∣chitecture in the foregoing Book. For the hole under the Rundle cannot be conceived any Mecha∣nical cause at all, why the same
Architecture may not be that was imagined before, and yet the Rundle ariseth not in the Vessel, nor does the water sile thorough. REMARK the Ninth. That the Rundle ariseth not in the Vessel the Learned Authour offers this reason, because the water gravitates now upon the Rundle, as having mediately a lighter element, namely the Air upon which it gravitates, l. 23. But being as firmly sustained as before from passing to the Air, why should it gravitate any more than before? And besides if the bottom of the Bucket be some∣what higher than the Basis of the Ribs of the Bucket on which it may stand, and there be a second bottom made to keep the Air be∣twixt this second bottom and the former perforated bottom from communicating with the
rest of the Air; it is worth the enquiring whether the Rundle then will not rise, because the Abituriency of the Air which was in the other case, is thus sufflami∣nated? Whence it would be plain, it was not simply because there was Air beneath, that the water gravitated on the Rundle, but because that Air was in the state of Abituriency, or at least in sufficient quantity to colluctate with the water, the Principium Hylarchicum upon such hints, by reason of the quick motion of those Laws of Life in it, putting this under-Air into that Abituri∣ent state, and therewithal carry∣ing the water raptu consensûs in∣to an actual tendency downward, and so thrusting the Rundle clos∣er to the Hole, intangles it self in its own attempt, as not acting by free reason and counsel, but by some general Laws of instinct of life, which in some such by-cases
do not further but hinder the effect generally produced by Nature. Whence it is evident that this Spirit of Nature is not the first Cause, which is the Aeter∣nal Wisdom, but a mere inferiour Creature. But this is but by the by. REMARK the Tenth. Our Authour mentions an ex∣periment of an empty Glass-bot∣tle carefully stopt, and sunk a great depth into the Sea, that the pressure of the water will break it a-pieces, p. 95. l. 9. And he resolves it into this reason, because the water presses against a lighter Element, the Air, though mediately through the Glass. But I say, that is not the adequate cause thereof, that it has a ligh∣ter Element near to it, but be∣cause that the Element is mispla∣ced, for the upper part of the
water in a Vessel does not press against the Air in the Vessel that is incumbent on it; but if a Bottle of Air were let down into the Sea with its mouth down∣ward, and well stopt to keep out water, yet the water will thrust the Cork upward and drive it in. But that is because the Air is mis∣placed, and put in the Element of water, which methinks are very apert insinuations, that there is no such thing as intrinsick Gra∣vity, but that matter moved is moved by a principle distinct from it self. For the parts of the water of the Sea do not press one a∣gainst another, neither before nor after the Bottle is let down, and yet there is such a pressure on the Bottle once let down, that either the Cork is driven in or the Bot∣tle broke in pieces. The other two instances also the Authour mentions in this page tend to the same purpose, I mean those of
Oyl driving Water upwards, and Water Quick-silver, of which he declares p. 96. 1. thus. For in these instances though the im∣mediate contiguity be of the hea∣vier body to the lighter, as Oyl to Water, and Water to Mercury, yet the Air being behind the Mer∣cury in the longer leg of the Si∣phon, and behind the Water in the Tube, the Water in the one case and the Oyl in the other, doth in truth gravitate upon the Air mediately and effectively, rather than upon the immediate heavier fluid. Which would plainly be a Gravitation upwards, and therefore the more harsh phrase and sense, but may justly insinu∣ate to this Authour the reasona∣bleness of their opinion that hold, there is no inward Gravi∣tation at all, but that the matter is moved pro re nata, and rang∣ed by the Spirit of Nature, ac∣cording to certain Laws
gene∣rally good for the Universe, and essentially implanted in the said Spirit. And these last Phaeno∣mena are easily resolved into the first Hydrostatical Axiom in my Enchirid. Metaphys. c. 13. sect. 10. Upon Chapter the Sixth. REMARK the Eleventh. The reason assigned, p. 101. l. 6. why a small Glass-Tube of so many Inches long, and filled up with water, and stopt with ones finger at the lower end, and let into a Vessel of Water of a competent diameter and depth, upon the unstopping of the low∣er end, all the water in the Tube above the superficies of the wa∣ter in the Vessel will run down till' it be no higher than the said superficies, namely, because if it obtain never so little more height
in the Pipe than in the Vessel, it has a greater force to press down∣wards than the water in the Ves∣sel has strength to resist it; this reason I conceive does not quite exhaust the difficulty: For sup∣pose this Pipe of but a quarter of an inch diameter, and a Buc∣ket of a foot and a half, and deep a foot, and the Pipe 9 inches and half a quarter long, and 9 inches thereof in the water, so that there is but half a quarter of an inch of the water to press up by its force to some, though very little, height, a moles of wa∣ter of 9 inches deep, and a foot and an half diameter, how is it possible that the force of intrin∣sick Gravity of a Cylinder of wa∣ter but a quarter of an inch di∣ameter, and half a quarter of an inch altitude, should raise at all a Cylinder of 18 inches diame∣ter and 9 inches in altitude, if some principle distinct from both,
did not assist? For the one Cy∣linder exceeds the other above some hundred thousand times, and yet the pressure of this little Cy∣linder must raise the great one by its own force, if there be no other principle to help, nor pe∣netration of dimensions, which is even as absurd as the other. Or if you take the 9 inches of water more in the Tube into your compute, yet this added to the abovesaid Cylinder of but half a quarter of an inch high, will be above 5000 times less than the exteriour Cylinder. So big is the absurdity still. REMARK the Twelfth. The falling off and sticking to of the obturaculum in a Tube with a valve according as the Tube is less or more immersed in the water; my reason of this Phaenomenon given in my Enchi∣ridium
Metaphysicum, cap. 13. sect. 17. this Learned Authour says, p. 103. he is as much dis∣satisfied with, as with the reason of the excellent Authour of the Hydrostatical Paradoxes, but he alledges nothing against it but that it is an obscure solution. When as yet this I think therein is very plain and intelligible, that if there be what I declare, quaedam quasi sursum suctio Aëris in Tubo contenti, & conformis ac contemporanea aquae compulsio in obturaculum GIH &c. that that is a very solid Reason why the obturaculum when this suction is strong enough (which is when the Tube is let down deep enough) by a circle of mo∣tion, or at least a joint com∣pression of the water at the same time against it, should be kept up from falling. For upon this abiturient state of the Air, it be∣ing more vigorous than that im∣pulse
that should carry down the Obturaculum, (or rather that Principle that moves the matter being rapt into one consent of circular motion from the bottom of the Air in the Tube to the top, and then down into the wa∣ter till it reach the Obturaculum under the Tube, urging the wa∣ter as if it would ascend up, (which it would do but for the Obturaculum) in pursuit of the Air so drawn upwards, till it was even with the superficies of the water) it is manifest that the Obturaculum upon that abituri∣ency is driven upwards, and that the motion in order of Nature is first there in the air of the Tube; for as much as if the abituriency of the Air in the Tube be stopt with a mans finger at a due near∣ness, or by a moveable Embolus, the Obturaculum that at such a depth clave close before to the Valve, will presently fall down,
which is a plain demonstration that the rise of the motion of pressure against the Obturaculum is from the air in the Tube first moved, according to that Law of the Principium Hylarchicum con∣teined in my first Hydrostatical Axiom, Enchirid. Metaphys. cap. 13. sect. 10. which causes this joint motion or pressure against the Obturaculum. This cannot be obscure to any that acknow∣ledge that a Spirit endued with plastick life, though devoid of understanding, and it may be of any acute sense, is able to move matter. REMARK the Thirteenth. And from what we have said in the foregoing Remark, it is evident I conceive that this Learned Authour is out in the account of this Phenomenon. For p. 110, and III. he resolves
the sticking of the Obturaculum to the Valve, into the Tubes pressing up a portion of water of a greater weight than it. If the Sucker, says he, (which answers to that which I call the Obtura∣culum) be drawn up (p. 110. l. 12.) and then immersed so low that the portion of water impelled up by the Tube does exceed the weight of the Sucker, the Sucker will be sustained by the pressure of the water upon it: But if the weight of a moles of water, saith he, commensurate to so much of the Tube as is immersed in the wa∣ter, be less than the weight of the Sucker, the Sucker by its own weight will subside. That this reason is maim, is apparent from hence; That if the Tube be let in so low that it raised a moles of wa∣ter whose weight is much great∣er than the weight of the Obtu∣raculum, or Sucker, and that for the present the Obturaculum will
stick to the Valve, yet if the Tube be stopt with ones finger, or rather by a moveable Embo∣lus at a due nearness to the Valve, the Obturaculum will suddenly fall; whence it is manifest, that the Solution is not finally to be made into the raising of the wa∣ter to several heights, upon which its pressure should encrease a∣gainst the Obturaculum, but into the abituriency of the Air in the Tube or just quantity thereof, and of the several forces of that abituriency into the laws of mo∣tion, innate or essential to the Spirit of Nature or universal Transposer of the parts of the mat∣ter of the world. For where there is no raising of the water high∣er at a deeper descent to make its pressure greater in the immit∣ting Air into Water, as in a Glass filled with Air and well stopt let down into the bottom of the Sea, upon a deep descent it will break,
though upon a moderate it will not (though it raises the water alike in both cases.) Which is resolvible into nothing but the greater excitement of the force of the Principium Hylarchicum, upon the greater transgression of those Hylostatick laws vitally and essentially included in it. For the parts of water in water do not gravitate one against ano∣ther, and they have as much room to play in when a Bottle of Air is sent down into the Water, as when a Bottle of Water of the same size is sent thereinto. But the Air in the former is mispla∣ced, contrary to the Hylostatick laws of the Universe.
Upon Chapter the Seventh. REMARK the Fourteenth. IT is a very notable and plea∣sant Experiment the Learned Authour mentions, p. 118. l. 19. It is most evident to any mans sense, quoth he, that will but try, that if a Tube be open at both ends and filled up with Mercury, and then one end stopped with the finger, and the other end in∣verted and immersed in the re∣stagnant Mercury, whereby it de∣scends from the top of the Tube, a strong and sensible attraction is wrought upon the pulp of the up∣per finger that closeth it, which continues and grows more and more forcible, sensible, and evi∣dent, the further the Mercury is removed from the upper end, and approaches to its usual station of 29 inches. This is his experi∣ment,
which to me is a seasona∣ble confirmation of what in the foregoing Remark I observed. That the force of activity in the Principium Hylarchicum or Hylo∣staticum is excited proportiona∣bly to the measure of misplace∣ment of the parts of the matter of the Universe. But as for the Learned Authours solution of this Phaenomenon, I mean of this attraction of the pulp of his fin∣ger at the top of the Tube, I must confess I am not at all satisfied with, and look upon it as a kind of Philosophical incivility, when∣as so eminent a fellow Creature as this Hylostatick spirit, took the opportunity of pulling him by the finger, when he could not shake him by the hand, that he would not embrace this offer of acquaintance, nor take notice of the existence of such a Being in the world, which I must confess, I think, this Phaenomenon is a nota∣ble
evidence of, so circumstantiat∣ed as this Authour hath described; for it is not Impulsion ab extrà as he describes it. For, says he, most evidently the force the finger feels is from within and not from with∣out: and when he says, it is upon the pulp of the finger and not the quitching of the skin, it is apparent that that force is in his very finger, not on the outside, whether in the Tube or without. And therefore it cannot be the contiguity of any body in the Tube, as our Learned Authour would have it, by which this at∣traction is made, but it is the Hy∣lostatick spirit of Nature, that upon unexpected occasions, after an unexpected manner moves the matter, and it was a kind of an attempt of this Hylarchick Prin∣ciple to expand and rarifie the pulp of the finger to supply the absence of the Mercury. Its tug∣ging therefore of the pulp of the
finger toward the Cavity of the Tube, made the sense of the At∣traction into it. But that this Attraction could be by no con∣tiguity of any body in the Tube, appears from hence, that then it would have been felt more parti∣cularly and distinctly in the very exteriour skin. REMARK the Fifteenth. The other two instances out of Honoratus Faber which this Learned Authour brings, p. 120. seem to favour my sense of the first. For the Papyr extendible by force, but otherwise contract∣ing it self, made fast at the upper end of the Tube, and upon the descent of the Mercury being ex∣tended, as also a Bladder so fast∣ned and close tyed in the neck, and being blown out at the de∣scent of the Quick-silver, both these seem effects of an ineffectual
effort in the Hylarchical Spirit of the world to supply that na∣kedness or emptiness of the Tube of that matter it ought to be re∣plenished with, as far as it can, and that makes it extend the Pa∣pyr to supply as far as it will go, and to blow up the Bladder by putting the grosser Particles in it upon motion, that is, rarefy∣ing what moisture there is in the Bladder, which, it is no wonder, when there is a hole in the Blad∣der, is not done, for then those Particles get out and are disper∣sed throughout the whole vacui∣ty. But that the whole Bladder should be blown up by attracti∣on, I shall take occasionRemark 32. here∣after to show to be a mistake. REMARK the Sixteenth. That Aphorism of our Learned Authour, p. 122. That regularly all natural bodily effects are
wrought by a contact of some active body upon the patient. This to me seems to contradict the Phaenomena of Nature, and in motion confessedly so called, most numerously and universally, which is not, unless ex accidenti, Mechanical but vital. The de∣scent of a stone is vital, as I have proved in my Enchiridium Meta∣physicum, but its hitting or oc∣cursion against any thing where∣by it moves, that is only Mecha∣nical motion in the thing so mov∣ed, otherwise motion is not by knocking or crowding, but by vital transposing of parts, as is most manifest in Fluids, the parts not gravitating one against ano∣ther, but being jointly and free∣ly moved by that vital Principle, which we call the Hylarchick Spi∣rit of the world.
Upon Chapter the Eighth. REMARK the Seventeenth. OUR Authour reasons pas∣sing-well against a free per∣meation of the Aether into the Glass-Tube derelicted of the Quick-silver, because the Quick∣silver then would subside to the bottom, as when there is but a hole at the top of the Tube no bigger than a Pins point, because then the Air he thinks may come in freely, so if the Aether could come in freely through the pores of the Glass, the Mercury would subside in that case too. But that the subtiler parts of the Air or Aether cannot upon occasion (though not so freely) penetrate the pores of the Glass, His Ar∣guments for this Assertion seem to me altogether unsatisfactory. For if I understand him aright, the first thing he offers to prove
it by, is, That if they could pe∣netrate at all they would pene∣trate freely, and then the for∣mer Inconvenience would return. The second is a denial, or suppo∣sal that there are no such pores in Glass as any such smaller Particles can go thorough. But to the first I answer. That though the pores of the Glass be pervious enough to the Aether or subtiler parts of the Air, yet the Rni∣tency of the natural consistence of the Air will not for-go them but by some force, and a less pres∣sure or force than of a column of Quick-silver of about 30 inch∣es high will not prevail, any a∣bove it will. To the second, That in my first Remark I have hinted that (part 4.) which will sufficiently prove that there are pores in the Glass as well as par∣ticles subtiler than the Air to pass through them, as is appa∣rent in the direction of the rays
to one point through a Burning-glass, against what our Authour here declares that there is only a vis, virtue or vigour corporeal, no substance that penetrates the Glass. For as bodies are only tangible, so they are only reflex∣ible and refractable; To which you may add, that the lightness and frangibleness of Glass are far∣ther Indications of its porosity. These things are so plain to the unprejudiced that it is needless to insist on them. REMARK the Eighteenth. And yet we may use a further confirmation of the subtiler parts of the Air passing the pores of the Glass, from the Authours own concession, p. 128. l. 18. that they pass not through the Mercury, as he conceives they do in the inverting a Glass-Tube of Mercury on the free Air, in
which case he observes bubles ascending in the Mercury as it de∣scends; but there being no such tumultuary motion of the Mer∣cury in the Torricellian Experi∣ment, he concludes, no parts of Air pass through the Mercury into the Tube. And therefore say I, it is the plainer case they pass through the pores of the Glass only in this experiment. Upon Chapter the Ninth. REMARK the Nineteenth. Of which we shall be the bet∣ter assured, after we un∣derstand that the Authours Rea∣sons in this Ninth Chapter for the ascent of steams or vapours from the Mercury it self, p. 139. l. 13. are not sufficient. For the two ways that he offers for the separating these steams or va∣pours from the body of the Mer∣cury
are, The first, expression or driving them out by the strong descent of the Mercury and com∣pression of the inferiour parts by the superiour. The other, is ex∣traction or straining out those parts that are more subtil and flu∣id, and capable of expansion, &c. To which I answer, that these two ways are in a manner one and the same, or at least the stress lies upon that one first, which if it fail the other will sig∣nifie nothing. And methinks it is apparent at least in such a case as this, that it will signifie no∣thing, namely, if the Tube filled with Mercury be immitted into the restagnant Mercury, very much inclining, and be raised to a perpendicular by degrees and leasurely, for then there being no such jolting of one part against another, but a gently bringing one part over another perpendi∣cularly, and being so posited,
they according to the law of Fluids not gravitating one part upon another in the Tube above the surface of the restagnant Mer∣cury, and having but little un∣der to gravitate upon, nor the restagnant Mercury (according to the same law of Fluids, even then when it was made some∣thing to ascend by the Mercury descending from the Tube) gra∣vitating one part upon another, it is manifest there was no com∣pression able to separate any par∣ticles from the Mercury and send them into the Tube. REMARK the Twentieth. The Authour himself raises a notable objection, p. 141. l. 26. against this opinion of Mercurial effluvia supplying the derelicted place of the Mercury in the Tube: Suppose, says he, the Tube were ten foot long, or the
upper end were a Bolts-head that should contain 4 pounds of Mer∣cury, this Mercury subsiding to 29 inches, where should there be effluvia to fill so great a space? His answer is, the more Mercury descends to 29 inches, the more effluvia there will be to fill the space; but I say if the Tube of Mercury be let down obliquely, as before, and be gently and lea∣surely raised to a perpendicular, according to the law of Fluids the compression will be even just nothing. From whence then can that vast empty space be supply∣ed but by the subtiler parts of the Air coming in through the pores of the Glass-Tube? which is that we aimed at.
Upon Chapter the Eleventh. REMARK the Twenty first. HIS confutation of the use of the Atmospherical Cylinder in the solving of the Torricellian Experiment is very ingenious, p. 158. l. 4. namely from the supposal of a Glass-Tube half an inch dia∣meter in Cavity, and as much in thickness of 3 foot long, and sealed at one end, filled with Mercury and immersed to the bottom of a Vessel of restagnant Mercury 7 inches deep, so that 29 inches and 1/2 will be above the restagnant Mercury, the Tube re∣maining full to the top. But the Glass being lighter than the Mercury, it will be driven up thereby near to the superficies thereof. So that about 6 inches of the upper end of the Tube will be empty, but the Tube con∣tinues
till 39 inches of Mercury and 1/2, the bottom of it immersed but 1/2 an inch; and the suppositi∣on is, that the 29 inches of Mer∣cury and an half, weighs one pound, and the Tube just as much. This Tube of Mercury now in these circumstances fixed by a String to a Beam of a pair of Scales, two pound in the adverse Scale will counterpoise, and any little advantage of weight ad∣ded will make it preponderate. Whence he clearly deduces from the Mercury's contributing the weight of a pound to the coun∣terpoizing the Scale, that it is not sustained by a Cylinder of Air of equal diameter and weight with it self, for then there would be but that one pound weight of the Tube alone to counterpoize the two pound in the Scale; which is a firm and ingenious de∣monstration against the Hypothe∣sis of the Atmospheres pressing the restagnant Mercury.
REMARK the Twenty second. Nor can it be eluded by say∣ing, p. 161. l. 8. that though the column of Quick-silver in the Tube be indeed sustained by a column or Cylinder of Air of equal diameter with the column of Mercury in the Tube, and so weighs not at all against the Scale; yet a column of Air whose basis is the top of the Tube does ponderate upon it, and so sup∣plies the place of the Cylinder of Quick-silver to which it is equal in weight. For since the diame∣ter of the Quick-silver is but half an inch, and the diameter of the whole Tube 3/2 of an inch, it is manifest, that the weight of the column of Air on the head of the Tubes, if it weighed at all in their sense, would be nine times as much in weight as that of the Mercury in the Tube, which is a very gross absurdity.
REMARK the Twenty third. And as weak a subterfuge is that whereby they would elude this Answer, namely by pretend∣ing, that the Glass-Tube being a body specifically lighter than Mercury, is it self sustained by the restagnant Mercury, as if that broke the force of the column of Air that presses 9 times as strong on the head of the Tube as the other column of Air on the re∣stagnant Quick-silver; when-as it is a thing plainly prodigious that a single force should keep Mercury 29 inches and 1/2 above the surface of the restagnant Mer∣cury up in the Air, though it be I know not how many thousand times lighter than Mercury, and yet that the Glass should not be kept down 6 inches under the sur∣face of the restagnant Mercury, though not fourteen times hea∣vier
than Glass, by a force nine times as great as the former. REMARK the Twenty fourth. But the Authour does very handsomely meet with all such elusions by two neat experiments. The one is of a Glass-Tube, the Di∣ameter of whose Cavity was 48, the Diameter of the whole 58 of an inch, the length 18 inches, the weight thereof in the Air 2 oun∣ces 34, the water it would con∣tain, near 1 ounce 34. This Tube tyed at the closed end to the Scale of a Balance, and being filled with water and stopt with ones finger, and so let down into water, and so settled there as that the lower end was near about a quarter of an inch from the sur∣face, there was required in the opposite Scale four ounces and 12, which is equal to the weight of the Water and Tube together to
hold the Tube in an Aequilibrium, and here the Glass-Tube is not held up by the restagnant water, the Glass being so heavy that it would sink to the bottom, as be∣ing a body specifically heavier than water. Wherefore this Aequilibrium being from hence, according to the Principles of those that hold the pressure of the Atmosphere, either because the Tube and the water jointly do weigh against the Weights in the other scale, or because the column of Air on the head of the Tube with the Tube weigh against them, this second being impossible, for as much as the di∣ameter of that column is five such parts as the diameter of the co∣lumn of water in the Tube, and that of Air on the restagnant wa∣ter is four, and therefore would press at least half as much again as the water in the Tube, name∣ly in the proportion of 25 to 16,
which the Scale discovers to be false, for there is only one ounce /4 added to the two ounces 3/, not 1/ 3/2 of an ounce more; it remains that it is the Water with the Tube jointly that weighs against the Weights in the other Scale, for as much as the restagnant Water does not hinder the Tube: from whence it follows, that the wa∣ter in the Tube is not sustained by any column of Air on the re∣stagnant Water, which will be more apparent in the other ex∣periment, which is this: He took, suppose, the same Tube, heated it very hot, and hung the closed end upon one Scale of a Balance, and let the open end sink a little into a Vessel of wa∣ter, and counterpoized it in the other Scale with 2 ounces 3/, the weight the empty Tube weigh∣ed in the Air, which, because the end of it did little more than touch the water, it still retained,
but within the space of half a quarter of an hour the Tube was filled 12 inches of its 18 with water, which 12 inches of water was found to weigh one ounce and ¼, and one ounce and ¼ more put in the opposite Scale, and the Scales held so that the Tube might only touch the surface of the water, the Tube with the 12 inches of water in it was found to weigh just 4 ounces. Now therefore since the Tube could weigh no more, if so much, on the top of the water, than it did when it was hung only in the Air, for the pillar of Air in∣cumbent on the top of the Tube is the same in both cases, it is manifest, against the principles of those that hold the pressure of the Atmosphere, that the water in the Tube weighs its part, namely one ounce and ¼ to make the weight 4 ounces, and conse∣quently that the water in the
Tube is not sustained by any pressure of a Pillar of Air incum∣bent on the restagnant Water. REMARK the Twenty fifth. That also is an ingenious de∣monstration against the opinion of the pressure of Atmospherical Cylinders, p. 175. l. 9. namely the inverting a Glass-Tube of Quick∣silver, suppose of a diameter of 9. such parts as the Vessels diameter of restagnant Quick-silver is 10. so that it may be apparent that the Rim or round superficies of the restagnant Mercury in the Vessel, is not a full fourth part of the area of the Mercurial Cylinder in the Tube, and yet the Mercury in the Tube will be sustained as in other cases. Which therefore cannot be from the pressure of the Air on the restagnant Mercu∣ry, the superficies thereof being less than one fourth part to the
area of the Cylinder of Mercu∣ry. REMARK the Twenty sixth. And this last Instance surely is no wise to be contemned, That the Torricellian experiment will succeed as well in a great Recei∣ver as in the open Air, when-as notwithstanding there can be no Atmospherical column on the re∣stagnant Mercury in the Receiv∣er, nor is there any refuge here to the elasticity of the Air, p. 186. because that supposes the Gravi∣tation thereof, which has been so plainly disproved by the Authour, not only by these last Experi∣ments, but in his 6. Chapter, and particularly by the two Brass Cy∣linders weighed in water of Di∣ameters of a double proportion one to another, and the one side of a quadruple to the other. For things being so contrived that a
column of Air of two inches dia∣meter press on the one, and not a quarter of an inch diameter on the other, the Cylinders yet shall be equiponderant in the water. The Experiment there has a three∣fold improvement, and the very first strong enough, considering there is no elasticity or rebound∣ing in the water, see p. 75. l. 4. though the Authour phansie there is, and that equal weights pressed by unequal force, the stronger must prevail. And moreover if this elasticity of the Air were ad∣mitted, he does not unskilfully urge, that every part of the in∣cluded Air does act so equally in a manner against every part every way, that there is a suspension of the pressure any way to any ef∣fect, &c. p. 194. l. 23.
Upon Chapter the Thirteenth REMARK the Twenty seventh. THat Experiment also of the Bottle and the Bolts-head is notably levelled against the elasticity of the Air, p. 196. l. 22. That a Bolts-head soundly heat∣ed, and placed upon a Glass-bot∣tle, with some fix ounces of wa∣ter in it, which may fill it about half full, but not so closely luted but that some Air, though but at a pins hole, may come in, the wa∣ter in the Bottle will be wholly drawn up into the Bolts-head. But if the Bolts-head were hasti∣ly so closed that no Air could enter into it, some water would indeed rise as far as into the shank of the Bolts-head, but the whole water would not ascend into the Bolts-head as before it did, which, says this Learned Authour, is a
plain argument against that huge elasticity of the Air that some imagine. For no fresh Air being let in by this strict closure, the force of the rarefied Air in the Bolts-head is more entire, and as he conceives the attraction more powerful to raise the water as before, if there were any thing near that elasticity in the com∣mon Air that is imagined there, that it can expand it self into 40 times a larger space if need be; nor would the weight, says he, of the interposed water be too great for the Elatery of the Air in this case to drive it up so high as before, since in a close Receiver it is able, according to their opinion, to thrust and keep up a column of Mercury to 29 inches high, possibly of a pound weight or more. Why there∣fore, if there were any such for∣cible Elatery of the Air, cannot it thrust up 5 or 6 ounces of
wa∣ter about 5 or 6 inches high in∣to the Bolts-head, which is ra∣tionally argued against that huge elasticity of the Air. But as for the Authours own solution of this Problem from Tension and Attraction, I am as little satis∣fied with, as he with their ela∣stacity, and am reminded of that saying in Pliny, Quid mirabi∣lius esse potest aquis in coelo stan∣tibus? But the same miracle is in the Bolts-head, neither of which I can resolve into any meaner Principle than that which I call the Hylarchical or Hylosta∣tical Spirit of the world. As for that of Tension we shall con∣sider in Chap. 14 and 15.
Upon Chapter the Fourteenth. REMARK the Twenty eighth. HEre the Learned Authour does declare himself, that all those experiments which the Virtuosi would give an account of from the pressure and elasti∣city of the Air, p. 203. are plain∣ly performed by suction and At∣traction of the Air, when put under a greater Tension or Rare∣faction; which I must confess I am much concerned to examine how true it is, in reference to what I have writ of the experi∣ment of the weight hung at the Embolus of the Air-pump in my Enchiridium Metaphysicum.Cap. 12. Sect. 2. On which therefore I may touch something in this Chapter, but more fully discover the mistake of this opinion in the next, where the Learned Authour pretends to
deliver the true cause of the sus∣pension of the Mercury in the Torricellian Experiment. REMARK the Twenty ninth. That the Mercury in the Tor∣ricellian Experiment, p. 203. l. 12. will fall 2 or 3 inches, as it shall be placed at the bottom of an hill or at the top of the hill, or upon the change of wea∣ther, is reasonable to me, be∣cause of the different consistency of the Air, which abounds more or less with the materia subtilis∣sima, and so can more easily trans∣mit it through the pores of the Glass with less violence done to its consistence: Which very ex∣periment methinks to me is an ar∣gument against the opinion of Tension, and subtil parts coming from the Mercury it self, for then it were all one in what weather, or where the Glass were placed.
But the Mercury subsiding in clearer and colder weather, in higher places on the top of the hills, where the Air is not so much stuft with vapours, it is plain this change depends on the more easie entrance of the mate∣ria subtilissima through the pores of the Glass, and that the con∣sistency of Air is not so strong there, but a lesser weight will break it than in a thicker. REMARK the Thirtieth. That upon a strong exhaustion in the Air-pump, a dry Bladder well tyed and blown moderately full, is broken, as likewise Glass∣bubbles, &c. That a Bladder, the greatest part of its air squeezed out, and the neck tied very close, and a weight fastned to it and put into a large Glass filled with water to be placed on the Air∣pump, and then covered with a
large Receiver well luted to the Pump, the Air pumped out of the large Receiver, this Bladder below the water would swell till by continuing the pumping it will be full blown. And lastly, that Water, Spirit of Wine, &c. will be raised to run out of a Glass, and that Bubbles will be formed at the bottom of an included Glass of Water in such a great Receiver, so that all is put into a various agitation; All this the Learned Authour resolves into the Tension of the rarefied Air in the Receiver: Which I must a∣gain confess I am as little satisfied with as he is with their elasticity of the Air, nor do I think either of them true; but this I think, that in the Bladders and Glass∣bubbles, that break, there is a stronger agitation of the parts of the Air, and that it is that which materially acts against the in∣ward-sides of the Glass-bubbles
and Bladders, not the exteriour matter by attraction, but there is a furious agitation of the interi∣our, which is not from any for∣mer elasticity, but which it ac∣quires pro re nata, as furious winds are raised in the North in the great world upon dissolution of aqueous particles of the clouds, which furious and rapid motion it is impossible for them to acquire from mere heat, but from some higher principle, and the same principle I suppose to act here, being raised into a fierce or quick activity, to reduce the matter in the exhausted Receiver as near as it could to a consisten∣cy more sutable to the rest of the Air at this pitch from the Earth, but there is no heat in the Bladder or Glass-bubles, or in the Receiver, that can so fu∣riously agitate the matter in them; and that here is such a boiling agitation and bubling in
water, spirit of Wine, &c. it is a plain indication, that these things happen not by way of ten∣sion, but of excitation and a fu∣rious dispersion of the parts to thicken, as much as may be, the whole matter in the Receiver, that is so highly thin above the measure of matter so near the Earth, and amidst our crass Air. Not to speak of other things that may be alledged, which I shall reserve for the ensuing Chapter. REMARK the Thirty first. As for that Experiment in Regius, it is very improperly brought in, p. 212. l. 21. for such an attraction as our Authour stands for, namely such as is made upon this kind of Rarefaction and Tension. For there is not the least pretence to any Rarefaction or Tension of this kind in that
ex∣periment, but only a circle of motion in the Air, The mouth draws in the air into the thorax by one part of a Tobacco-pipe, and the thorax being distended presses the external Air, which find its way into the other To∣bacco-pipe lighted with Tobac∣co in it, the smaller end immers∣ed into the water; and through the water the air and smoke pas∣ses, and continues its course till it come into the other piece of a Tobacco-pipe, which, though it passes the close cover of the Vial, yet does not pass into the water it self, but falls short of it, and so getting into that piece of a Tobacco-pipe after it has pas∣sed through the water and got into the Air betwixt the cover of the Glass and water, it goes into the Tobacconists mouth, and so completes the whole Circle; but here is not one jot of Tension or Rarefaction of the Air all this
time, but only of the Tobacco which is turned into a fume. But that all the parts of the water to the very bottom of it, and the granules of Sand lying at the bot∣tom of the water are put into a tumultuary motion, that is no wonder, (when-as the Air and smoke are forced to find their way through the water) and may a little illustrate and facili∣tate the conception of the true reason of those tumults and agi∣tations of water and the spirit of wine above mentioned, observ∣ed in the exhausted Receiver, namely because a more subtil and active element came in through the pores of the Glass, as the hurry of the Tobacco-fume and Air through the water in this last experiment, and that they had a more than ordinary excitation in them from the moving Principle, for the reasons above specified: but that Tension has nothing to
do in these things, I shall further confirm upon what occurrs in the following Chapters. Upon Chapter the Fifteenth. REMARK the Twenty second. In this Chapter the Learned Authour lays down the true cause, as he conceives, of the suspension of the Mercury in the Glass-Tube in the Torricel∣lian experiment, and he takes oc∣casion to speak of three kinds thereof, but I shall take no∣tice only of one, and that the chief of them, in which if I plainly discover his mistake, I suppose there will be no contro∣versie touching the other two. This experiment then is, when a Tube, suppose of four foot long, is filled full of Quick-silver, and so inverted and immitted into a vessel of restagnant Quick-silver,
upon which the Mercury in the Glass-Tube will descend to 29 inches and an half, and leave a∣bout 18 inches in the Tube de∣stitute of Mercury. The reason of this Phaenomenon the Authour gives to be this; The expression and ascension of some mercurial vapours or particles at large, for∣ced up by the agitation and pres∣sion of the parts of the Mercury, and withal their Tension, that they may be able to fill so great a space as the 18 inches of the Tube devoid of the body of Mercury. This is his solution of this Problem. But the Rea∣sons upon which this solution is built, are not sufficiently firm. For first, He supposes no Aëreal particles passing through the Mercury to get into the dereli∣cted space of the Tube, that it must necessarily be the effluvia of the Mercury it self that ascends; when-as by the 3. and 4. part of
my first Remark there are such subtil parts in the Air that they penetrate the pores of the Glass. And then secondly, For the pres∣sion and agitation of the parts of the Mercury, the pression of Flu∣ids on Fluids of the same kind, is nothing in a manner, and the agitation observed might be much diminished, if not wholly prevented by a leasurely oblique immission of the Tube, and so by degrees bringing it to a per∣pendicular; whence there would be either no mercurial effluvia raised, or else the copiousness of them so varied accordingly as they shall take heed to prevent the tumultuary agitation, that the suspension of the Mercury will not be the same at all times, but sometimes lower, sometimes higher. Nor is that lucta in the Mercury from the endeavouring of Nature to give Tension to the effluvia, but betwixt the weight
of the column of Mercury, and the resistency of the consistence of the compressible Air. Nor last∣ly will that experiment of the Quick-silver, so forcibly rising against the top of the Tube, if it be suddenly lifted up, prove any such Lute-string-like Tension in the supposed effluvia. For in this case there is that, which this Learned Authour admits of, both phrase and thing, that is, Gravi∣tatio sursum, and upon the more sudden plucking up the Tube, the consistence of the Air not letting in the subtil Element, and there being no vacuum any where, nor penetration of dimensions, the Air is driven upon the re∣stagnant Quick-silver, and the restagnant Quick-silver into the mouth of the Tube, and so is as it were a flux of water into a far straiter Channel, and therefore it must there proportionably run the swifter. And this swift
mo∣tion in so heavy a body as Mer∣cury must needs be the stronger and more peremptory, coming against so thin a body as that subtil matter in the Tube, even to the danger of breaking it. So that the whole is as it were a quick Gravitation sursum, by a circle of motion against that thin Element at the upper end of the Tube. Which plainly shows, that there is no ground for Tension, there being such reason for Cir∣cumpulsion. And thus I have shown the groundlesness of his Reasons, but in the next Chapter I shall discover the repugnancy of his assertion. Upon Chapter the Sixteenth. REMARK the Thirty third. In this Chapter he sets down the two suppositions he holds necessary for the maintaining of
his former solution of the Torri∣cellian Phaenomenon. The first is, that there is no vacuum in Nature. The second, that thin or subtil bodies are capable of Ten∣sion, and of attraction and strong adhaesion to other bodies, and co∣haesion of one part to another, as in a Lute-string, as is his fami∣liar illustration, saving that in a Lute-string the Tension one way straitens it another way, and makes the Lute-string narrower, but here the Tension and Cohaesion is every way at once. As for the first, that there is no vacuum, it is granted, which makes his denial of the passing of any aërial parts or particles in the Air, through the Glass or Mercury, repugnant to his own supposed principle. For it being plain that the im∣mersion of the Tube may be made so obliquely and leasurely as neither to press out nor fridge out any mercurial effluvia; it
follows there would be a vacu∣um; or if some few should arise, what would they do when the top of the Tube is like a Bolts∣head, containing the capacity of many pounds of Mercury, there must be a vacuum, or such a Ten∣sion of those few effluvia, that I should think it would exceed all belief in the very Authour himself. But let this go; There is enough in what remains utter∣ly to destroy this Hypothesis of the Authour, I mean these two things comprized in the second member; mere Tension it self, such as is ordinarily supposed in an usual Tube, in the descent of the Mercury to 29 inches, and that tough adhaesion and cohaesion of the particles thus extended. For first as for the Tension, in a Tube so obliquely immitted and lea∣surely raised to a perpendicular, no man can rationally imagine one inch of effluvia either pres∣sed
or fridged out of the Mer∣cury by its descent; and if there were, and these taken or let out by some artifice at every trial, some 18 trials would lessen the Mer∣cury 18 such inches of the Tube, which would prove very sensi∣ble. But though this were not, there would in the mean time by this Tension of one inch of mat∣ter into 18, be seventeen inches penetration of solid matter and hard, or else it would not be pe∣netration, and this by so small a force as the weight of a Cylin∣der of Mercury of no greater di∣ameter than would make it weigh one pound, when-as the Authour himself acknowledges that an 100 pound weight will not press water so as to make it yield at all, and yet here upon the least gentle motion of the Tube from a perpendicular to an inclined posture, and from an in∣clined posture to a perpendicu∣lar,
there shall be more or less penetration of dimension, as if that which wise and considerate Philosophers have held impossi∣ble, were as easie as the running an hot Bodkin into a pound of Butter, which methinks to any one that indifferently perpends the matter, must seem a clear de∣monstration against this solution of the Problem, as I have alrea∣dy noted in the sixth and seventh part of my first Remark; and what I have there already writ, will save me the labour of any further enlarging my self in this point. But now for that tough and peremptory adhaesion of this thin body in the Tube, to the top and sides thereof, and cohaesion of one part thereof to another, and the lowest part to the high∣est part of the Quick-silver in the Tube, as if the top of the Tube were instead of so many Peggs,
and the upper part of the Quick∣silver the Bridge of the Lute, and the subtil matter betwixt, under this actual Tension, so many Lute-strings, in virtue whereof the column of Mercury hangs suspended as a weight. This to me I must confess is unimagina∣ble. For first I cannot but con∣ceive, that if I could come to this thin matter, which is thin∣ner than Air it self, I could cut through it with a Spinners thred, or by any other line subtiler and weaker than it; nor can I ima∣gine that that which can be so easily cut asunder, holds so fast together, as that it will sustain in this experiment one pound weight, in some others it may be some hundreds. Besides, if every part held together so toughly, no Flie could move in it, nor Flie nor Feather fall down from the top of the Tube to the upper Bafis of the mercurial
Cy∣linder, which is against experi∣ence, but they would hang like dust or flies on the webs of Spi∣ders, or indeed the whole con∣sistence of that subtil matter would be viscous or glutinous and so impassable to them. To all which you may add, If it had this strong retraction as a Lute-string, it taking hold only on the upper part or surface as it were of the mercurial Cylin∣der, it would pluck up the Bridg. Wherefore the mercurial Cylin∣der is not held up by Suspension but by Circumpulsion and Gravi∣tation upwards, if I may use the language of this Authour, the Air and Quicksilver both gravi∣tating against the thin subtil mat∣ter in the upper end of the Tube, through the Mercury in the lower end, as the water does against the stopple of the Valve in theRemark 12. above-mentioned experiment, that is, there is a
sistency of them in this order and Libration by the Hylostatick Spi∣rit of the Universe, which also directs the motion of heavy bo∣dies downward, of which this learned Authour does ingeni∣ously confess men have tired themselves in vain to find out any mechanical cause, and I have in my Enchiridium Metaphysicum proved that it is contrary to the laws of Mechanicks. And he seems to resolve these things in∣to Nature, which is the Principium matûs & quietis, as Aristotle de∣fines, and also declares of her, That Natura nihil agit srustra. Whereby, but that his words have stuck in his teeth and he hath not spoke out, Aristotle acknow∣ledges what I contend for, a Spi∣rit of Nature or Hylostatick Prin∣ciple, which he must of necessity acknowledge, unless he contra∣dict himself, for as much as he makes matter merely passive,
which it cannot be, if what moves it and orders it be but a modifi∣cation of matter, and not a Spi∣rit distinct there-from: for that modification would be from its own essence, and consequently it would be self-moved, and move it self so, (unless we play tricks with it) that it does nihil agere srustra, which is far from being a mere passive Principle. But this is more than I intended to say upon this occasion. VVe have plainly enervated the main of this Chapter; what little maters remain, we will dispose into the following Remarks. REMARK the Thirty fourth. The Learned Authour endea∣vours to prove the attraction of tensed bodies, p. 239. l. 12. from Natures affectation of a strict contiguity, it being a kind of continuity of the Universe and
all its parts. But I observe, if there were any such attraction, the final cause only is there indi∣gitated, but we seek after a na∣tural efficient cause. And I deny moreover that there is any scope in the suspension of the Mer∣cury to save the Universe from discontinuity, but only to pre∣serve the Air in its due consi∣stency. Nor is the Air the com∣mon Cement of the parts of this in∣feriour world, but it is one com∣mon Spirit that holds the parts of the whole Universe together, no Atomi hamatae, or any such corporeal contrivances. And where the matter is never so sub∣til, the contiguity of the world is as much as where it is more crass. And therefore where we see strange things done upon any place, being filled with only ex∣treme subtil matter, it is not be∣cause there is any more fear then of discontiguity or a vacuum,
but because that matter is mis∣placed, and the Hylostatick Spi∣rit of the Universe would dispose of it better. REMARK the Thirty fifth. The Learned Authour, p. 240. and 242. would prove this at∣traction in his supposed tensed and rarefied bodies in this sense, from the experiment of Cupping∣glasses and the Bladder in the top of the Tube in the Torricel∣lian experiment. But that these are no proofs for Attraction I have shewedRemark 30. in former Re∣marks. REMARK the Thirty sixth. He here mentions again, p. 242. l. 12. the heated Tube we have spoke of, Remark 24. of its at∣traction and suspension of the water in it, the water in the
Tube and the Tube weighing as one body; and the like experi∣ment he makes here again of a heated Beer-glass with a more flew mouth, drawing up water, and weighing as one body with the water, he attributing the suspension of the water in both to the attraction of the rarefied Air. But that Hypothesis be∣ing so fully confuted by me, I am more sollicitous in these instan∣ces to give an handsom account of the jointly weighing of the Tube and Mercury, of the Tube and Water, and of the Glass and , each of them as one joint , than of confuting what is already confuted. And the case I conceive stands thus: By the Hylostatick laws of the Vni∣verse it is, that heavy bodies will even press upwards, as light up∣on heavy, and jointly both a∣gainst a far lighter, though there be an heavy body betwixt,
which I a littleRemark 32. above noted in the resiliency of the Quick-silver against the top of the Tube. Now as there the Air and restag∣nant Quick-silver gravitated a∣gainst the subtil matter in the top of the Tube through the co∣lumn of Quick-silver in the Tube, so the Air and Water gravitate both in the Tube and Drinking-glass, against the rarefied Air therein, it being thinner than the common Air, and ascended in each so far according to Hylo∣statick laws; As I doubt not but that if a whole Tube of such subtil matter as is at the top in the Torricellian experiment could be had and were inverted into re∣stagnant Mercury, the Mercury would be seen to ascend to 29 inches in the Tube as the water is seen to ascend in the Beer-glass and Tube. In all which cases both the Mercury and Water ascend by a Libration which this
Authour calls a Gravitation up∣wards, and are held there by the same Law at such a gage, and not by attraction or suspension. But how then, will you say, does the Tube and Mercury, the Tube and Water, the Beer-glass and Water, weigh each of them to∣gether as one joint body? 'Tis a considerable Problem, but I answer, The same Hylostatick Principle that thus librates them, which is the Spirit of Nature, does also, but with a vincible and mutable union, unite them. For both motion and union is from Spirit, as I have showed in my Enchiridium Metaphysicum. And from hence it will be easily un∣derstood, how when with the hand, p. 247. l. 12. you lift up the Beer-glass towards the super∣ficies of the restagnant water, the water included will arise with it much above the superficies of the external water. Which though
it be not by that monstrous Ela∣stick pressure of the Air that some are for, yet it is by a Gra∣vitation of the Air upon the wa∣ter, and of the water upwards, and both of them jointly against the rarefyed Air in the Concave of the Glasse. So little need is there of any Tension, but merely of this Hylostatick Libration. REMARK the Thirty seventh. The Learned Authour, p. 248. l. 16. speaks of the power and efficacy of the Laws of Nature, in colligating strictly parts of the most distantial Textures and Con∣sistencies without the help of Vellicles, Hooks, or Grappers, or Atomi hamatae, and p. 238. he says, and that very truly and eloquently, That all the men in the world can never give any sa∣tisfactory Reason, why the moti∣on of a Stone is downwards to the
Earth more than to the Moon, but only Nature that is the principi∣um motûs & quietis, or rather the God of Nature, whose stand∣ing and statuminated Law Na∣ture is, has so odered it, and or∣dered it so in the best way for the use, beauty and accommodation of the Vniverse: Wherein he does plainly declare that the laws of Nature are not mechanical, which if they be not, they must be vital, and if they be vital Laws, what is the immediate Fountain next to God, and sub∣ject in which this life is, or this principium motûs & quietis? Is it a substance distinct from mat∣ter, or is it an essential power or modification of matter it self? For every thing is either substance or modification of substance. If these Laws of Nature be an essen∣tial power, or modification of matter, matter is self-moving, and is also herself-orderer, even
to the expression of all those cu∣rious footsteps of the Divine Wisdom in the Creation, which is most apertly against Aristotle, whom our Learned Authour has no mean respect for, and who expresly gives only passivity to matter, but derives activity from another Principle. This is his frequent doctrine. And then which is still worse, it confounds the nature of Body and Spirit, the motive and unitive power being immediately and original∣ly in Spirit, but the moveable and unitable in matter. But if these vital Laws in Nature that conduce to the good of the Uni∣verse, be not essential to the mat∣ter and act from it, it remains there is a Spirit of Nature to which they are essential, which is the mover and moderatour of the matter, which wants no Vel∣licles, Hooks, or Grappers, to hold those parts of matter
toge∣ther that are to be held, or while they are to be held together, nor Chissels to loose them, as the Laws of Nature shall require. This this Learned Authour seems to be assured a Spirit is capable of, by the union of his Soul and Body; and it is a wonder to me, being we consist of those two Principles, that the Genius of the Age is so generally such, that they take all their measures of Philosophizing from their corpo∣real part, none from their Spiri∣tual, as if they had forgot they had any such, or were utterly unacquainted with its faculties, or as if their entire personal com∣pages were nothing else but a cer∣tain modified mass of Philoso∣phizing matter: But that mere matter should so peremptorily hold together without those Ato∣mi hamatae the Epicureans talk of, would be to me a greater won∣der than that they should with
them; but that there remains the same wonder still how the parts of the Atomi hamatae hold toge∣ther, for Physical parts they must have, or else they could have no figure. Upon Chapter the Seventeenth. REMARK the Thirty eighth. OUR Learned Author, p. 251. l. 12. resolves the close sticking together of two smoothed Marbles, with a weight hung at the lowermost, into Fuga vacui, for as much as if there should be a parallel divulsion of them, there would be some time, (motion not being in an instant,) before the interiour distance could be supplyed with matter. Which therefore would cause a Vacuum in Nature. Which no question Nature does abhor from, and which might be without any
Logical Repugnancy, (there be∣ing so plainly an Extensum every where distinct from matter, as I have abundantly demonstrated in my Enchiridium Metaphysicum) did not the Laws of Nature op∣pose it.Cap. 6: But we must note also that Fuga vacui is but the final Cause, but those that slight this solution, seek after an efficient Cause; and here again we must either make matter self-moving and self-uniting, or self-fixing, or else we must have recourse to the Spirit of Nature and its Hy∣lostatick Laws, whereby it go∣verns the matter; and whereby indeed it holds the whole com∣pages of the world together. For the world being finite, as I have proved in my Enchiridium Metaphysicum,Cap. 10. Sect. 6. and consisting of an indefinite number of vortices and what ever other liquid mat∣ter, if the motion of the matter were mechanical, and not from a
vital Principle actuating it, which I call the Spirit of Nature, there would be a dehiscency of the parts of it, and nothing would be so plentiful as vacuities, when∣as now there is either none at all, or as little as may be imagined. For the divuision of the Marbles incliningly or angularly, will ve∣ry hardly be conceived without some infinitely small vacuity, un∣less motion can be conceived to be in an instant. REMARK the Thirty ninth. Upon Stevinus his Experiment occurring here again, p. 259. l. 10. how that a Rundle of wood, lighter than water, laid upon the hole of the bottom of a Vessel to be filled with water, that the pillar of water on that wood will keep down the Rundle, and in∣deed will gravitate to the full weight of such a dimension of
water, when-as, if that hole be not under the Rundle, it of it self will come up. I say, this were a great Paradox in Nature, if the parts of water gravitated on wa∣ter, and that there were such a monstrous elasticity of the Air. For the recoiling column of Air bearing against the Rundle through the hole, of such a diame∣ter, as that such a column would o∣vercome in some other cases some hundred pounds weight, this should make the Rundle arise with far greater ease, than when the bottom of the Vessel is whole and is not perforated; therefore it is a plain indication that there is no such constant pressure of the parts of water on water, nor any such prodigious elasticity of the Air, but that the motion and rest of matter is pro re nata, ac∣cording as the Hylostatick spirit of the world guides it. For certainly that upper Elater of
the Air that presses the water on the Rundle, is less resisted by far, by the bottom unperforat∣ed, which does not heave at the Rundle to lift it up, than it is by the column of Air below, that heaves so strongly as might match some hundred pound weights. Which consideration will be most unexceptionable if for a Rundle we place a lesser Vessel with thin sides, with four small holes made sloopingly through the sides at the bottom, as I have above described upon another Occasion. It will be hard then to find any evasion if the inward Vessel ascend not as it does when the bottom is unper∣forated.
Upon Chapter the Eighteenth. REMARK the Fortieth. THat the divulsion of the Magdeburg Hemispheres, p. 267. is so far much easier side∣way, than from their Center, I easily accord to; for in such a divulsion there is as it were the power added of a double wedge, but in pulling directly from their Centers, it comes nearer to the case of one attempting to pull a Billet into two, by taking hold of this side and that side of the middle of it, and so to part it into two, in a parallel separation of each part. But that they are held together by any such Tension of Filaments, or the contraction of them, while they adhere to the concave of the Hemispheres, seems not to me at all credible. For though the Learned Authour
argues indeed shroudly against the elasticity of the Air being the cause of their adhesion, because, if the Hemispheres after they have grown cold adhere so close together, that the weight of 30 pound will not sever them, (by reason of the elasticity of the Air or weight of the Atmosphere pressing them together,) yet though they were put again in∣to a considerable heat, they would adhere as strongly still, the elatery of the Air being not at all diminished, but rather en∣creased by warmth, it exciting the spring thereof to a more for∣cible expansion, which therefore must press the harder against the Hemispheres; but that it is ob∣served that if they be but made blood-warm they will easily fall asunder, which I confess is no contemptible argument against the elasticity of the Air's being the cause of this so strong cohe∣sion:
Yet it is in my opinion one argument amongst others, that it is not the contraction or resti∣tution of the tensed matter in the Hemispheres, that is the cause thereof. For if it were upon so strong a stretch and contraction, as he ordinarily expresses by the stretch of a Lute-string, it is in∣credible that so small a moment of heat should so suddenly and hugely relaxate it, that the He∣mispheres should as it were fall asunder of themselves, that be∣fore stuck so strongly together that they bore 30 pound weight, which Relaxation neither can be without penetration of Dimen∣sions, which immensly heightens the incredibility of it, that so small a force should cause penetra∣tion of Dimensions, as I have also observedRemark 1. part 7, and 8. Remark 33. before in the Torricel∣lian experiment, besides all other repugnancies that recurr here a∣gain. And therefore as the
Learned Authour would con∣clude from the remotion of the elasticity of the Air, there none other appearing, that his Tension and Restitution must take place; so I by like reason, by the remo∣tion of the elasticity of the Air and his Tension & Restitution, may infer that my Hylostatick Spirit of the world ought to take place, which acts pro re nata upon the matter, constringes and relaxes as occasion is. And here I say, upon cooling of the Hemispheres, here is a gravitation of the Air inwards, toward the common Center of the Hemispheres, by reason of the subtilty of the mat∣ter there contained in an undue place, and the sides of the He∣mispheres are kned together, as a man may sometimes feel his Ribs to be in some subtil cold Air, and we feel this contraction not from within, but rather from without or in our very Ribs. I
say therefore there is an occasion∣al Gravitation of the ambient Air and Hemispheres themselves a∣gainst the rarefied Air or subtil matter within them, to squeeze it out, as there is of water against a Bottle of Air let into the Sea, which sometime this very pres∣sure breaks: Which cannot be expected in these brass Hemi∣spheres; but this compression be∣ing not mechanical but vital, a little hint changes the operation, as in the board that ascends in a Bucket, if there be a hole in the bottom of the Bucket it will not ascend, but if there be a false bottom below that, at a due nearness, it will, and the obtura∣culum of the Valve in the Tube that will adhere to the Valve, if the Tube be open into the Air, yet do but stop it with your Em∣bolus at a right distance, the ob∣turaculum will descend. So a lit∣tle warmth here makes the Hylo∣statick
spirit of the world quit her compressive operation, and relaxate her hold, without pene∣tration of Dimensions or any o∣ther absurd supposition; only suppose vital motion instead of mechanical, and all will go off glibly.
Upon Chapter the Nineteenth. REMARK the Forty first. The Author's in∣geniously con∣trived Pump, p. 293, 294. will require some few more Re∣marks, and then we shall have done. The Orifice B being lu∣ted up, the Embo∣lus was raised, but not with equal fa∣cility as it was when it was open, the reason whereof the Learned Authour re∣solves into the vi∣olent Tension every elevation of the Em∣bolus gives to the Air in the upper Ca∣vity of the Glass, that it may
thereby be able to supply the place of the water drawn up by the Pump. But I conceive it is to be resolved into the strength of the consistency of the Air with∣out, which without some vio∣lence will not suffer the materia subtilis to be squeezed out of it into the Cavity of the Glass. So that there wants no Tension for the making up this Phaenome∣non. REMARK the Forty second. The Glass-bottle A B C hold∣ing 5 quarts of water, and first freely by pumping being evacu∣ated of 2 ½, the Orifice at B after being luted close, a quart more with much ado was pumped out, so that there was but one and 1/2 left, into which notwithstanding the Pipe of the Pump did reach. But after this, be the Embolus ne∣ver so often listed up, not a drop of
water comes. But the Air only, says our Authour, included in the Pump is rarefied by lifting up the Embolus, and condensated by depressing it. Which very ex∣periment methinks should be a sufficient confutation of this kind of rarefaction and condensation, as if one mans strength were able to cause so monstrous a thing as Penetration of dimensions, see Remark 1. part 6, & 7. Nor is the reason of no more water coming, because the Air is now tended to the utmost that such a strength of the pulling up the Embolus can extend it, but it is from the greater firmness or obsi∣stency of the external Air, whose strength is invigorated by the Hylostatick spirit of the world, against that unfit constitution of having already so much subtil matter misplaced; as in the Mag∣deburg Hemispheres: besides that it were against the Hylostatick
laws, that so heavy a body as wa∣ter should shoot up so high into so extreme thin a body as that subtil matter in the GlassSee Re∣mark 27, and that without any fresh Air suc∣ceeding thereinto, or extreme heat preceeding. And I do not question but that if the Torricel∣lian experiment were made un∣der water, the Quick-silver in the Tube would stand hugely much higher than it does now in the Air. And therefore that consi∣deration may have also its weight in this Phaenomenon. But it is apparent there is no need of any Tension in these Problems, there being subtil matter to supply its room. And yet for this subtil matter, if the motions of the parts of the Air were wholly me∣chanical and not vital, we can find no reason but that the force of the Embolus, that at first pump∣ing overcame the consistence of the Air, should not overcome it
still, that Glassful of subtil mat∣ter being nothing to that Ocean of it in the Air. So evident eve∣ry way is our Hypothesis of an Hylarchick Principle. REMARK the Forty third. Moreover the Embolus reach∣ing near H, and being elevable near to the top of the Laton Sy∣ringe or Pump, the Air, if we can gather any thing from the figure of the Instrument and its proportions, is upon the eleva∣tion of the Embolus to its full height, stretched in the Pump so (when-as the Tension of the Air in the Cavity of the Glass oc∣cupies a space to what it did be∣fore, but in the proportion of 7 to 5.) as to occupy a space that is to its former at least as 5 to 1. which is a greater sign that there is no such Tension, (For if there were, the Air in the Cavity of
the Glass that is but tended as 7 to 5. would receive more Ten∣sion, and so make the water ascend) than that in the Pump should be so overproportionate∣ly tended. And consequently that the water is not suspended in a Pump by Tension, nor made to ascend to such an height by that means, but by Gravitation-upwards, either upon an actual misplacement of the subtiler Ele∣ment, or upon the imminent dan∣ger thereof, which would be if the water receded, therefore it goes up till such an height or measure, the Air and Water a∣bove the bottom of the Pump gravitating upwards, not being so much crowded by reason of impenetrability of matter, as conducted and vitally moved by the Hylarchick Principle in this Gravitation-upwards. The force whereof is according to the so∣lidity of the Elements that thus
gravitate. And hence also may emerge a reason why in this case not one drop of water comes, upon the elevation of the Embo∣lus, namely because the Gravita∣tion of the rarefied Air in the Cavity of the Glass, added to the restagnant water above the Orifice of the Pipe, by reason of the tenuity of the one, and small quantity of the other, is too weak to raise or sustain a pillar of water in the Pipe, that would reach up into the Pump, and so no water comes. REMARK the Forty fourth. But now upon supposition that the Pump were longer, p. 297. I. penult. or that there were a strong external heat applied to the superiour Air in the Glass, if the water in that case would be as easily raised as at the first, as our Authour affirms; In the
first way, it must be when the Pump is so long, that the space the subtil matter occupies there upon the pulling up the Embolus, is larger than that it occupies in the Glass, or the matter rather more subtile. And in the second the reason might be, that the ap∣plication of this heat changes the vital energy, that is, that perem∣ptory firmness and obsistency I spoke of before, into a more re∣laxate operation, as I noted in the Magdeburg-Hemispheres. But I am not certain that either way will find success. But certain I am, upon no account of Tension and Restitution it will be, if suc∣cess answer expectation. REMARK the Forty fifth. The Learned Authour collects out of the experiments of his Pump, p. 298. I. 16. That the Gravitation or pressure of the
external Air is not the cause of raising the water in a Pump; and as touching that springie Atmo∣spherical way, his collection I conceive is true, but I said above and here again repeat, That the raising of water, and the suspen∣sion of it in a Pump, is by a cir∣cular pressure and Gravitation of the Air and Water incumbent on the superficies of water that the bottom of the Pump is on, which jointly gravitates upward with the water ascending in the Pump, as I above declared the Air and Quick-silver gravitates upward in regard of that subtil Element in the top of the Tube, and here the Air and Water gravitate up∣wards, that there may be no bare subtil matter in the Pump, to the disorder of the Universe: which gravitation of Air and Quick-silver, and of Air and Wa∣ter upwards, is not, as I said, by any crouding or gravitating part
upon part, but they are all carried by the Hylostatick spirit of the world in this orderly way and to so good an end, that there may be no inconvenience by mispla∣cing the Elements of the Uni∣verse, of which I hold the mate∣ria subtilis to be one. REMARK the Forty sixth. His collections also against the very elasticity of the Air from the said experiments are ingeni∣ous, but I cannot insist on them, I shall rather take notice of what occurrs, p. 302. l. 6. where he supposes that the immission or in∣sinuation of the Air into the Ca∣vity of a Well (for there is the same reason as in the Glass-bot∣tle, that is, as it were, the Well of his Pump) is the effect not the cause of the recession of the water. The scruple here is, whe∣ther it may not rightly be said,
to be both. For in that circle of Air and Water that is made in the going of the Pump, the mov∣ing of the Air, that by the coming out of the water is carried either toward the Well or into it, as it is the effect of the waters coming out of the Well and Pump; so, it making part of the circle of Air and Water that gravitates even to the bottom of the Buc∣ket in the Pump, where the ha∣zard of an hiatus, and the baring of the subtil element is, is also a cause, I mean instrumental cause, (for the principal efficient is the Hylostatick Spirit of the world) of the getting the water out of the Pump, it being part of that material circle in motion, caused by that Principle that guides the matter.
REMARK the Forty seventh. The two arguments against the elasticity of the Air, which the Learned Authour concludes with, are, if they be well weigh∣ed, very considerable. The first is, that if the elasticity of the Air in a low roof'd Room, or a Glass Receiver, is able to sustain the Mercury in the Tube at the same height in the Torricellian experiment, that it is sustained in the free Air where there is the weight of the Atmospherical Cy∣linder superadded to the said elasticity of the Air, it is a sign that they are both but a mere conceit, and that the Mercury is suspended by the pressure of nei∣ther. I must confess I cannot ima∣gine how those elastick Philoso∣phers can evade the evidence of this argument, unless they hope to escape by saying, That the
elasticity of the Air being brought to its highest vigour or force the Atmospherical pressure can give it, so it be but kept at the same springiness and tightness by the Glass or the roof of the Room, the elasticity being the same still, the effect will be the same. This a man might phan∣sie at first sight, but if he more distinctly consider the matter, it will not satisfie: For let the force elastick of the Air in the Glass or Room caused by the pressure first of the Atmosphere be as 10, and this conserved entire in the Glass or Room which does not press against this elastick Air, but stands immoved, nor would the Atmosphere, if it were incum∣bent on this Air, add any thing more to the elasticity thereof, but it will still remain as 10, yet though it add nothing to the ela∣sticity of the Air, seeing it has a pressure and protrusive force in
it, which the Roof and Glass have not, it will notwithstand∣ing have its distinct force super∣added to that 10 of the interja∣cent elastick Air, through which it will effectually act for the ea∣sier raising or suspending of the Quick-silver, and consequently will suspend at an higher pitch than the Air in a Room or Glass can do, there being a small con∣venient Valve that would let out the Air, but hinder any from coming in. There is a nicety in this business, but I doubt not but the truth will be found on our Learned Authour's side, and the urgency forward or progres∣sive conatus of the elastick Air, will add something to the ac∣count. And besides, as an Appendage to this Argument, if we com∣pare portions of this elastick Air without regard to the Atmo∣sphere, the least proportion of
it will have equal effect with the greatest, and a Cylinder of elastick Air reaching from the roof of the Room to the restag∣nant quick-silver, shall have no more force for the sustaining of the Mercury in the Tube, than one of but the tenth part of an inch high, which is again a sign there is no such elasticity at all. For no man will say that the smallest charge of Gunpowder will, when it is fired, explode the Bullet with equal force, that a due quantity of Powder will; for all its elasticity or expansive∣ness is more quick and smart than this of the Air. Or that, if but a quarter of an inch of Air, or less, were condensated to that propor∣tion that a due measure of air in a Wind-Gun uses to be, that it will discharge with that force that the other does, and yet both their motions here are by elasti∣city properly so called. Where∣fore
there being these differences where elasticity is really, but none in the pretended elasticity of the Air, it is a sign it is a mere pretense and no true Phaenomenon in Nature. And now for the Authour's other Argument which he raised out of his Pump, which is this; If there were any such elasticity of the Air, suppose in a close Room or Glass that could keep up a Cylinder of Mercury, (I add, and raise it too, if a Tube of Ma∣teria subtilis only, could be let down into it) to 29 inches high, which yet according to the am∣plitude of its Diameter may weigh two, four, or ten pound, it were impossible but that the elatery of the air in his Pump (it being open at K and B, so that the Air may come in at B, and either Air or Water go out at K) should drive a portion of water into the Pipe of but half an inch
diameter, so that it may rise a∣bove the surface of the restag∣nant water in the Glass-bottle, suppose an inch or half an inch high, which is nothing in a man∣ner to the raising of 10 pound weight. Which we shall under∣stand still more clearly and con∣vincingly, if we will suppose the Pipe of this Pump of such a di∣ameter that 29 or 30 inches of Mercury in it would weigh 10 pound, and a Glass-bottle of a dia∣meter 18 times larger than that of the Pipe, which is the proportion that this Glass-bottle does really bear to this Pipe in the Pump: Then imagine this Glass-bottle so well replenish'd with Quick-silver, that the restagnant Quick-silver will reach somewhat above the middle of the Glass, the Pipe in the mean time filled 29 or 30 inches full of it, it will stand at thereabout, though it be 10 pound weight; nay I dare appeal to any
considered Philosopher if there were a Glass-Tube of 4 foot, or longer, of mere materia subtilis immitted into this Glass-bottle of Mercury, sufficiently replenisht therewith, if he can otherwise think but that the Mercury will rise up to about 29 or 30 inches high. But for the sustaining of it, it is acknowledged of every side, that 10 pound weight of Mercury 29 inches high, is su∣sustained, whatever it be that su∣stain it. The elastick Philoso∣phers say, it is the elatery of the Air in the Glass-bottle, which bears so strongly against the re∣stagnant Mercury, that the 29 inches of Mercury, that weigh 10 pound weight, cannot descend into the restagnant Mercury. But our Learned Authour here most rationally denies it, averring, that if there were so strong an elatery of the Air as to drive up or bear up 10 pound weight of Mercury,
which is here 29 inches in the Pipe or Tube; certainly the same elasticity would drive or bear up one inch of water into the Pipe or Tube, it being many hundred times lighter than those 29 inch∣es of Mercury. But here the ela∣stick Philosophers seek a witty refuge, viz. That it is the Non∣resistence of the materia subtilis that is destitute of all elasticity, which is the reason of the preva∣lency of the elatery of the Air to mount up or sustain so great weight of Quick-silver, but there being Air in the Pipe of like ela∣sticity with that in the Glass-bot∣tle in this other case, that it is that that stops all such motion of the water upward. But this is to indulge to pretty phancies a∣gainst palpable sense and all true reason. It is already acknowledg∣ed by these elastick Philosophers, that there is an elatery of the Air in the Glass, that will at least su∣stain,
if not raise up a ten pound weight. Now if there be not an elatery in the air of the Pipe so strong as might resist such a force, but exceedingly far weaker, if any at all, the water must rise or stand an inch high at least, nei∣ther which is done. But now you may feel with your fingers end how exceeding weak the ela∣tery of just such a Cylinder of Air is, as is in the Pipe, if you make a Tube of the same diameter with that Pipe, and make an Embolus of some wood equiponderant, or at least not lighter than water, and so fit it to the Pipe that it may slip up and down with all ease imaginable, which it may do and be close enough if it be oiled. And this easie slipping up and down of it, might be an argu∣ment how weak the elatery of the Air is in it, but that they will straight answer that you move the Emboblus so easily upward, be∣cause
the recoiling elatery helps you; but does not the direct as much hinder me? But put your Embolus in the water, whose surface I suppose the upper end of the Embolus will lie even with, then put the Tube on the Embo∣lus, and putting your hand into the water, with your finger move up the Embolus, which you shall find to move against the elatery of the air in the Tube, if there be any, with extreme ease; you will discern that the force of 1/4 of a pound weight at most, will re∣pel the air with its elatery. How then can it resist the force that will draw up or sustain forty times as much? Wherefore it is plain upon supposition that the elasticity of the Air is so strong that it will raise or sustain ten pound weight, that it will so for∣cibly press the water in the Glass-bottle into the Pipe, that by rea∣son of the straitness thereof in
comparison of that part of the Glass, that contains the water, it will send it packing through that Pipe as Air sent out through the nozel of a pair of Bellows, by him that presseth the Bellows with his hands. All the air of the Bellows is pressed at once, and the motion of that in the Bellows being much slower, that in the nozel comes out quick and smart, and so would the water through the Pipe be driven with a swift∣er force by reason of its straitness, and new air coming in at the Ori∣fice B, it would never leave run∣ning out at K, till the water were exhausted as low as E, which we seeing not done, we see hereby, that there is no such elasticity in the Air at all, as our Elastick Phi∣losophers suppose. We will obviate the vanity of but one evasion more and then conclude. The pretense of the recoiling elatery of the Air we
took away by placing the little Tube and Embolus of wood in the water. Here perhaps they will say, that the Elatery of the Air on the surface of the water, causes the Embolus so easily to be pressed against the elatery of the Air that is incumbent on it. But how can that be, whenas the water has no elatery to lift up my hand, or bear against the bottom of the Embolus, and the water only succeeds the pressure of my finger against the Em∣bolus, does not press with it, if we can believe our senses? so that there is merely a circule of such strength as the pressure of my finger makes and no more. And besides this, if this be any such advantage, the same is found in this Learned Authours Pump, the air coming in at B to make a circle of pressure by its elasticity to E and so to A and out at K, till it come to B again, and yet there
is not one inch of water raised by this elasticity above the surface I, though this elasticity is pretend∣ed to sustain 29 inches of Quick-silver of 10 pound weight. And that this mistake may still be laid more open, and no creep-holes lest for further evasion, from the Valves or littleness of the passa∣ges at K and B, let us turn this round Glass into a large open Vessel, that the pressure of the air may come as free as heart can wish, and let into it a Tube, 29 inches whereof would contain 10 pound of Mercury, and which being immersed in Mercury, so many inches of Mercury would be suspended in: put upon such an Embolus as was above descri∣bed, (whose upper Basis lies equal with the water) this empty Tube, and then put in your hand into the water, and believe your sen∣ses, with what ease that Embolus is to be pressed up against the ela∣tery
of the air in the Tube, it re∣quiring as I said before, scarce the force of a ¼ of a pound weight. Can therefore the elatery of the air sustain 40 times that weight, and keep the Mercury about 30 inches high in the same Tube, and not raise water into the Tube one inch high, which is above 400 times lighter than the 30 inches of Mercury it is pretended to su∣stain, whenas the elatery of air in the Tube is deprehended not to make the fortieth part of resi∣stence against the elatery of air in∣cumbent on the restagnant water, which is pretended to press forty times stronger? Wherefore the ela∣tery of the air being so certainly deprehended not to do that which is forty times easier for it to do, it is impossible that it should do that which is forty times harder, and is a manifest demonstration there is no such elatery at all.
Conclusion. But now to bring all home at length to the intended scope, and to recount the chief fruits of our labour in making these Re∣marks on the Learned Authours two Treatises. If I be not out in my account, I conceive in my Re∣marks on the first Treatise (to say nothing of several in the second) I have clearly demonstrated the invalidity of all this Authour's in∣ventions, though otherwise inge∣nious, whether mechanical or na∣tural, (and yet such as would exclude the Spirit of Nature) whereby he might seem to under∣mine the strength of my Demon∣stration from the rising of the wooden Rundle in a Bucket of wa∣ter, Enchirid. Metaphys. c. 13. sect. 4. Which demonstration there∣fore remains unshaken in the be∣half of the Principium Hylarchi∣cum or Hylostatick Spirit of the Universe.
And as for that other like notable demonstration, from the ascending of so great a weight hung at the Embolus of the Air∣pump, the chief undermining of the force thereof being by either the Elatery of the Elastick Philo∣sophers, or this Authour's Tension, the former this Learned Authour himself has so abundantly confu∣ted with such plain and solid ar∣guments, that any discerning per∣son may easily discover the despe∣rateness of that cause. And now for that other, I think I have of∣fered abundant reasons for the incredibility', or rather impos∣sibility thereofSee Re∣mark 1. 29. 32, 33. Wherefore the conceit of the elasticity of the Air, and of Funiculus Lini, or Tension in general being thus utterly defeated, it is manifest, the force of my Demonstration, Enchirid. Metaphys. cap. 12. sect. 2, 3, 4, &c. from the weight at the Embolus of the Air-pump, for the Hylarchick Spirit of the world
holds strong and entire still. And therefore I account, in a more di∣stinct compute, that the fruits of my labour in making these Re∣marks are these. First, This Learn∣ed Authour I hope is freed from that anxiety & solicitude touch∣ing me, and is by this time satis∣fied that I have not incurred the guilt of that rashness and heedles∣ness as to make choice of small and feeble Arguments to sustain great and concerning Truths. For it is very judiciously said of him, and I am wholly of his mind, That the most important and surest Truths in the world never receive so much detriment by Arguments and Sophistry of Opponents, as they do by those Arguments in their fa∣vour which have improper medi∣ums to support their conclusions, or such as are capable of other solu∣tions: which I am very confident mine will never be found capable of. And I think from these Re∣marks this Learned Authour by
this time may be sensible, is no rashly grounded confidence. Secondly, There is the redound∣ing of no small commendation to this Authour for his industry and dexterity, and special sagacity in making and improving Hydrosta∣tical Experiments, that are so con∣siderable succours to such useful Truth. For he has very stoutly and pertinently assisted me in a more full defeating of that which al∣ways appeared to me an incredi∣ble Paradox, I mean that prodigi∣ous elastick pressure of the Air, and therefore I impute it to the modesty of this writer, that he has entitled his second Book Diffici∣les Nugae. For though there may be some difficulty and curiosity in making and examining such like Hydrostatical experiments, yet believe me there is no Nugality at all, unless to those that make ex∣periments for experiments sake, or to pass away the time, or to be thought great natural or rather
mechanical Philosophers, and that in hope to shew, that all the Phae∣nomena of Nature may be per∣formed without the present assi∣stance or guidance of any imma∣terial Principle. But to try and consider these Experiments and Phaenomena with that carefulness and distinctness, and penetrancy of discernment, as to discover there must of necessity be some imma∣terial mover underneath, there is no nugacity at all in this, but sound and serious Philosophy. Thirdly therefore, This is no small fruit of this Authour's two Treatises, and of my labour in making my Remarks on them, that it does more plainly and evident∣ly appear, that there is nothing of real strength can be said against my Demonstrations for the Spirit of Nature, but that of necessity there is such a Being in the world. Fourthly, And that therefore it being so plain that there is this in∣feriour immaterial Being endued
only with life, or some more ob∣scure sensation, and that has the general strokes of the Laws of the Universe, but cannot act by rea∣son and counsel pro re nata, it is manifest that there is a more no∣ble and divine Being in the world that gave this inferiour immate∣rial Being its existence, and allot∣ted to it in measure, or limited out to it those general Laws of vital Activity, which we discover in it in the Phaenomena of Nature. Beside, that this certainty of the existence of the Spirit of Nature demolisheth the strongest Bul∣wark that ordinarily the Atheist has, namely his confidence that there is no such thing as a Spirit or Immaterial Being in the world. Whence he securely hugs himself in that fond and foul Conclusion, That there is no God. Fifthly, Whenas many men are driven quite out of all conceit of ever understanding the nature of their own Spirit or Soul, by that
sophistry put upon them, that if it is a Spirit or Immaterial Being, it would pass through the body, but could not take hold of it or unite with it to move it; the discovery of the Spirit of Nature, moving as well as penetra∣ting all the matter of the world, will as solidly and palpably confute the Sophism, as he did that against moti∣on, by walking before the face of the Sophister that would prove there was none in the world. Sixthly, Whenas this Spirit of Na∣ture moves all the tenuious matter, and fluid as well as solid in the Uni∣verse, we easilier discern how rati∣onal it is, that particular Spirits, An∣gels suppose, or Daemons, may have a faculty of moving their tenuious ve∣hicles, and the souls of men the ani∣mal spirits in the body. Seventhly & lastly, Whenas others according to the thickness of their conceptions cannot believe they have any soul at all, but take it for grant∣ed they have none, what a rousing ar∣gument ought this to be to them, to
awake them out of this dull dream, to consider that a stone does not de∣scend to the earth, but by the virtue of a Spirit that moves it downwards, nor a wooden Rundle ascend up in a Bucket of water, but by the same means? How then can it be possible, but that we being conscious to our selves of more free and spontaneous motions, of motions contrary to the tuggings of the Spirit of Nature, of motions heavenly and divine, that these can be performed by mere mat∣ter and body, and not by a particular Spirit really distinct therefrom? Wherefore there being that unexce∣ptionable evidence for the existence of the Spirit of Nature, and that e∣gregious usefulness of the knowledge thereof, I shall conclude for this anci∣ent Platonick or rather Pythagorick. Opinion in this Lucretian strain of confidence. Ergo etiam at{que} etiam est in Mundo SPIRITUS ILLE NATURAE, qui Materiam regit at{que} gubernat. THE END.
