m504 12636916 64902
Dr. MANNYNGHAM's SERMON Preach'd at the PARISH-CHURCH OF St. ANDREWS HOLBORN.
A SERMON Preach'd at the PARISH-CHURCH OF St. ANDREWS HOLBORN, The 30th of December, 1694. ON THE Most Lamented DEATH of our most Gracious Sovereign Queen Mary. By THO. MANNYNGHAM D.D. Rector of St. Andrew Holborn, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY. LONDON: Printed for Sam. Smith and Benj. Walford at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church-yard; and Eliz. Crooke at the Green Dragon without Temple-Bar. 1695.
TO THE READER. I Had not publish'd This Sermon, but that I saw Great Leaders be∣fore me; and that it was not possible, when others had broke the way, for me to stand any longer to my own Judg∣ment in this Matter, without gi∣ving some Offence to many Excel∣lent Persons, who by their Piety and Friendship have great Authority over me.
I am conscious of the many De∣fects of This Discourse, which was the Production only of some few hours; which was written with such a Concern, as would not allow of much Ornament, and which cost me more Tears, than Invention. I am also sensible that I have given you here but a very imperfect View of but some of the many Vir∣tues of our most Dear and Sove∣reign Queen departed. For ha∣ving confin'd my self in a manner to my own Knowledge and Observa∣tion of Her, I did not take Com∣pass enough to bring in half Her Worth: this forc'd me to neglect a main part of her Princely Cha∣racter, and to speak of Her ra∣ther as a most Pious Lady, than
as a most Noble and Illustrious Queen. However, there is some Advan∣tage in this my low performance, that, that part of Her Example which you may read in this Sermon, seems most capable of a General Imi∣tation: which, I assure you, was the chief Aim of this present Dis∣course; which, after some Retire∣ment, comes now abroad in the Ha∣bit of a True Mourner, without much Dress or care of Periods; without Flattery, or mean Designs; without hopes of Applause, or fear of Censure; those little things, which Sor∣row always disregards. Receive it therefore as it is, a Composure Plain and Serious, and
in its Circumstances, I hope, not Un∣decent. A Composure, which has nothing to recommend it, but the Great and Dear Subject of which it Treats, the deep and sincere Grief of Him who made it, and the many unfeigned Tears of those who Heard it,
Chapter the VIIIth of the Prophet A MOS, Verse the Ninth, and part of the Tenth. And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that I will cause the Sun to go down at Noon, and I will Darken the Earth in the clear Day. And I will turn your Feasts into Mourning. IT would have been proper on this Day, to have entertained you with some further Enlargements, on the Wonderful Wisdom and Mercy of God, in sending His own Son into the World, to Compleat the Work of
our Redemption: from thence, to have rais'd your Minds into a joyful Frame, and a becoming Chearfulness; and to have laid down some such Rules, as might make your Rejoycings sober and pious, Moderate and Christian, and suita∣ble to the Mercy, which at this Time, we Commemorate. But, als! there is a sad Occasion, which has given a new Turn to our Thoughts, a sufficient Temper and Solemnity to all our Joys, and has made it seasonable for me to change my Subject, and to turn my Song into Lamentations. And it shall come to pass in that Day, saith the Lord, &c. The Prophet here expresses the Great∣ness, Suddenness, and Unexpectedness of the Calamities that were coming on the Jews, by Phrases and Similitudes which are most significant, and apt, both to imprint, and to declare great Consternation of
Mind: For thus he signifies, that God would bring such sudden Troubles upon them, as should cause as much Terror and Affrightment, as if they really saw the Sun go down at Noon, and the clear∣est part of the day immediately expire into thick and horrid Darkness: or as if in the midst of their greatest Jollities, and Festival Delights, some should hear of the sudden Death, of their only Children, and others, of their Dearest Friends. Now something that comes very near to this most dismal Representation, has in∣deed happen'd to us of this Kingdom: for we have suddenly lost such a Pattern of Vertue, as did truly shine amongst us in a Meridian Lustre; we beheld our Queen with chearful Eyes, as She appear'd in the very Beauty of Holiness, rejoycing to run Her Course of pious Duties: and when we expected nothing but a long and clear Day of Light and good Example; be∣hold! Darkness has overspread us, all Faces gather Blackness, and our Greatest
Festival is turn'd into a Season of Mourn∣ing! Now that it may appear, that our sud∣den loss of so Excellent a Queen, in the prime of Her years, and in the full bright∣ness of Her Vertues, may very well be compar'd to the Sun's going down at Noon, or to the Earth's being Darkned in the midst of a clear Day; I will en∣deavour to set before you something of Her Character, and then consider what reason we have to Mourn, and what is the best use we are to make of such Dispen∣sations. As to Her Character, I shall not much meddle with the Reports and Relations of others; because I think I am able to de∣lineate some very Considerable Branches of it, from my own Knowledge and Obser∣vation: And therein I shall confine my self to these Three things:
I. I shall Contemplate Her, in the pecu∣liar Sweetness of Her Temper. II. In Her Continual Concern for, and Encouragement of, the True Religion establish'd amongst us. III. In the Constant Practice of Her own Devotion. I. I shall Contemplate Her, in the pecu∣liar Sweetness of Her Temper. We are apt to think, That Sweetness of Temper, is the Ordinary Constitution of Princes, and great Persons: that it natu∣rally arises from a Generous Blood, a No∣ble Education, Obsequious Attendance, and the easie Accommodations of Life: but all these are no other than Contingent Causes, and do oftentimes produce quite contrary Effects; as Pride, Haughtiness, and Cru∣elty, and such nice and fastidious Hu∣mours, as few can comply with, and none can please.
A Sweet Natural Temper is certainly a great blessing from whatsoever it arises; but there must be care taken to polish and improve it, or it will not hold good long; it is very apt to turn into Slothfulness or a Sensual Ease; so that Vertue alone can give it stability, and a lasting shine. It is the most proper Soil for Christianity to grow in, and then it has this advantage, that it receives a New Richness from the very Fruit it bears. It is likewise That, which best sets off, and recommends a Vertuous Life to others; for who can resist the Counsels of Wisdom, when they are insinuated by all the Charms of Love and Good Nature! Now a peculiar Sweetness of Disposition is ever expected from those who are Emi∣nently pious; for they are Nobly Descended indeed, being in an especial manner Born of God; They are Educated under the Highest Institution, the Dictates and Government of the Holy Spirit, That Spirit of Gentle∣ness, Meekness, and Love: and thereby their Souls are enlarg'd into the most generous Designs of Humanity and Publick Good.
And such was the Temper of our most Excellent Queen; a Natural Sweetness of Mind, heighten'd by good Principles, and a pious Education, perfected and brightned by a Constant Exercise in the Duties of Re∣ligion. This made all Her Carriage Gracious, Her Intentions most Sincere, Her Conversa∣tion most Lovely: All who saw Her at a Distance read Kindness in Her Looks, and all who attended on Her, found its Real effects. She had all that Majesty, which was needful, Temper'd with that Mildness, which made it more Becoming: She knew not how to maintain a sullen Grandeur a∣mong those whom She ever esteem'd more Her Friends, than Her Subjects; and they who censur'd Her as too Familiar in Her Con∣versation for a Queen, may well pardon Her Condescention, when they consider, that in all Her sweet Behaviour, She endeavor'd to shew that She was Akin to our Nation. Besides, She had spent some part of Her days in a Country, where 'tis not the fashion for the
Highest Persons to affect much Distance; but where they chuse to Converse more upon a Level, with more Freedom and Equality, than is usual in the Courts of Monarchies: and by this Obliging Civility of Hers, She won the Hearts of all the Considerable Families in the Provinces, and was almost Adored by the Common People: And had there not been some unhappy Differences in this King∣dom about her way of Coming to the Throne, which made some People study to be peevish and censorious, She had been Ʋ∣niversally Admir'd, and would have wanted nothing but a longer Reign, to have equall'd Her, with the most Celebrated of all our Queens. Which will further appear, if in the IId place, we consider Her in Her continual Concern for, and Encouragement of the True Religion establish'd amongst us. Her Zeal for the good of the Church, and Her right Sense and Judgment in Matters of Religion, were so well known to all the
Clergy who were about Her, that She was the very Joy of their Hearts, the Encoura∣ger of their Studies, and their continual Sup∣port under all the Reproaches of the Wicked. She stor'd Herself with the best choice of good Books written in the way of Practical Divinity, read them often in Her Retire∣ment, and made them part of Her Enter∣tainment when She sate at work with Her Maids of Honour; where there was constant Reading of Good Books, either of History or Divinity, which they undertook by turns, one always Reading aloud to the rest; and this they did to carry on a Constant Im∣provement, to supply their Thoughts with useful Knowledge or Meditation, and to pre∣vent all unprofitable Discourse. Now this is a Pattern for all our Ladies to imitate, that they may be able to give a good account of that Time and Leisure, which their plentiful Fortunes, and their fairer circumstances of Life allow them: that thereby they may shut out many Temptati∣ons
to which they are otherwise most ex∣posed, furnish their Minds with the best Ar∣guments of Discourse, raise their Conver∣sation into more degrees of Wisdom, and exchange their Censoriousness of others for a more frequent Examination of themselves. 'Tis to the Queen that we owe many of those Pious Treatises which have been lately Publish'd amongst us: And that multitude of plain, useful, and Practical Sermons, which She approv'd of, and caus'd to be Printed, are Her Gift to the Publick. It is hardly to be express'd, with what Delight She came to Her Chapel; what At∣tention She gave to the Preacher, and what an Example of Seriousness She was, during the whole Service of the Church. She stir'd up such an Holy Emulation in all who appear'd before Her in the Pulpit, that it is judiciously concluded by many, that there was no such Preaching in the whole World besides, as at Whtie-Hall; and never such in England before.
I do not think that any of Her Sex, (and truly but few of ours) were able to make a better Judgment of those Performances: She never was affected with fine sayings, and flowers of Rhetorick; with angry Controver∣sie, or Spiritual Railing; but where there was sound Divinity, solid Sense, good Rules and Directions, plain Matter, an Ʋseful Sub∣ject, and a vein of Holiness that ran through∣out; there Her Approbation was sure to fol∣low; there She commended; and there, when seasonable, She plac'd Her Prefer∣ments. Her Heart was wholly set upon Goodness; and all who were Her Favourites, came to that Honour under the Character of Good and Pious. We may soon know where Her Heart was, if in the IIId place, we contemplate Her in the con∣stant practise of Her own Devotion. Devotion is usually look't upon as the soft∣est and most delicate exercise of Religion;
where the Affections may have an innocent En∣largement; and the Soul may safely display it self in all the Ardours of Divine Love. Upon this account all pious Ladies have laid an especially claim to Devotion, as their peculiar Province: and tho' they have yield∣ed to Men in other parts of Religion, where greater strength of Reasoning is requir'd; yet in this more Affectionate part, they have al∣ways studied, or pretended to Excel. Let this be granted: But then consider a∣gain, how common and how dangerous the Miscarriages are in those warmer Elevations of the Soul; where the Affections, which are so apt to Inflame, are most unfit to Guide? for how easie is the passage from earnest Devoti∣on, to Heats of Enthusiasm, or to weaknesses of Superstition? How ready are the Humours of the Body to mingle with the Fervours of the Mind, and to Taint the Sacrifie? nay, how often are the Zealous deceiv'd with false ways of Worship? and having a strange Impetus of Praying upon them, are Directing it to eve∣ry
Object, that an Idolatrous Custom shall set before them? and lastly, How often does it happen, that they, who are most eager in Raising their Affections in their Closets, do make sad work with their Passions in their Families, a long time after? Whereas I can say this for the Queen's Devotion, that it was the most Judicious, the best Temper'd, and the most Constant, that I ever observ'd in any of Her Sex. She address'd Her self to God in a most Humble and Aweful Manner, without any Affectation of odd Motions, Gestures, or Voice: She usually cover'd Her Face to keep Her Attention fix'd, and to prevent the Wander∣ing of Her Thoughts: She always seem'd to be deeply affected with a due sense of the Divine Majesty, and of the great Duty She was about: but being of a very Even Tem∣per, She was not subject to much Transport on one hand, or to much coldness on the other; but seem'd to keep up an Equal Con∣cern, a Continual fire in Her Heart without much Flame, from the beginning to the end
of Her Devotion. In which, Her Constancy, was very remarkable, which I am sure is the best sign of a solid piety: whatever Business She had, (which was oftentimes very pres∣sing and weighty in the absence of the King) She would never miss Her solemn prayers: and if upon the account of some necessary avocations She found the time would be un∣seasonable for Her Chaplains to attend; (such was Her Goodness and Condescention to the meanest of Her Servants) She would dis∣miss them; and have prayers said in Her own Chamber by the Clerk of Her Closet, who was always ready to assist Her Devotion. She never miss'd to Communicate every Month in Her Chapel; and Her preparation was generally enter'd upon with some strict∣ness almost a Week before: and those Inno∣cent Diversions, which Her Station call'd for, and the Expectation of the Court requir'd, and some joyful Occasions made seasonable; She always, as far as lay in Her power, so order'd and contriv'd; that they might be at the greatest distance from Her more seri∣ous
times; and give the least disturbance to the Devotional frame of Her Soul. Thus She kept up a Continual Intercourse with Heaven; Her Lamp was always Burn∣ing, always Bright; and She had but little to do when God was pleas'd to Confine Her to Her Bed of Sickness: Resignation and Submission was Her whole Duty then, and with that She meekly comply'd. When the Art and Skill of the Physicians fail'd, and Her Death might be easily read in the Concern of all who were about Her; She alone was not surpriz'd; She had a God at hand whom She had faithfully serv'd; and She was well prepar'd to commit Her Spirit to him, and to resign Her Earthly Throne, for a share in the Everlasting Kingdom. Thus She has had but a short Reign amongst us, and that mix'd with Cares, attended with some hard Circumstances, being often over∣clouded with the sad apprehensions of what might befall Her Royal Husband, who was
call'd from Her every Summer, by the Ne∣cessities of a Forreign War: who has escap'd many Dangers abroad, to meet with some∣thing more Terrible at Home: for He, who could have met His own Death in the field, with the clearest Courage and the firmest Resolution, could not part with His Dearest Queen, without the Expressions of that Ten∣derness of Soul, which only True Conjugal Love Could make, and must Excuse. She is gone from us in the midst of Her Age, when we might have expected the In∣fluence of Her Publick piety for many years, and when we most wanted it too. Thus our Sun went down as at Noon, and our Earth was Darkned in the midst of a clear Day; and when we had lain in Provi∣sions to make this Season chearful, our Feasts were suddenly turn'd into Mourning. As to the Pious and Charitable Actions u∣sual at this Time, no Afflictions can make
Them unseasonable; they rather call for more of such good actions; but as to the Feasting and Triffling part, that seems the less proper, under so Great and so Publick a loss. We have now in the space of a Month or thereabouts, been bereav'd of Two of the greatest Encouragers of Solid Piety in their several ways, that this Age hath for a long time produc'd! and what Serious Christians can be fond of life, when so much Goodness and Vertue are departed from us, and so much Iniquity abounds? For how do the Men of Natural parts favour Atheism, or the Blasphemies of Socinus? How do mul∣titudes of the young of both Sexes give themselves up to all manner of Uncleanness! How Intemperate and Riotous are some! How Worldly and Covetous are others! How Factious and Malicious are many, who pass for sober People! How few are Truly Devout, Lovers of God, and of Wisdom, acted with a Spirit of Zeal and Discretion?
When God Almighty makes up His Jew∣els in haste, and takes away His Chosen Ves∣sels so suddenly; it is a Terrible sign, that He intends to bring some great Evil upon us: for when such Supports are remov'd, what shall hinder the Overflowings of Ungodli∣ness? and when once a Torrent of Sin breaks in upon us, it will be soon follow'd by a Deluge of Judgments. The Best use we can make of such severe Dispensations, is to turn immediately from our Sins; to betake our selves to the Strong holds of Religion; to Imitate the Vertues of those, whose Departure we deplore; and to admire God, and Adore Him in all His proceedings. We were certainly most Happy in a Queen, who was an Ornament and Blessing to this Kingdom: who made such a step to save a Sinking Nation, as Her Tenderness shrunk from, but Her Wisdom and Conscience saw Necessary to make: And tho' She has been Censur'd in the opinion of some, whose Judg∣ments
have been sway'd, either by a False pity, or by Mistaken principles of Government; yet all who could consider wisely, did not only acquit, but applaud Her; and all who Truly favour'd Vertue, and truly Knew Her, Lov'd Her. If She had any Real Enemies, they were the Wicked and the Prophane, whom She would never Countenance, however Power∣ful and Great: and 'tis no wonder, if they, who dare to Blaspheme even God Himself, The Fountain of all Goodness; should like∣wise endeavour to Defame the Best Created Loveliness: who was Kind to all, who had any Merit, and not willing to offend those who had None; who endeavour'd to make all about Her as Vertuous, and thereby as Love∣ly as Her self; and who was always ready to place Her Distinguishing favours, where God had given any singular Grace. I find I am entring into Her Character a∣gain: But tho' it be a most Engaging Theme, I must now try to refrain.
Perhaps I may be thought too forward in meddling at all with so Great a Subject, but truly, I was of opinion, that any other at this Time, would hardly have gone down; and that the Publick Concern had indispos'd my Auditory for any Common Discourse: I was also perswaded, that I might recommend Piety with some advantage to you, under so Eminent, and so Affecting an Example. I have now another Consideration to lay before you, which is a General Contribution, to Be gather'd from your respective Dwel∣lings, for the present Relief of the Poor; recommended to us by Royal Authority: where our King not only calls upon us to be Charitable, but goes before us in this Duty, and sets a Pattern for us to follow. You are Exhorted to Relieve those who are of the same Houshold of Faith, who live in the same City with you, who are Di∣stinguish'd from you only by their Misery: who suffer, not for want of Industry, but by reason of a Deadness of Trade; and whose
Poverty, is not their Sin, but their Calamity. It must be confess'd, that Ʋncharitableness, as it relates to the relieving of the Distress'd, is none of our National Sins: for our Nation has been made a Sanctuary for Exiles, and we have largely contributed to the Support of our persecuted Brethren, who have fled to us from all Quarters: But that should not hin∣der us from being Kind to our own Poor; even they suffer for their Religion too, tho' they keep their Dwellings: for whilst we la∣bour under a necessity of War, there are ma∣ny hardships and losses, which must necessa∣rily fall heavy upon many particular Families: but whilst we are able to lessen the Afflicti∣ons of others by an easie Contribution, let us not be backward in Well-doing. There is some hope, that God will still Support us under all our Calamities, because there is so much of the true Spirit of Christi∣an Charity remaining still amongst us: but if this Fountain should once dry up, I fear, we should scarce have any other Publick Vertue left, to plead our Cause with God.
He therefore, who has an Abundance, let him give plentifully; He who has but little, let him give without distrust, or fear of wanting; for the Especial Providence of God will not fail to make a suitable return. Complain not of the Difficulty of the Times, when God allows you many Enjoyments, and Means of making others happy: Neither be you tir'd with the frequency of such occasions as this; for they present you with the best opportunities of Glorifying God, and will give you a mighty support, when ever your Day of Calamity comes. I am sure, our late Gracious Queen gave Her self a Constant imployment and exercise in this Duty: it was Her delight and contri∣vance how She might spare, and lay by for Charitable uses. All Her prudent Manage∣ments had an Eye to this Vertue; and she brought a Decent Frugality into fashion a∣mong the Chief of Her Honourable Atten∣dants; who in Imitation of Her, so propor∣tion'd their Expences, that they might always have a certain Fund for Charity.
When ever any real Necessitious Condition was truly represented at Court, it seldom fail'd of some Relief: nay, it was a Common thing, for the Ladies who were about the Queen, to Contribute freely themselves upon any such just occasion, and amongst them to make a Purse for distressed Persons: of such general Influence, is a Great Example! and so largely Beneficial, is a Good one. Now since God has been pleas'd to Turn our Feastings into Mourning; let us turn some part of our Hospitality into acts of Charity: and let us Honour the Memory of our Dear Departed Queen, by an Immediate Imitation of Her Example in this particular; and by a present, and chearful exercise of that Ver∣tue, which She always practis'd and lov'd: That when God shall please to call us out of this World, we also may be found Doing of Good, and be receiv'd into that Joy of our Lord and Master, of which all his Good and Faithful Servants shall partake.
Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be all Honour, Glory, Power, Praise and Thanksgiving, now and for evermore. Amen. FINIS.
