O693 R841 12367980 60466
THE THREE BOOKS OF Publius Ovidius Naso, DE Arte Amandi. Translated, with Historical, Poetical, and Topographical Annotations. By Francis Wolferston, of the Inner-Temple, Gent. Et prodesse volet, & delectare. LONDON, Printed for Joseph Cranford, at the Castle and Lion in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1661.
TO THE Valiant and truly Noble Major-General Randolphus Egerton, Lieutenant to His Majesties Life-guard. SIR, HAd my Endeavours born a Symmetry to my desires, this which casts it self at your feet, had been worth your eye; but such is my mis-fortune, that what I designed to be responsible for the interest of that service I am bound to pay you, being priviledged with your protection, renders mee much more a debtor to you, and Meanders mee into such a labyrinth of Obligati∣ons, that they only leave mee capable to evince to the world how great my gra∣titude would appear, were your merit
less. (Generous Sir) having afforded mee your protection, I shall boast a fame next to that of your Loyalty, which is so well known, and in the most dangerous attempts hath been proportioned with a courage no less true than the oppugners designs were traiterous. Your Soveraign hath ac∣knowledged, and your Country oweth you for actions beyond the amplest Characters of Art to express. Take this (Sir) as the preface to that respect I owe you, and grace the front of my labours with your acceptance, an honour that transcends my desert, and shall ever be acknowledged Superlative by Sir, Your obedient servant, FR. WOLFERSTON.
TO The Entertaining Reader. HAving lately fabricated some Poems o, my own, I feared it might argue too great a presumption for mee, altogether a stranger to the Pross, at first to publish things that had never swallowed the pills of cen∣sure; which timidity, (generous Reader) was the first Motive to this Translation, and induced me to present you with a Roman Muse, yet habited i. an English dress, which, if (out of your accustome civility to strangers) you shall please to grace with a candid reception, I shall labour to gratifie with an English Thalia: And though it is as far from my expectation, as ambition to please all (for I know there are such as would reject Apollo him∣self, should bee happen into their prophane hands; whose Elogies and detractions are, in the opinion of judicious persons, equally prejudicial to any that merit an Iô Paean) yet I hope to meet with some both learned and ingenuous, that will at least allow my pains in a succinct Transtation; which (to escape the Charybdis of over curious and critical censures) I have rendred throughout lne for line.
If I have any where mistaken the Author, I doubt not but you will favourably acquit or correct it, when you shall know I have had nothing more, to instruct mee in his meaning, than his own words: Notwithstanding which, I hope you will finde I have forced no construction dis-intelligible to the Latine. And although this Poem of Ovids is by some (mis∣taking it for his Amorum) accused of too much levity and wantonness, I have englished it in so modest a sense, that (if their judgement bee respon∣sible to my expectation) it will bee inoffensive to the chastest ear. For the Annotations, they are such as I thought convenient, for the amplifi∣ing the Readers intelligence, to introduce to each book, which to some perhaps may seem too large, to others not large enough; either of which I might have humoured, but that I was confident the inge∣nious would be better satisfied with mediocrity, to whose auspicious and favourable censures, these first indeavours are humbly presented by FRANCIS WOLFERSTON.
The first Book of Publius Ovidius Naso De Arte Amandi: The Argument. Ovid shews where you may choice Beauties see, The Theatre and Forum's places be Well stor'd with all sorts: how you may begin To entertain them with discourse, and win Your self acquaintance: in the stories, hee, Of Byblis, Myrrha, and Pasiphaë, Unlawful lust condemns; next a way shows To gain access: doth confidence impose. Fine Courtship teacheth men, and in the end Forbids to trust a Mistress with a friend. IF any here bee ignorant in Love, Let him read these, hee shall a Lover prove. Swift Ships with flying Sails by Art are led, Chariots by Art, by Art Love's governed. Well could [1] Automedon in Chariots ride, And [2] Typhis the AEmonian ship did guide; Venus hath mee her Deputy proclaim'd: Love's Typhis and Automedon I'm nam'd. Love raging is, hee oft repugneth mee, But hee's a Boy, and must directed bee. (3) Phillyrides to harp Ahille taught, And furious minds by Art to mildness brought.
Both friends and soes hee terrifi'd, 'tis said, That the full-yeard-old-man was much afraid. Those hands must Hector feel, which censur'd fit By's Master, bee doth to the Rod submit. Chiron, Achiller, I love's Master am, Both cruel Boyes, both from a (4) Goddess came. But necks o Seers with Plows still loaded are, And in their mouths fierce horses bridles wear. So I can love incline, my heart though hee Wound with his bow, and dart his flames at mee; Though Love torment, on mee impression make In this a nobler Revenge I'le take. Phoebus, I feign not Arts inspit'd by thee, Nor that the Aiery Bird premonisht mee. (5) Clio nor Clio's Sisters have I seen A keeping Sheep on the Ascrean (6) Green. Use causeth this, to a skill'd Poet bow, Truths sing I: Love grace my beginnings now. Be gone yee (7) Vittae badge of modesty, And borders which down to the feet do lye. Venus secure, and granted pleasures wee Sing: in my verses there no fault shall be. Thou who a Souldier in this war wouldst prove, Must labour first to finde out whom to love, And next of all the pleasing Girle to gain, Last, that her love may 2 long time remain. This way, this manner, to our course assign, Nor must our Chariot-wheel this Goal decline. With out-cast lures, go still about, chuse one, To whom say thus, Thou pleasest mee alone. Heaven will not drop one down, then look about Until you finde a pleasing Beauty out. The Hunts-man knows well where his toils to lay, And in what dale the foaming Boar doth stay.
Fruit-trees the Fowler knows, Fishers can chuse The place, to swim where shoals of fishes use. So you that would a Lover bee, inquire To what place most your Mistress doth retire. To finde her out, I'le not command that thou Shouldst travel far, nor the vast Ocean plow. (8) Perseus (8) Andromade from (9) India brought. A Girle in Grecia, Trojan Paris sought. So many beauties (10) Rome affords to thee, That in the world there can none greater bee. As Corn on (11) Ida, Grapes in (12) Lesbos found, As Sea's with Fish, as Trees with Birds abound; As Heaven of Stars, of Maids so full is Rome, Venus appears i'th' City of her (13) Son. If that a tender growing age you prize, Unstained Virgins are before your eyes. If one mature you seek, here thousands are, You cannot chuse one, than the rest, more fair. If a grave Matron do delight you much, Here useth oft to bee a band of such. You may but gently walk in Pompes Grove. When Sol doth on the back of (14) Lee move. Or, where the Mother did t' her Sons gifts add A costly work, th' outside with Marble clad. You must not pass by (15) Livies Porch, where are Old Stories, which their Authors name do bear. Where (16) Belides their Husbands have not spar'd, But barb'rously slaughters for them prepar'd. Bewail'd (17) Adonis, pass not by, nor that Which is to th' man of Juda consecrate. Unto the Temple of Nile's (18) heifer go, Shee many makes, 'cause shee to Jove was so. Who'd think (19) the Forum's should cause love, yet there The flames of Venus many times appear.
Where (20) Appias plac'd in Venus Marble fane, Yeelds a soft sound, waters powr'd down again. Oft hee that love consults here, love affects, Whilst others he cares for, himself neglects. Oft in this place the Eloquent are mute, New things fall out, they must plead their own sute. Venus laughs at that man, who coming too Plead for another, for himself must wooe. Chiefly the (21) curved Theatres frequent, Choice beauty's hither come, will you content, Here you shall finde what's lovely, what you could Sport gladly with, if touch, for ever hold. As busie Ants in Troops march to and fro, And mouths full-stor'd with wonted food do go. Or as the Bee through groves to pastures hies, There from one flower to another flies. So thick the Ladies to the Stage repair, Ost I have wondred at their numbers fair; Hither they come to see, and to bee seen, Here modesty hath oft neglected been. Such playes thou (22) Romnius devisedst, when The Sabine women pleas'd thy widowed men. O're th Marble Theatre, then no sale did wave, Nor could the Tragick Stage red colours have. Green leaves, the trees excrescents, then were thrown About the Stage, Artless the Scene was known; On gradual seats of sods and turfs, made fit With leavie boughs, then did the people sit; Each man sits round, and doth his Mistress see, And in their still breasts many motions bee. Whilst Thuscus rudely pipes upon his flute, Lydius stmps three times on the ground with's foot: I th' midst of all their sport (which Art did want) The King as wisht signs to his men did grant.
Shouts shew their joy, each man leaps from his place, And doth in's eager arms a Maid imbrace. As fearful Doves do from the Eagle flye, Or tender Lambs, when they a Wolf espye; So the poor Maids afraid o'th' Souldiers fled, A total paleness all their checks o're-spread; One fear had all of them, but not one face, These tear their hair, and those swound in the place; These silent grieve, those mother call in vain, This mourns, that's 'maz'd, this runs, that doth re∣main, Thus were the shame-fac'd Maids ravisht and led A genial prey unto each Romans bed. If one refus'd, her servant did imbrace, And her straight on his wanton knees would place, Then say, Why weeps my Dear? I'le be no other To thee, than was thy Father to thy Mother. Romulus to pay thy men, well didst thou know, So pay mee, and I'le be thy Souldier too. From that first time the Stage hath yearly bin A place for to entrap the fairest in. Th' Capacious (23) Circus, of a large extent, Where right-bred horses run, you must frequent; Point not at all with fingers any way, Nor with a nodd do you your thoughts betray. Accost your Mistress, whilst by none deny'd, And gently joyn your self unto her side; If shee refuse that you should sit so neer, The custome of the place allows it there; Here you must ask (for 'tis the readiest way To gain discourse) things in the present play: Whose horse is this comes up, and then must you Whatever shee commends, commend it too. Or when a stately shew th' contenders raise, As you see her, so you must Venus praise.
Or if the dust rais'd high fall on her then You with your hand must brush it off agen. If none light on her, yet brush off that none, Action in such a case becometh one. If her loose Mantle fall unto the ground, To take't up, you must bee officious found: Whilst you stoop low, observe with nimble eye, If that you can a dainty legge espye. Take care lest they that sit behinde her push, Or with their kuees her tender back should crush. 'T is profitable sleight things please her oft, As with your hand to make her cushion soft. Some, fanning cool air, do their Mistress move, Or with a foot eas'd give a birth to love. The Circus yeelds such opportunities, Or th' Sand which all about the Forum flyes. Ost amorous youths, that on th' (24) Arena fought, Beholding others wounds, worse wounds have caught. Or whilst they look for, and a book require, And t' have the Victors prize put down desire, Wounded cry out, feeling loves cruel dart, And ere they do begin, are struck to th' heart. When Caesar from a naval fight did come, The Persian and Athenian ships brought home, How many foreiners did then appear? A world of people in the City were. Who at that time could not a Mistress gain, How many did on forein Loves complain? Caesar for's conquered Nations doth prepare, And ours the (25) utmost bounds o'th' Orient are. (26) Crassus rejoyce, Parthians our spoils return, And Romane Ensigns by the Barbarous born. W'have one though young t'revenge us hath attain'd And conquests, by such years not got, hath gain'd.
To count the birth-day of the Gods forbear, Before that day the Caesars valiant were. Wisdome Divine his youthful years adorn, And he to lose through Idleness doth scorn. (27) Tyrinthius did, when he was but a Boy, Worthy so great a birth, two Snakes destroy. Now young man (such thou Bacchus didst appear, When conquer'd India did thy (28) Thyrsis fear) Thou at thy Fathers years his arms shall wear, And every where his prosperous Trophies bear. Let thy great narne thus much declare to thee, Th'art chief of th' young men, and of th' old shalt be. The young thy Brothers are, revenge their cause The old thy Fathers be, protect their Laws. Thy (29) Countries Fathers arms for thee prepare: The foe thy Fathers Kingdomes peece-meale teare; Thou pious arms dost bear, so doth not hee, Justice and Vertue will thy Ensigns be. May 'st thou in arms the Parthians overcome, And add Eöan wealth to Latium. Caesar and Mars smile both when hee doth go; Each of you is a God, and shall bee so. I prophesie you'l vanquish, and will raise In lofty verses a deserving praise. Thou with my words thy troops shalt animate, Let not thy memory these dissipate. Roman pursuits, and Parthian flights I'le sing, How th'enemies their shafts do backward (30) fling. The Parthian flying, doth his foe assayle, And with an Omen so malign prevail. The time shall come when thou a Victor known, Brave man shalt be by four white horses drawn. Before thee Chieftains going, with Gives so chain'd, That liberty by wonted flight's not gain'd.
Young Men and Maids will come for to behold, And that day many will their minds unfold. Then if your Mistress ask a Princes name, Or what in's Country is of chiefest fame, All things declare, yea though shee ask of none: And talk of things unheard of, as if known. (31) Euphrates this with Reeds edg'd on each side, That (31) Tygris which with blewish streams doth glide Call these Armenians, those of Persia: Say 'tis a City in Achaemenia; These were Commanders, them by right names call If that you can, if not, feign names for all: Banquets preparativcs are, and Tables spread, But something besides Wine is to be had. Oft Bacchus Grapes of all those sweets the best, Hath Purple Cupid in his soft hands prest, Until with Wine his spreading wings made wet, Hee sits him down, and sleeps where hee is set. Anon the wet from's dabled wings doth shake, But cannot love from's heart so easily take. Wine doth prepare and heat, our griefs allay, Cares in full cups of wine are washt away; It laughter brings, and doth the poor man cheer, Sorrow expels, and clouded looks doth clear. It oft-times doth our private thoughts declare, And by its means with Arts wee furnisht are, Oft-times young men with Love it doth inspire, Love joyn'd with Wine, is putting fire to fire. Chuse not in Wine, neither when it is night, That injureth your judgement, this your sight. (32) Paris the Goddesses i'th' day did see When Venus hee the fairest judg'd to be. Night imperfection hides, no faults doth show; Makes them that are not fair, seem to bee so.
Rich Gemms and Purple in the day peruse, By th' light of th' Sun a good complexion chuse. Why should I mention those that with intent To hunt, in numbers do the woods srequent? Why any thing of shoars should I relate, Or baths which do sulphurious smoaks create? Where some being wounded to the heart thus speak, This water's not so good as some would make, Loe in the Suburbs Delia's Temple stands, And Kingdomes won by sword-supporting bands. 'Cause shee's a Maid, and scorns at Cupids bow, Hee will his shafts amongst her creatures throw. The several places where choice beauties be, Hereto hath my Thalia sung to thee. That fair one, which thou most dost fancy, now T' obtain (the top of Art) I'se teach thee how. Whoere you bee, your easie minds incline, And every one observe my discipline. Assume a courage first, think any may Be won, and fearless your devices lay. First Birds and Locusts shall to sing forbear, And the (33) Menalian Hound run from the Hare, E're Virgins courted will young men deny, The most unwilling yeeld most willingly. Stoln pleasure's grateful to a young mans fire, Ladies as much do privately desire. 'Tis fit a Love-sick Maid her mind should show, Lest hee shee loves should to another go. Heifers do low after a Bull i'th' Mead, After ston'd-horses too young Mares have ney'd. But lust's represt in us, it rageth not, Wee lawful bounds unto our flames allot. Of (34) Byblis, who incestuous love did make, And therefore hang'd her self, why should I speak?
Or (35) Myrrha who did for her Father burn, How into bark her tender skin did turn? Her tears do us perfume, which odours are, And Myrrah's name those prccious drops still bear. On Ida's leavie plains under the shade, A Bull the glory of the herd was laid. A hide as white as milk, this beast adorns, Except a black spot just betwixt his horns (36) Gnossos and Cydon heifers him would gain, And gladly on their backs this Bull sustain. Lustful (37) Pasiphaë makes him her Mate, And therefore doth the lovely heifers hate. Known truths I sing, which Creet though us'd to be, Nor all her (38) hundred Cities can deny. Shee with an untaught hand is said to pull Green leaves, and mow the Meadows for her Bull. Amongst the droves is in the pastures born, Her Husband leaves, a Bull doth Minos horn. Pasiphaë why dost go in cloaths that are So rich? thy Bull doth not for such things care. Why in a glass dost feign the herd to see, Or that a hairy skin doth cover thee? But yet beleeve thy glass, for it will show No horns, though wisht for, on thy fore-head grow. Doth Minos please? no other take, at least Deceive him with a man, not with a beast. The Queen, her bed being left, through woods and groves Like an enraged Priest of Bacchus roves. How hath shee frown'd, when shee did Heifer see, And said, why should my Lord so pleased bee? See how shee leaps before him, thinking to Please him, imagines hee's delighted so. Then shee commands her from that place be brought, To draw the undeserved yoak be taught,
Or her a Sacrifice oth' Altar makes, And in her hands the harlots entrails takes. How oft she did with such the Gods appease; Say thus to th' slain go, you my Bull could please. (39) Now Io (40) then Europa would shee turn, A Heifer that, this on a Bull was born. The Bull deceiv'd by her, cloz'd in a frame, The Author of a monstrous birth became. (41) Had Cressa to Thyestes bed not gone, (How hard it is to be content with one) Sol i'th' Meridian had not staid, nor then Back to Aurora had return'd agen. King (42) Nisus daughter stole his Purple Hair. And now a Birds form is suppos'd to bear. (43) One Scylla, Circes made, a monster foul, Under whose belly furious Sea-dogs howl. (44) Atrides from all dangers sav'd his life, Yet fell, a Victim to his lustful wife. (45) The bloody Mother wept not for the breath Of her slain Sons, neither Creüsa's death. (46) Phoenix Amintors Son no tears doth spare. (47) Hippolitus mad horses piece-meal tear. (48) Doting Phineus works his childrens ends, And the same fate upon himself attends. All these sad mischiefs womens lusts have made. More raging th'are than ours, and more unstaid. Doubt not to gain what beauty ere you chuse, Mongst many you'l not finde one to refuse. What they grant or deny, they love to be Entreated, let repulse not trouble thee. Be not deceiv'd in change most pleasure finde, And a new Love will alienate your minde. The Corn is riper in adjacent fields: Your neighbours Cow a larger Elder yeelds.
First let it be your care her Maid to gain, For shee an easie entrance can obtain. Be sure 'tis her that all her secrets knows, To whom shee doth her private thoughts disclose. With gifts and promises corrupt her, shee Can easily with thy wishes furnish thee. Shee'l chuse a time, and so Physicians use, When her you love is least apt to refuse. Shee's fit'st for such impressions when shee smiles, So standing Corn thrives best in fatting soils; When mirth shee entertains, no griefs molest, Venus is soon'st admitted to her breast. (49) Ilion when sad, with arms defended sits, When glad, the foe containing horse admits. Try when some foe hath crost her, for then shee T'revenge her self on him, will pleasure thee. The Maid imploy'd in dressing of her head, May move this, and to you assistance add. With a low murmuring noise, thus whisper, sure You cannot his unworthy change endure; Then she may name you, urge your praises high, Swear, for her love you are resolv'd to dye; Make haste then and go to her, lest shee may Be angry and grow cold, through your delay. I ou should think the best way's to begin And kiss her Maid, much danger is therein. The Maid is coming, but the Mistress coy, That would have what this onely should injoy. 'Tis hazardous, though sweet, hard to refrain, Yet my advice is, that you should abstain. Headlong o're Precipeeces Ile not tread, Nor following mee, shall young men be mis-led, Receiving Letters by her, though you finde Some pretty postures pleasing to your mind,
Yet th' Mistress then shee's yours, to Venus see That your first offering no Handmaid be. This I advise, if you will credit Art, Let not my words like hollow winds depart. Never attempt, or else a conquest make, Y'are safe, if ever shee your crimes partake. Neither can Birds from their lim'd feathers flye, Nor can the Boar the Windowy Net untye. The Fish is eas'ly caught, when struct by Art, Do not unsatisfi'd from her depart. The fault being mutual, shee will not accuse, Or to declare her Mistress mind refuse. If you keep Counsel, do her not discover, Shee'l be to you a mind-informing Lover. Hee's out that thinks hee may at pleasure plow, Or Pilots any time for Sea allow. Alwaies the Husbandman doth not prevail, Neither do ships in every season sail. Alwaies to be a courting's not secure, You onely at convenient times must wooe her; If it her birth-day bee, or when the Queen Of Love, with Mars is in conjunction seen; Or when sh'has on a cloath of Silver-gown, And in the Circus a rich prize put down, Desist: when winter comes, and (50) Pleiade▪ For that the (51) Goat is swallowed in the , 'Tis best leave off: then they which trust the deep, Scarce any part of their torn sails can keep. Begin such time as (52) Allia before Began t' look red, and blush with Roman gore. Or on that (53) Feast begin to court again Which th' (54) man of Palestina did ordain. Be sure her birth-day solemnly be spent, You something, though close-fisted, must present.
Ladies do many pretty motions make, And any thing that is that servants take. The Mlliner first will to your Mistress go, You standing by, to her his wares will show; Shee'l your opinion ask, and something try, Then with a kiss intice you for to buy. Shee'l say her use it a long time may fit, 'Tis very cheap, and shee hath need of it; Then if you say you cann't so much expend, Shee' bid you write for it unto some friend. Give her upon her birth-day what you will, When ere shee wants, that is her birth-day still; Or from her ear a Jewels dropt shee'l feign, And then you must buy one for her again. Shee'l borrow many things, yet none restore, Nor shall your loss of them gain favour more. Ten mouths, as many tongues too little are For mee the Arts of Harlots to declare. First let a Letter seal'd an entrance finde, Let your wax bear the impress of your mind: And let your Letter love expressions bear, To which you must add an imploring prayer. At th' (55) Kings request Achilles did refend Hector: and Heaven will to prayers bend. Promises hurt not you, then promise much, 'T makes those that are not rich, seem to be such. Your Letter wins her, if shee credit it, Hope's a false Goddess, yet for you most fit. Give her not much, for fear that you should part▪ Shee onely gains then, thou the loser art. Bee alwaies giving, yet let nothing go, Swains are with barren soil deluded so: The ground will get, and hee besows in vain, Until that lss his greedy hands detain.
Her favour you may without gifts procure, If shee love gratis, it will long'st indure. With handsome lines you must prepare her mind, First try if those will entertainment finde. A Letter wonn Cydippe, which was brought, And the poor Maid was with her own words caught. I'de have young men the liberal Arts to gain, They better may a Clients cause maintain. The Maids in 's favour pleasing looks will send, Whom the grave Judge and Senate do commend. To get applause, in learning strive t'excel: Let not your lips on tedious stories dwell. Who to his Mistress useth to declame? Ladies will oft-times long Epistles blame. Yet smoothe and taking words, a handsome stile, That shee may at your pleasing language smile. Doth shee your Letter back unread resend, Proceed and hope shee'l read it in the end. In time the sullen Steer will draw the Plow: The reigns in time the stubborn horse will bow: The Iron Clivies daily use will fret, And th' passive earth the crooked share doth whet; The softest drops by constant falling on, Will make impression on the hardest stone. Persist, were shee Penelope, you'd gain, (57) Pergamus late, but yet at last was tane. Urge her not back again to write a line; 'Tis grace enough if shee but look on thine. If once shee read, shee will write back, but these Great favours shee bestoweth by degrees. Perhaps her first Letter no pleasure brings, Bids you not trouble her with such fond things; But yet shee prayes that you may fixt remain; Pursue, and fear not but you will obtain.
If you your Mistress on her bed espy, Thrown on her back, accost her privately, Be sure that none o're-hear, lest they defame, And add a scandal to your Mistress name. If in the porch you chance to spy her stay, Walk at a distance till shee go away. Sometimes before, sometimes behinde her go, Now you may walk apace, and then walk slow; When you shall overtake her, do n't diffide, But go as close as may bee to her side; If shee to th' Curved Theatre be gone, There follow her, observe what shee hath on; There you may boldly look on her attire, Commend her eyes, and every part admire; Applaud the fool that to a Wench doth start, And favour him that acts a Lovers part; When shee stands, stand, when shee sits, do not stire And gladly spend the time in serving her; Do not use instruments to curle your hair, Neither your leggs with the rough Pumice wear. Those things provide, (58) which Cybil did devise Lamented, Sung to in the Phrygian guise: Neglected Modes become best, Theseus brought Away Minois not by Courtiers taught. Phaedra, Hippolitus, though rude, lov'd well: Adonis, Venus care, ith' woods did dwell. Neatness delights, the fields will tan too much, Be sure your cloaths be handsome, without smutch; Keep your tongue smooth, and let your teeth be fair, Nor on your feet shooes that are too big wear; And then your hair in order neatly put, Let your beard by a skilful hand be cut; Look that your nails be clean, and keep them low, Nor let your hairs within your nostrils grow;
Your breath if it corrupted be, persume, Let not a Goatish lust your nose consume. Leave such like things for shameless Maids to use, And men that basely their own fex abuse. (59) Liber stiles mee his Poet, hee doth aid Lovers, and flames within himself hath made. (60) Poor Ariadne on the shoar complains of Dia, which the watery Sea contains. Starting from sleep, bare-leg'd, unlac'd her cloaths, Shee with neglected golden tresses goes. Shee cruel Theseus calls, him oft repeats, Whilst a fierce storm her tender body beats; Shee weeps and sighs, but yet shee's handsome still, Nor do incessant tears make her look ill. Now striking on her tender breast, quoth shee, False man, hee's gone, what will becomeof mee? When towards the shoar shee hears a Cymbal, and A Timbrel struck by a commanding hand; Amaz'd shee falls, is of all sense berest, No blood is in her liveless body left. Lo (61) Mimalonides with carelss hair, And Satyrs do before a God appear. Loe (62) old Silenus drunk, upon his Ass, Scarce sits, yet holding by the mane, doth pass. And whilst hee follows flying Menades, Hee on his dull beast with a cudgel layes; And tumbling down, beating his ears hee lies, Whilst the young Satyrs cry, Rise Father, rise. Next (63) comes the God himself up, who was born By Tygers, in a Grape-carv'd Chariot drawn. Speech, colour, Theseus left the heartless Maid, Thrice shee'd a fled, thrice by her fear was staid, As a strong wind the weakest stem doth stir, Or Reeds in madid fens, so fear shakes her.
To whom the God: Loe here's one that will bee More , fear not, thou shalt marry mee. In Heaven I will seat thee 'mongst the Stars, Th Maid of Cree, shalt guide the Mariners. Thus said: lest that his beasts should her molest, The God leaps down, his feet the sand comprest; Then her, unable to resist, doth bring Folded in's arms, Gods may do any thing. Some Hymen sing, (64) others Evohe sed, So th' God and's Bride joyn issue in their bed. When you to Bacchus plenteous pots shall come, Having a Lady in your bed at home, (65) Nyctelius your Father beg to lend His aid, that Wine may not your head offend. You in a latent way may speak things so, That shee, 'tis onely her you mean, may know. Let sweet discourse wait on your Wine, that shee May Mistress of your Table chuse to bec; And that your flame may be acknowledg'd, you Must teach your looks as well as lips to wooe. First take the Cup, and kiss the very place, Which with her lips shee did in drinking grace; The meat her fair hand carves desire, and As you receive it, gently touch her hand. Let your care be to please her Father, such A friend will properate your business much; When you drink, first to him your cup direct, In keeping your head bare shew him respect; Whether hee bee your equal, or below, Yet still a like respect unto him show. Through friendship to deceive is saf'st of all, Yet hee that so deceives is criminal. Many will too much liquor quaff, and think Others, 'cause they have done't, must as much drink
Observe to keep a mean in drinking so, Your tongue and feet their office best will know; Chiefly beware of quarrelling in Wine, For then your hands too much to blows incline. Through too much Wine Eurition fell to th'earth: Wine and a Banquet are most fit for mirth; Have you a voice, then sing, if nimble, dance; What pleasing part soe're you have, advance. Really drunk doth hurt, but so to feign, I think is good, if you cannot speak plain, Then if you speak, or do what is unfit, The Wine is judg'd to be the cause of it. Say th'man she'l sleep by shall most happy bee But pray not for him if shee means not thee. When Dinner's ended, and the Table's gone, An opportunity waits you upon. Step through the throng, your Mistress come close to And foot by foot with her from th'Table go. Now is the time to speak, then fears prevent Venus and Fortune aid the confident. Our Art cann't Eloquence on you bestow, Onely endeavour't, and you shall bee so. You love must act, you feeling wounds must feign, By all means try a promise to obtain. Think no pains great, and say all lovely are, Though ne're so foul, some do esteem them fair. Oft a dissembler I have seen in love, What first hee feign'd, at length did real prove. Then Ladies use men kindly in the end, Their love proves true, which they at first pretend▪ With praises you may captivate her mind, So banks are with soft water undermin'd. Her face admire, her lovely hair commend, Her little slender foot, her dainty hand.
The chastest Maids with praise delighted are, A Virgins beauty is her love and care. Th' two Goddesses on Ida wo'nt appear, Because they were not judg'd the fairest there. (66) Juno's bird if commended spreads his train, Silent look on him, and hee'l cloze't again. Race-horses for to have their manes lye straight, And to be clapt upon their necks delight. Fear not to promise, promises will move, And call the Gods as witness to your love. Jove from above laughs at Loves perjuries, Bidding Aeolus blow away such toyes; For hee himself did falsly use to swear By Styx to Juno, his examples are. 'Tis fit there should be Gods, that wee should know, And unto them accustomed honours do. To careless sleep themselves they do not give: The Godhead sees thee, therefore harmless live. Restore what thu hast borrowed, none delude, Nor have thy hands in humane blood imbru'd. Falshood to Maids only unpunisht goes, Faith's least ashamed to be broke with those. Cheat those deceivers most of falshood made, They oft fall into th'nets themselves have laid. Aegypt is said nine years t' have wanted Rain, And so long under parching drought had lain. When Thrasius to Busiris coming, said, Jove's wrath must be with strangers blood allay'd: To whom Busiris: then shalt thou be slain A Sacrifice to Jove for Aegypts Rain. Perillus in a red-hot Bull was laid, Which hee a torment had for others made; Both these were just, let death-inventers dye, And first those torments made for others, try.
So let perfidiousness falseness prevent, And women wrong'd, as they wrong us, lament. Tears drop, for those a stony-heart will move, By madid eyes let her perceive your love. If tears (for at all times men cannot cry) You want, with a wet finger rub your eye. Wise men mix kisses with the words they speak, If they'l not give, such things ungiven take. But shee'l perhaps refuse, an anger feign, Yet wishes her resistance be in vain. Take heed that when upon her lips you seize, To press them not too hard, lest it displease. Who gains a kiss, and other sweets gets nor, Deserves to lose that kiss which hee hath got. If after kisses pleasures wanting were, It was thy clownishness, not bashful fear; Forcing they tearm it, yet that force is sweet, With it, against their wills, they gladly meet; Shee that's of Venus will no rape forsake, But let her wantonness full pleasure take; And shee that may, yet doth untoucht depart, Though shee seem glad, at it is sad at heart. Both (67) Phaebe and her sister ravisht were, Yet they were grateful to their ravisher. Here is a story that deserves my pen, How the (68) Aemonian did the Scyrian win, When Venus worthy such a prize to have, On Ida, her unlucky (69) promise gave, Which now a daughter doth to Priam fly, And is receiv'd with welcomes into Troy. All, to revenge the injur'd husband, swear And each a part do in his sufferings bear. Achilles at his Mothers base request, Conceals his Sex, in womens cloaths is drest.
What dost Aeacides? don't wooll desire, Titles of honour otherwaies acquire. Why doth thy target-arm those baskets wear? Why yarn, ith' hand must Hector kill, dost bear? Never into that hand a spindle take, Which onely should the Spear of Peleus shake. By chance in the same bed a Royal Maid, Who quickly found hee was a man, was laid: Shee by his force was overcome wee know, Yet shee was willing to be forced so. Oft when Achilles in the morn would rise, To set his distaff spear betwixt his thighs: Now where's that forcing, thou Deidamia, With flattering words thy ravisher wouldst stay? They'r bashful till th' have first receiv'd it, then Having once try'd, they must try't ore agen. Alas too much hee to his form doth trust, That doth expect his Mistress should speak first. First let the man approach her, and beseech, Ladies will hearken to a handsome speech. Speak if you would obtain, shee would bee askt, With words let your desires be unmaskt. Jove suppliant went unto the Maids of old, Deny his sure no Virgin ever could. If you perceive her scorn at, and disdain Your prayers, forbear, from her a while abslain. They love what's not, at what is theirs they scoff, Take their disdain away by keeping off. Alwaies by courting her shee'l never bend, Sometimes go wait upon her as a friend; By such an action to obtain, I one To come neglected, go belov'd, have known. Merchants should not have feminine looks, but bee Made swarthy by the Sun, and storms at Sea.
It ill-becomes a Plow-man to look fair, That turns Joves earth up with a crooked share. You should not have a Ladies smooth-skind face, That on your head would Pallas Chaplet place. In Lovers, pining looks do most excel, Though some say not, yet it becomes them well. Pale-face't Orion in the woods did rove, So (70) Daphnis lookt for gentle Nais Love. Thin looks a Lover argue, sometimes wear A sickly cap upon thy well cut hair. Sorrows and griefs immense with watchings late, Th' effects of Love young men attenuate; That you may win, seem miserable, so That all may say, there one in Love doth go. Should I advise, complain, right, wrong allow, Friendship and truth are dis-esteemed now. Praise her not to a friend, lest he should prove With her, beleeving your report, in Love. Yet Patroclus ne're stain'd Achilles bed, And (71) Pirithous from base Phedra fled. As Phaebus, Pallas, (72) Hermion, Pylades, Or as the two Twins lov'd Tyndarides: Who hopes the like, may look for Plumbs to grow On Tam'rix, or that streams with hony flow. Baseness delights now, pleasure's all their care, And those, to others griefs, obtained are. O wicked! Lovers fear no open soe, Shun whom you trust, and you may safely go, Nor Brother, nor a friend confide in, just Occasion they will give you to mistrust. I've almost done what thoughts the Ladies raise, Their several humours court their several waies. No places for all grain convenient are, That Vines, this Olives, others Corn will bear.
As many minds on earth as features known, And a wise man prepares for every one. As nimble (73) Proteus us'd transform'd to bee, A Lion, now a Boar, and then a Tree. Some fish with darts are caught, others with th' hook, And some within a hollow net are took. One way will not with any age agtee, Far off old women your devices see. If learn'd to th' rude you seem, or wanton to The chaste, no more shee'l trust her self with you. Hence 'tis they fearful, honest men forsake, And oft th' imbrace of an inferiour take. Some of my work's perform'd, some's to be made, And here my ship is by her Anchor stay'd. The End of the first Book.
Annotations on the first Book OF Publius Ovidius Naso De Arte Amandi. (1) Automedon in) an expert Charioteer, the Son of Diora and servant to Achilles. Virg. Ae∣neid. 2. — equorum agitator Achillis armiger Automedon — (2) Typhis the Aemonian-ship) Typhis was Pilot to the first ship framed in Greece, called Argo, which transported the Princes Jason, Hercules, Theseus, Castor, Pollux, and the rest of the Miny's to Colchos to fetch the golden Fleece, called Aemonian, from Mount Haemus, which divideth Thessaly from Thrace, from which Mountain Thessaly is often called Ae∣monia. (3) Phillyrides to) Chiren the Centaur so called from his Mother Phillyra, hee (to omit the fable of his procreation) being grown up, retiring himself to the woods, to inquire into the nature of Herbs, be∣came an excellent Physician; hee taught Aesculapius Physick, Hercules Astrology, and Achilles, besides many other things, to play on the Harp. (4) Gods came) both Cupid and Achilles; Cupid from his Mother Venus, and Achilles from the God∣desse Thetis. (5) Clio nor) The Muses nine in number, begotten
by Jupiter upon Mnemosyne, whence they are called Mnemosynides, we finde them mentioned by many other names, as Heliconides, Parnassides, Aoni∣des, Citherides, Corycides, Pierides, Pegasides, Aganip∣pides, Hippocrenides, I lissiades, Libethrides, Pimpleides, Castalides, Pateides, Ardalides, Maonides, and Sice∣lides, all which names are attributed to them, either from their habitations, or from the places consecrate unto them. Their particular names are Calliope, a ra∣vishing singer; Erato the Lovers Muse; Thalia from her flourishing Poetry; Melpomene from her delicate warbling, a Tragick Muse; Terpsicore from her de∣light in dancing; Clio the celebrater of famous actions; Euterpe the inventress of the Mathematicks; Polyhymnia from her vast memory, the Muse of Hi∣story; Ʋrania a heavenly singer, the Muse of Astro∣nomy. Hesiod. degenerat. Deorum. , , . Which I english Jove had nine Girls, Euterpe, Thalia, Clio, Melpomene, Polymnia, Erato; Urania, Terpsicore, And 'bove the rest famous Calliope. (6) Ascrean Green) a Plain in Boeotia, neer Heli∣con: such an expression hath Propertius in lib. 2. ad Musam. Nondum etiam Ascreos norint mea carmina fontes. (7) Vittae badge of modesty; and borders) a Lin∣nen Band or Fillet which the Vestal Nuns tye up their hair with: Ovid speaking of Daphne's chastity. Met. 2. saith,
—innuptae{que} aemula Phoebes, Vitta coërcebat positos sine lege capillos. — and aemulous of Phoebe chaste The Vitta her neglected hair imbrac't. For the borders. I take them to be the nether end of the gown, which Sigonius calls Stola Cinctura a∣strictior, denoting a modest woman. (8) Perseus Andromade) Andromade was Daugh∣ter to Cepheus, and Cassiope, who for her Mothers pride, comparing her beauty with the Sea-Nymphs Nereides, was by the Nymphs taken, bound to a Rock, and exposed to a merciless Sea-Monster, yet notwithstanding was delivered by Perseus, who slew the Monster, and afterwards married her by the consent of her Parents. Metam. 4. —generum{que} salutant Auxiliam{que} domus, servatorem{que} fatentur Cassiope, Cepheus{que} pater— —Cepheus and Cassiope with joy Salute him for their Son, whom now they call The Saviour of their house, and of them all. Perseus was begot by Jupiter upon Danaë Daugh∣ter to Acrisius King of the Argives, who being pre∣monisht that his Grandchilde should kill him, shut his Daughter Danaë in a strong Tower, intending with her body to mure her womb up, and conse∣quently avert his foredoomed fate, but when Jupiter in the form of a golden showre, had begotten Perse∣us upon her, shee with her Infant being in a small boat, committed to the Sea in expectation of inevi∣table destruction, were miraculously preserved; Per∣seus grown up, returned, and unfortunately slew his Grandfather. (9) From India brought) India tot a serme spectat O∣rientem,
minus in latitudinem, &c. India (saith Cur∣tius, lib. 8.) lieth toward the East, containing more in longitude, than latitude; the North parts bee mountainous and hilly, but all the rest of the Land campain: It hath many famous Rivers, which de∣scending down from Mount Caucasus, make a de∣lightful progress thorow the Countries. Indus is more cold than any other of the Rivers, whose wa∣ter resembles the colour of the Sea. Ganges is the greatest of all, which running thorow the Southern Country, until meeting with the opposition of ma∣ny Rocks and Precipeeces, his course is turned Eastwards, where it is swallowed up of the Red Sea. When other Countries be burned with the Sun, In∣dia is covered over with Snow; and when other places be frozen, the heat is there intolerable: for which appears no natural reason. The Elephants in this Country be bigger and stronger than those of Africk: The Rivers carry down Gold, and run smoothly along, and the Sea doth cast upon the shore both pearls and precious stones. Stephanus saith, the Trees are alwaies green, that the ground bears corn twice a year, that from hence comes Pep∣per, Calamus Aromaticus, and Cynamon. Aelian lib. 1. Vari. saith, their Pigeons are of a yellow colour. (10) Rome affords) Rome the Metropolis of Italy, and most celebrated City of the whole world, of which Virgil in his first Egloge makes Tytyrus speak thus, Urbem quam dicunt Romam Melibaee putavi Stultus ego huic nostrae simtlem, &c. Englished by Mr. Ogleby. That City they call Rome, I did account Fondly like this of ours, where Swains are wont
Yearly with care to wean their tender Lambs; So I conceiv'd Whelps equal to their Dams, And judg'd that Kids were as their Mothers tall, So us'd I great things to compare with small: But shee 'bove other Cities lifts her head, As o're the Shrubs the lofty Cedars spread. It was called Rome from its founder Romulus, who built it on Mount Palatine, in a quadrangular form, which Mount hath ever since been the Seat of the Romane Emperors. It is called Urbs Septi-collis, from the seven hills on which it standeth, their names are these, the Mount Palatine, the Capitolian Mount, Quirinus Mount, the Caelian Mount, the Mount Esquilinus, the Mount Viminalis, and the Mount Aventine. Ovid. Trist. lib. 1. Sed quae de septem tot um circumspicit orbem Montibus imperii Roma Deum{que} locus. Rome, which from seven hills doth over-look The world, the Gods have for their Empire took. See Romulus infra. (11) On Ida) a high Mountain that looks to∣wards Troy, the North-side of it reaching from the Straits of Abidos, to the Cyzycene Fields in the Pro∣pontis, the Weft-side looks over the Hellespont, the South makes a Promontory, and the Eastern parts decline towards Missia. Hom. lib. 8. Iliad. saith, that the top of it is called Gargarus, where there is a Temple consecrate to Jupiter, and that it hath many Springs, and multitudes of wilde-beasts. (12) Lesbos found) in Methimna a Town of Lesbos, so called from Methymna, the daughter of Macharis, are abundance of Vines; in this place the famous Harper Orion was born. (13) Of her Son) of her Son Aeneas, who with
some Sea-beaten Trojans arrived in Italy, where hee van quished Turnus, and married Lavinia, (14) Leo move) the Sun doth annually move, through the twelve signs of the Zodiack, whereof Leo is the fifth sign: in the celestial Globe represented by a Lion, into the first degree of which, the Sun enters on or about the twelfth of July, which then bears twenty degrees eleven minutes North decli∣nation from the Aequinexial line. It is never seen of us here in England, but is fixt in that part of the E∣cliptick; which extends it self over the Islands Cuba, Jamaica and Hispaniola in America. It is often cal∣led the Nemean and Herculean Lion, because Her∣cules slew a Lion in the Nemean Forrest of an im∣mense and prodigious greatness, which the Poets feign to be translated into the sign Leo. (15) Livies Porch) the Romans had certain walks on the side of their Delubrum which they called Por∣ticus, and in these places it was lawful to trade and confer of worldly occasions, amongst which was Livia Porticus, or Livies Porch, so called from Ti∣tus Livius, the most famous of all the Roman Histo∣riographers. (16) Where Belides) the fifty daughters of Danaus so called from their Grandfather Belus: with whom Aegistus the Brother to Danaus, desired to marry his fifty Sons, but Danaus understanding by Oracle that hee should bee slain by his Son-in-law, refused, yet in the end being compelled thereto by Aegistus, hee consummates their marriages, but privately plots with his daughters to murder their fifty husbands well steept with Wine in their marriage-beds: all which too too obedient to paternal authority, cruel∣ly butchered their wretched busbands, except Hy∣permnestra,
who out of compassion spared her Husband Lynceus, who seeing his Brothers mise∣rable destinies, slew Danaus, and invaded the King∣dome of the Argives. (17) Bewais'd Adonis) the Son of Cynira, King of Crprus, and his daughter Myrrha, the darling of Venus, who whilst he was hunting in the Idalian For∣rest, was slain by a Boar, Bion. Idylium 1. . . Which I English, Adonis fair doth on the Mountains lye, A white tush having peirc'd his white thigh, Venus laments whilst hee expires, black gore Flows from his wound. And a little after. , . The loving Hounds do howl about the Boy, The Mountain-Nymphs lament with Venus cry. Whom Venus is said (Metam. 10.) to have turn∣ed into the flower called an Emony. (18) Niles Heifer) Jupiter being in love with Io the daughter of Anachus, ravisht her, but being surprized by Juno to conceal his theft, turned Io in∣to a white Cow, which Juno begged and commit∣ted to the custody of Argus, who being slain by Jove's command, poor Io by Juno frighted, ran to the banks of the River Nole, where Jove commise∣rating her mis-hap, importuning Juno, returned her to her former shape. Metam. lib. 1. De Bove nil superest, formae nisi candor in illa: — nothing now But that pure white retains shee of the Cow.
Shee after changed her name to Isis, and married Osiris in Aegypt, where shee was honoured for a God∣desse, and after that was deified at Rome. Lucan. lib. 8. Nos in Templa tuam Romana recipimus I sim. Into Romes Temples wee thy Isis took. Where shee had a Temple built her in Campo Martio, the cause of whose ruine was this. A young Gentleman called Mundus, when hee could by no means entice the chaste Paulina to satisfie his lust, perswaded the Priests of Isis to say that they were warned by Oracle, that Anubius the God of Aegypt desired the company of the said Paulina, she think∣ing the Priests would not lye, and it being accounted an honour to have to do with a God, was stuprated by Mundus in the Temple of Isis, under the name of Anubius, which hee after confessing, the Priests were put to death, the Temple beaten down, and the Image of Isis thrown into Tyber. Lang. Chron. page 250. (19) The Forums) there were many Forums in Rome, of which chiefly three, Forum Romanum, Fo∣rum Julium, and Forum Augustum, which first was chief of all, and by way of excellency called the Fo∣rum, as if there were no other Forum: Round a∣bout this Forum Romanum were built Trades-mens shops, here was the Comitium, or Hall of Justice, the Oratours Pulpit, the Sanctuary, and several o∣ther stately Edifices. (20) Appias plac'd) here Pallas is meant by Appias, but Venus and Pallas are both called Appiades, they had a Temple erected to them upon the Appian wa∣ters, neer to Forum Caesaris. (21) Curved Theatres) places where Plaies and
other Shews were publickly acted, in form of a half Moon or Semicircle. Martial. Spect. Quiequid in Orpheo Rodope Spectasse Theatro dicitur, exhibuit, Caesar, Arena tibi. What Orpheus's said on Rodope to see, Caesar the stage exhibits unto thee. There were also places called Amphitheatres, which were in form of two Theatres joyned toge∣ther in a full circle; upon this Amphitheatre did Fencers play their prizes, wilde-beasts were baited, and the Gladiators to exhilerate the Citizens, were miserably forced to butcher one another. (22) Romulus devisedst) Numitor King of the Al∣banes in Italy, was expelled his Kingdome by his younger Brother Amulius, his Son Lausus slain, and his Daughter Sylvia to prevent all hopes of off-spring to Numitor, consecrate by Amulius a Priest of Vesta, but being comprest by Mars, shee brought forth Romulus and Remus, which were by Amulius command, together with their Mother thrown in∣to yber, but being found by the Shepherd Faustulus, were preserved, and nursed by his wife Laurentia; being grown up, they slew Amulius, and restored their Grandfather Numitor to his government; af∣ter whose death the brothers disagreeing, fell to arms, by which Renaus was slain, and Romulus alone obtained the Kingdome. Plut. in Rom. ΟΤΙ . Rome (saith Aelian lib. 7. var.) was built by Re∣mus and Romulus: but Florus lib. 1. cap. 1. calls Romulus onely the builder of it, hee marked the foundation of the City wall with a plough, drawn by four white horses, according to Propert. lib. 4. de Urbe Rom.
Quatuor hinc albos Romulus egit equos, Here Romulus did four white horses drive. The City being built, Senatus centum seniorum, qui patres dicti sunt, constituitur, saith Just. lib. 43. Hee constituted a Senate, being a hundred of the Elder Citizens, which were called Fathers. Having thus stated his Government, hee desired that his souldiers might marry with the Sabines, bordering upon them, but was by the Sabines resused, where∣upon, saith Florus, lib. 1. Simulatis equestribus, vir∣gines, quae ad spectaculum venerant, praeda fuere; hee devised certain shows, which when the Virgins came to behold, they were made a prey, and seized upon by the souldiers. (23) Circus of a large) the Romans had many pla∣ces where they exhibited their plaies unto the peo∣ple, the most remarkable was a great Circus, or Shew-place, called Circus Maximus, it was a large peece of ground lying neer that part of the A∣ventine Mount, where Diana's Temple stood. It was built by Tarquinius Priscus, with divers Galleries called Fori round about it, from whence the Sena∣tors and Gentlemen of the City did behold the run∣ning with great horses at the lists, the fire-works, tumbling, baiting, and chasing of wilde-beasts. The seats about this Circus were able to contain one hundred and fifty thousand persons. There was also another Circus upon the Hill called Collis Hortulo∣rum, and this was the Circus or Shew-place of the Strumpet Flora, who made the people of Rome heir to those goods shee had gotten by prostituting her body to young Gentlemen. God. lib. 1. Rom. Hist. (24) Arena sought) the Amphitheatre, called A∣rena,
from its being scattered over with Sand o Gravel, that the blood of such as were slain in the place, might not make it too slippery for the comba∣tants. Martial. Spec. Praeceps Sanguinea dum se rotat ursus arena. (25) Utmost Bounds) the Eastern Countries sub∣jected to the Romanes. Propert. lib. 3. to Augustus. —parat ultima terra Triumphs Tigris & Euphrates sub tua jure fluent. —Remote Lands Trophies show, Tigris, Euphrates in thy Empire flow. (26) Crassus rejoyce) Marcus Crassus a wealthy Roman, who being sent with an Army against the Parthians, himself, his Son, with eleven Roman Le∣gions, were cut off and slain, and all their ensigns taken by Surena General of the Parthian Army, whose deaths were fully revenged by Ventidius, of whom Corn. Gall. Qui nunc Crassorum manes, direpta{que} signa vindicat Augusti Caesaris auspitiis. Who now for Ensigns lost, and Crassus slain, With Caesars fortune, full revenge hath tane. (27) Tyrinthius did) Hercules so called from the City Tyrinthia, where hee was brought up, hee was the Son of Jupiter, begotten on Almena, whilst hee was in his Cradle, Juno sent two Snakes to destroy him, both which hee slew: hee was famous for per∣forming many dangerous and Heroick enterprizes; amongst whose many labours I shall only mention this, that hee as yet but a youth, comprest the fifty Daughters of Thspius in one night, of whom he got filty Sons called Thespiades. (28) Thyrsis fear) a Spear or Javelin bound about with Ivy, which was carried by the Manades or
Priests of Bacchus at their Sacrifices which were per∣formed every third year, in remembrance of his triennial expedition into India. (29) Countries Fathers) the Senators which were called Patres or Fathers, Cicero calls them Patres con∣scripti, quia Romulus, qui Senatores centum, quos ab honore patres appellavit, conscripsit. (30) Backward fling) the Parthians who were most excellent at the use of darts, with which they would seem to flye back on purpose to prejudice their enemies. (31) Euphrates, Tygris) Inter Tygrim & Euphra∣tem tam uber & pinguis soli, &c. betwixt Tygris and Euphrates (saith Curtius lib. 5.) the Land is so fat and fertil, that the Inhabitants are fain to drive their cattel from pasture for fear they should surfeit. Sa∣lust saith, they both uno fonte manare in Armenia, flow from one fountain in Armenia: but Curtius going on, saith, These two Rivers have their begin∣nings in the Armenian Mountains, where they bee distant two thousand five hundred furlongs, and so run forwards, keeping their distance till they ap∣proach the confines of Media and Gordia, where they come more neer together, they compass round the Country called Mesopotamia, and so run through the confines of Babylon, into the Red-Sea. (32) Paris the Goddesses) the three Goddesses Juno, Pallas and Venus, contending for priority of beauty (occasioned by a golden Apple, with this in∣scription upon it, This for the fairest) meeting with Paris upon Mount Ida, chose him for the decider of their controversie, who gave his vote for Venus. (33) Menalian Hound) Arcadian Hound, Mena∣lus being a very high Hill in that Country.
(34) Biblis who) shee fell in love with her own brother Caunus, whom shee so much importuned, that to avoid her, hee fled his Country, whom shee pursuing, was by the wood Nymphs turned into a fountain. Met. lib. 9. Sic lachrymis consumpta suis Phoebeia Byblis Vertitur in fontem — Phebean Byblis by her tears consum'd, Into a fountain turn'd. — (35) Myrrha) the Daughter of Cyniras King of Cyprus, who being enamoured on her Father, and by the assistance of her Nurse, obtaining the satis∣faction of her lust, conceived and brought forth A∣donis, for which shee was turned into a Tree, from whence distils a gum called Myrrh. Metam. lib. 10. Flet tamen & tepidae manant ex arbore guttae: Est honor & lachrymis, stillata{que} cortice Myrrha Nomen herile tenet. — Yet shee doth weep, the Tree warm drops doth spill, Honour in tears, Myrrh from the rinds distill, Which bears her name — (36) Gnossos and Cydon) the two most famous Cities in Creet. (37) Pasiphae' was the Daughter to Sol, and Wife to Minos King of Creet, who falling in love with a Bull, was by the art of Daedalus inclosed in a woodden Cow, covered with a Cow's skin, by which means shee injoyed her Bull, betwixt whom was begotten that monster called the Minotaure, which Daedalus inclosed in the Labyrinth where hee was slain by Theseus. (38) Hundred Cities) Creet is said to have a hun∣dred Cities in it, whence it had the Epithet of He∣catompolis.
(39) Now Io) the daughter of Inachus whom Ju∣piter turned into a Heifer. Vide supra. (40) Then Europa) shee was the daughter of Age∣nor; with whom Jove being in love, transformed himself into the shape of a Bull, and carried her on his back through the Sea to Creet, where resuming his former shape, hee ravished her. (41) Had Cressa to) Aerope called Cressa from Creet, who committing adultery with Thyestes her Husband Atrens brother, the children which were born to her by Thyestes, were slain by Atreus, and given to their Father to eat, at which horrid wicked∣ness the Sun is said to have gone back to the morn∣ing. lib. 2. de Trist. Si non Aeropen frater sceleratus amasset, Conversos solis, non legeremus equos. Had not Thyestes for Aerope burn'd, Wee had not read how Phebus Carr return'd. (42) Nisus daughter) Scylla, who stole her Fathers purple hair, upon which the fate both of himself and Kingdome did depend, and carried it to his e∣nemy Minos, who besieged him, and after whom shee lusted, but being by him contemned, shee at his departure hung on the keel of his ship, where she was turned into a Lark, her Father Nisus was also turned into a Hobby betwixt whom hath ever since continued enmity. (43) One Scylla Circes) the daughter of Phorcus, whose nether parts the Witch Circe changed into grinning doggs, which shee not knowing how to restore, casting her self from a precipeece, was turn∣ed into a Rock in the Mamertine-Sea, betwixt Scicily and Italy, destructive to Mariners. (44) Atrides from all) Agamemnon, so called from
his Father Atreus, who having by Land avoided a thousand dangers in that long and desperate Siege at Troy; and afterwards escaping a threatning Ship∣wrack, the Sea being perturbed by an angry Nep∣tune, returning safe home was slain at a Banquet by his wife Clitemnestra, and her Adulterer Aegistus. (45) The bloody Mother) Medea, who by her charms furnishing Jason with the golden Fleece, was by him afterward married, to whom shee bore two Sons: but hee forsaking her, and marrying Crëusa, daughter to Creon King of Corinth, the inraged Medea consumed Crëusa in her Pallace with in∣chanted fire, of which fact Jason coming to take vengeance, shee before his face strangled her two Sons, her self flying to Athens. (46) Phaenix Amintors Son) who by his Mothers advice having to do with his Fathers Concubine, was haunted by the Furies, and flying from his Fa∣thers presence, and coming into Thessalie, was made Achilles Tutor. (47) Hippolitus mad horses) the Son of Theseus and Hippolita the Amazon, who constantly resolving to live a single life, in his Fathers absence, was soli∣cited by his Mother-in-law Phaedra, whose lust he repudiating, was by her accused to his Father, from whose anger flying, hee was torn to peeces by the horses that drew his Chariot, and was buried in Diana's grove. Fast. lib. 3. Hic latet Hippolitus loris discerptus equorum, Unde nemus nullis illud aditursequis. Here lies Hippolitus by horses slain: Whence no horse ere came in that grove again. (48) Doting Phineus) the Father of Orythus, and Crambus, whose eyes hee put out; perswaded there∣to
by his second wife Idaea, for which his own eyes were after pluckt out by the Furies. (49) ion when sad) Troy so called from Ilus the soin of Iros, which being begirt with Graecian soul∣diers, and by them reduced to extremities, did ren∣der them more sorrowful, and consequently much more watchful and vigilant; but the Greeks feigning a departure, left a wooden-horse, of an immense and prodigious greatness, whose belly was lined with souldiers: the Trojans joyful of their depar∣ture, and beleeving this to be the gift of Minerva, with Ropes drew the vast bulk into the City. Virg. Aeneid. 2. —circum pueri iunuptae{que} puellae Sacra canunt, funem{que} manus contingere gaudent. —Boyes, Virgins, round about Glad touch the Ropes, and sacred hymns chant out. In the night the souldiers coming out of the horse, opened the gates to their confederates, which were then returned, slew the Trojans, and set the City on fire. (50) And Pleiades) the seven stars feigned to be the seven daughters of Atlas, their names are, E∣lectra, Alcione, Celaeno, Maia, Asterope, Taygete, and Merope, which last is hardly to be discerned, the reason is, because six of them married each one a God, but Merope married a Mortal, for which shee hath ever since absconded her self; they are placed betwixt the mouth of Taurus, and the tail of Aries, and cause Snow in Winter, according to Lucan. l. 5. —jam sparsrat Aemo Bruma nives, gelidoq, cadens Atlantis Oly mpo. —Now with Winters Snow The Pleiades did Aemus top bestrow.
(51) Goat is swallowed) Capricornus or the Goat is one of the twelve sings, and the watery Tropick, be∣ing the farthest limit of the Sun's course South∣ward, the Aequator; which entring makes the Winter quarter, and turns his course again to the Aequi∣noxial. (52) Allia before) a River flowing from the Cru∣ctumentan Mountains in Hetruria, where the Romans were overthrown and slain by Brennus, Captain of the Gauls: hence they used to call an unlucky day dies alliensis. (53) Feast begin) the Feast of the Passcover which the Jews kept on the fourteenth of the month Ni∣san, which month containeth part of March, and part of April, by us now called Easter. (54) Man of Palestina) Moses, by whose mouth the Lord commanded the Feast of Passeover should be kept in remembrance of his passing over the houses of Israel, and destroying the first-born of Aegypt; Ovid calls him the man of Palestina, because hee died on Mount Abarim, which is a Hill, (saith Josephus. lib. 4. cap. 8. Antiq.) neer Jericho, Pale∣stina containeth Judea, Samaria, and Galiea. (55) Kings request) Achilles at the humble request of King Priam, did restore the dead body of Hector whom hee had slain, and dragged his coarse in Tri∣umph. Hom. Iliad. 24. (56) A Letter won) Cydippe, a noble young La∣dy of transcendent beauty, whom young Acontius being in love with, and fearing a repulse, because hee both in birth and fortune was inferiour to her, devised this means to obtain her; as shee sate in Diana's Temple, hee threw an Apple with this In∣scription. Aristaen. lib. 1.
, By Diana I will marry Acontius. Which shee taking up and reading, at unawares promised her self to him, after which time whenso∣ever shee went about to marry another, shee was cast into a dangerous disease by the offended God∣dess Diana, which her friends at last understanding, married her to Acontius. (57) Pergamus late) a high Tower in Troy from which the whole City is called Pergamus, which City (saith Dares de excidio Tro.) after ten years, eight months, and twelve daies siege was taken by the Grecians. (58) Which Cybil did) There were (saith Aelian. lib. 12. Nar.) ten Cybils, one of which was Phrygian Cybil, shee first invented the Tabor and Pipe, the Cymbal and Timbrel: shee was called Mater Deo∣rum, or the Mother of the Gods, and was worship∣ped at Berecynthia, a Town in Phrygia, of which Catul. 64. —Sequimini Phrygiam ad domum: Cybelles Phrygia ad nemora deae, Ubi Cymbalum sonat vox, ubi Tympanareboant. —Follow To th' Phrygian Grotto, Goddesse Cybils shade, Where Cymbals sound, and where the Timbrels plaid. Her Priests were enjoyned to geld themselves with a Fish-shell, whose manner of worship was thus: A Phrygian man and woman apparrelled in particoloured garments after the manner of their Country, carried their Goddess Picture about, beat∣ing their breasts, and miserably howling, after whom followed others playing on Tabors, Pipes, and Cymbals.
(59) Liber stiles mee) Bacchus so called, either be∣cause (as Plutarch saies) pro Boeotiae libertate pugna∣vit, hee fought for the liberty of Boeotia, or because with Wine hee exhilerates men, and frees them from solicitous cares. (60) Poor Ariadne) the daughter of Minos and Pasiphae whom Theseus taking out of Creet forsook: leaving her disconsolate on the shoar of Dia, an Island in the Aegean-Sea, one of the Cyclades, up∣on whom being gone, shee thus complains in Ca∣tullus; Siccine me patriis abvectam, perfide, ab oris, Perfide deserto liquisti in littore Theseu? Siccine discedens, &c. Which I translate. Flase Thesens, was I from my Country took Thus on a forein shoar to be forsook? Thus, all the Gods neglected, dar 'st thou go, Thy perjuries attending on thee so? Alas! could nought avert thy cruel mind, My sorrow in thee no compassion finde? Thy cruel breast not pity my estate? Ah! thou before ne're mention'd such a fate. Thou bid'st mee never look for such a thing, But joyful wedlock, and wisht Hymen sing. Which of no force sleight winds away do bear: Let women ne're beleeve men when they swear. (61) Loe Mimalonides) the Menades, or furious Priests of Bacchus. (62) Old Silenns) the Foster Father to Bacchus, who was alwaies wont to ride upon an Ass. (63) The God) Bacchus, the inventer of Wine, who by the Thracians was worshipped for a God, it being the custome of old amongst the Heathens to deifie the inventers of things.
(64) Others Evohe sed) an exclamatory noise which the Menades were wont to use in praise of Bacchus. (65) Nyctelius) Bacchus, so called from his seasts, which were performed in the night. Aeneid. 4. — Nocturnus{que} vocat clamore Cytheron. (66) Juno's Bird) the Peacock, whose train shee beautified with her heardsman Argus his hundred eyes. Metam. lib. 1. Excipit hos, volucris{que} sua Saturnia pennis Collocat, & gemmis caudam stellantibus implet. Yet that those starry Jewels might remain, Saturnia fixt them in her Peacocks train. (67) Phoebe and her) Phoebe and her sister Elaira the daughters of Leucippus, ravished by Castor and Pollux. (68) The Aemonian) Achilles so called from his Country of Thessaly: the Scyrian is meant by Dei∣damia daughter to Lycomedes King of Scyros, an Isle in the Aegean-Sea, on whom Achilles habited in womens apparel, begot Pyrrhus. (69) Promise gave) Hellen the fairest of all Greece, whom Venus promised to Paris, which being given, was the ruine of not onely himself, but all Troy. (70) Daphnis lookt) a youth of Sicily, the inventer of Bucolick verse, in love with the Nymph Nais. (71) Pirithous from) the son of Ixiox joyned in a firm league of friendship with Theseus, whose wife Phaedra soliciting him to lust, hee refused out of re∣spect to his friend. (72) Hermione Pylades) Pylades was so faithful a friend to Orestes, that when Theas King of Taurica had designed to sacrifice Orestes, hee affirmed him∣self to be Orestes, that hee might dye for his friend:
whose wife Hermione hee entirely loved, because she so nearly related to his friend. (73) Proteus used) a Sea-deity, the Son of Ocea∣nus and Thetis, the Poets feign that hee could trans∣form himself into what shape hee pleased. Me∣tam. 8. Nam modo te Juvenem, modo te videre Leonem, Nunc violentus aper, nunc quem tetigisse timerent Anguis eras, modo te faciebant cornuatanrum, Sepe lapis poteras, arbor quo{que} saepe videri. Which I english, One while a youth, a Lion then appear, Now a fierce Boar, a Snake now, which they fear To touch, now horns shew thee a Bull to bee: A Stone th' art oft, and oft-times turn'd a tree.
The second Book OF Publius Ovidius Naso De Arte Amandi. The Argument. Daedalus flight from Creet, Icarus fate, No love can Philtra's, or fond charms create. Rude language fits not love. Lady's must find Subsequient servants, neither storms nor wind A Lover must retard, how to commend A Lady's imperfections, and pretend Her faults are handsome: make her think them so. All hazards for her sake to undergo. Loves secrets must be kept so, Ovid saies, Ending this second Book with his self-praise. SIng (1) Iô Paean, twice Iô Paean sing, My wisht-for prey caught in my nets I bring. Bayes to my Verse the Jovial Lover deems, And mee before (2) th' Meonian man esteems. Such was the (3) Priameian that prevail'd, And with his fair prize from Amyclae sail'd. Such was the man that in his Chariot run, And with the course fair (4) Hippodamia won. Whither so fast young man? thy ship doth steer Ith' midst of th' Sea, no wisht-for Haven neer. 'Tis not enough to finde thy Mistress, shee Py Art is got, must so continued be.
It is as much to keep, as to acquire, In that is danger, this must Art inspire. Venus and Cupid smile, if ever now, And thou Erato to whom Lovers bow. Great things Ile sing, how love may constant prove, And th' Boy which all about the world doth rove, Hee's light, hath wings wherewith the Air to cut And bounds to them, 'tis very hard to put. Though (5) Minos do all means of scape deny A desperate way Daedalus found ith' Skye. When hee included had within his frame The Semiox and Man, the Mothers shame. Hee said just Minos my exile prefer Let my own Country these my bones inter, Driven from thence by a sad fate, where I Could never live, O suffer mee to dye. O let this Boy return, though I've no grace, If not the Boy, pity my aged face. Such words he spoke, such might he speak and more, But no return could from the King procure. Which when hee sees, now Daedalns, saith hee, Th' hast matter for thy ingenuity. Both Sea and Land Minos possesseth so, There is no way by Sea-or Land to go. Let's flye through Aire that only open lyes, Jove pardon my presumptuous enterprize. I don't affect to touch the Starry Seat, For mee to flye there is no way but that. Let mee pass Styx, through Styx my journey take, For that my nature will immortal make. Distress exiles our wills, who'd think men might Through the Aërial passages take flight. Hee doth the wings of Birds in order place, Hee doth his work with packthread enterlace.
The quills in fire-softened wax were wrought: Thus this new work was to perfection brought. The Boy did touch the wax, at th'feathers smile, Ignorant they were made for's shoulder, while His Father saies, wee with these sayls must try, To gain our Country, and from Minos flye. Minos all passages but the Aire hath shut, By my invention wee that Air must cur. Neither (6) Boôtis, nor Orion bold, Or the Tegean Maid, do thou behold. Follow mee with thy wings, before thee I Will go, keep close and thou shalt safely fly. If wee too neer unto the Sun shall soar, Our wings will melt, and not the heat endure. Or if too low, and neer the Sea wee toyl, The humid vapours will our feathers spoil. Keep in the midst O Son, the winds beware, Strike prosprous sails which way so'ere they bear. Whilst hee doth fit them, hee instructs the Boy, Just as old Birds do teach the young to fly. Then his own plumes hee on his shoulder tyes, And trembling doth for th' flight his body poize. Ready to soar, just now hee kist his Boy, And let a Fathers tear steal from his eye. There was a little hill did over-look The Plain, from which a desperate flight both took. Daedalus flyes, yet evermore looks back, And flaggs, that Icarus may overtake. Now the new Journey pleaseth, fear's put by, And daring Icarus doth boldly fly. These were espy'd by Anglers, who forsook Their Rods, themselves to speedy flight betook. (7) Samos and Naxos did with Paros stand, Delos the (8) Clarians love on their left hand.
At th' right (9) Lebinthus and Calydna's wood, With Ponds well stor'd Astipalia stood. When the rash Boy another way will chuse, Soares up, and quickly doth his father loose. Wax melts, and threeds grow slack, a God too nigh: Nor longer with the wind his arms can fly. Amaz'd, from high into the deep looks where Black night was risen to augment his fear. The wax consum'd, hee his bare arms doth shake, Trembling, hath nothing whereon hold to take. Hee fell, crying Father, Father, as hee went, And there the water did his speech prevent. Th' unhappy Father Icarus doth cry, Icarus, where ar't, saith hee, where dost thou fly? Icarus? and then ith' waves his wings hee spies, His name ith' Sea, ith' earth his body lyes. Minos could not a Mortals flight restrain, Yet I will make a flying God remain. Hee that doth use (10) Aemonian Arts is gull'd, Or gives what hee from a Colts fore-head pull'd. Medea's herbs will not make love keep warm, Nor poisons mixt drunk with a Magick charm. Jason with Phasias, Ulysses should remain With (11) Circe, if that spells could love obtain. Philtra's to Maids it is in vain to give, It wrongs their sence, doth them to madness drive. Such wickedness abhor, indearing be More than thy beauty, 'twill advantage thee. Though lovely Nireus do old Homer please, And (12) Hylas ravisht by the Naides. To keep your Mistress, don't your self admire, The gifts of Nature those of Art require. Beauty is frail, in time it will decay, And with our youthful age it flyes away.
Nor Violets, nor Lillies ever grow: Nor do pluckt Roses alwaies lovely show. Fair youth, gray hairs are coming on thee now, And wrinckles will thy face with furrows plow. Frame a good mind, the form of that maintain, Which will unto thy utmost day remain. To deck your neck with Jewels, don't desire: Two languages at least you must acquire. Not fair, but eloquent Ulysses was, And yet the Sea-Nymphs would his love imbrace, At his return how did (13) Calypso wail? And ever made the Sea unfit for sail. Shee oft-times would intreat him to relate, Because hee spoke so well, the Trojan fate. O'th' shoar they stood, where fair Calypso would have the Odrysians bloody acts retold. Hee had a slender Rod in his right hand, And what shee asks, hee draws upon the Sand. This's Troy, saith he, which mighty walls inclose, This is (14) Simois, these my tents suppose. This is the field where (15) Dolons death was wrought Whilst th'watch expects th'Aemonian horses brought. There stood Sithonian Rhesus tents, that night I came with th' captive horses from the fight. More hee would have drawn out when suddenly A wave doth wash away both tents and Troy. Then th' Goddess saies, what hope for thee is found? Dost see what mighty names the Sea hath drown'd? Therefore, whoe're you be, do not begin To trust to shapes, have Substances within. A milde behaviour very much will take, When boisterousness, hate and dissontion make, Wee loathe the Kite, that doth sharp talons keep, And Wolves, that use to fright the fearful sheep.
The gentle Swallow no man strives to take, But in what place shee will, her nest may make. Hence all contentions, hence a bitter tongue, Soft and sweet language doth to love belong. The wives their husbands, husbands wives forsake Through strife, things ill at one another take. Wives have a gift to chide, they'l not forbear: None but sweet language let your Mistress hear. Law hath not you unto one bed confin'd, But doth allow your love reward to finde. Court her with praises, such do please her ear: Then shee'l bee alwaies glad when you appear. To rich men I need not my skill impart, They have no need of mee, nor of my Art. Hee's witty that saies take it, that same man Will do much more than my invention can. Poor Lovers I instruct, my self lov'd poor, When gifts I could not, words I gave her store. Let such love wisely, how to speak take care, Such things as rich men will not, they must bear. I angry, once my Mistress locks did move, How many daies that anger lost her love! I don't beleeve't, but yet shee said that I Did tear her Gown, made mee a new one buy. If you bee wise, example take by mee, Avoid offences that so costly be. Peace with your Mistress, war with Parthians make, Sport or speak any thing you think will take. If you your Mistress strange, uneasie finde, Persevere still, in time shee will prove kinde. Crook'd bows will bend, if leisurely you try, But if too rash, they will in peeces fly. With easie stroaks a River may be crost, But if you strike too fast, ith' stream y'are lost.
Lions and Tygers are made tame by wit, Steers by degrees will to the yoak submit. Who love did more than (16) Atalanta shun? Yet by the merits of a man was won. 'Tis said (17) Melanion 'cause his Wench detain'd Her promis'd love under a tree complain'd. Oft on his shoulders hee his Nets would bear, Oft in the Cruel Boar would fix his Spear. Wounded hee sees Hylaeus Bow well strung, Better known whilst it did to him belong. I do not bid haunt the Menalian grove, Nor with your Nets upon your shoulders rove. Nor do I bid you with your breast a Dart Oppose, 'tis easie to perform my Art. To overcome, you must not her withstand: Bee sure to act what parts shee shall command. What shee rejects, reject, if shee, allow; What shee saies, say, what shee denies, do thou; If shee laugh, laugh; but if shee weep, weep too: As shee her looks disposeth, so must you. If any time shee play with you at (18) Dice, You must throw ill, let her's be her own choice. Play for no more than you would gladly lose, And then let yours be alwaies losing throws. Or if at chess your man might safely pass, Let him be taken by his (19) foe of glass. Carry her fan in one hand all along, And with the other lead her through the throng. Bee not asham'd to hand her to (20) her bed, Set by, or reach her shooes, as shee has need. Oft-times you may, then do not fearful stand, But in your Mistress bosome warm your hand. Think it not base (for though it bee 'twill please) By holding of her glass, her arms to ease.
Hee that in peeces did the Serpents tear, That Heaven deserv'd, which he (21) before did bear, A basket 'mongst th' Ionian Maids did use, And for to card their wooll, would not refuse. These for his Mistress did the Horoe do, And will you scorn such things to undergo? If shee say come to th' Forum, her obey, Go sooner than shee bids, and longer stay. If shee say to you, go, meet such a one, Haste, other things deser, be stay'd by none. If in the night shee from a banquet come And call you, you must wait upon her home. If shee ith' Country call, love hates the slow, On foct, if th'hast no Coach nor horses, go. Neither let Summers heat your journey stay, Nor Winters Snow driven along the way. Love is a kinde of war, cowards away, Loves Ensigns are not born by such as they. Night, winter, long waies, dolorous events, All labour's undergone in these soft tents. Oft storms from high pitcht clouds on you shall fly, Oft you must cold upon the bare ground lye. Cynthius is said Admetus beasts to keep, That hee each night in a poor Coat did sleep. What Phoebus taught who will not; leave disdain Whoe're you bee that would have love remain. If to approach her, thou no safe way hast, With an opposing lock the door made fast. Your self down to her from the wide roof let, Or else a passage through some window get. Shee will reioyce to see you undertake, (Sure marks of love) all dangers for her sake. Leander oft without his Wench could bee, Yet hee did swimm for her his Love to see.
Let not the servants shame their place to know, Nor be asham'd great with those Maids to grow. Each by her name (no loss to you) salute, And humbly beg them to assist your sute. You must, as your estate allows, to all Her servants at some times be liberal. Reward that Maid to whom shee doth confess, Whose hand doth her in the French garment dress. Trust mee, make all of them your own, but more Especially gainhim that keeps the door. I do not bid you costly gifts present, But sleight ones, yet such as will her content. When Corn is ripe, and Orchards ponderous are, Then let a Boy fruit in a Basket bear. Say those unto you out of th' Country came, Although by th' way for her you bought the same. Carry her Grapes in clusters, that do swell, Or Nuts which Amarillis lov'd so well. A Throssel sent, or a green Chaplet will Show, that to her your love is lasting still. Rich Gifts consume men, which old age will rue, They that are too profuse themselves undo. To write her verses I would teach you how, But they (alas) are dis-esteemed now. Verse they commend, but Riches they respect, Rich men they will, though ne're such clowns, accept. Now is the golden age, honours are gain'd, And Ladies loves, by heeps of gold obtain'd. If Homer should, attended by his Muse, Come hither without Gold, they'd him resuse. Some Ladies learned are, although but few, And others that are not, would seem so too. Let your verse both extol, then also will The Reader with kind words commend your skill.
Each of those Ladies will your verse esteem, And it to such may a sleight present seem. You may contrive for your advantage so, That what you would do, shee injoyn you to. If you are bound to set a servant free, Let him from her request his liberty. If you release him, shee's oblig'd to you, For granting that which you were bound to do. She hath the praise, you the advantage, use, Contrive that she may have, and you not lose. Whoe're would have his Mistress love remain, That he is ravisht at her looks must feign. If she wear Tyrian, Tyrian wear commend, If Coan, that becomes her best pretend. If cloath of Gold, say you that wear best love, If she have courser on, courser approve. If bare-neckt, say she sets your heart on fire: But that she take no cold thereby desire. Is her hair parted, praise the parted hair, And say, the locks that she hath curl'd are fair. Her dancing praise, her singing voice admire: Complain when her Air-sweetning notes expire. Honour that company, and that thing commend Which she loves, let your words on hers depend. If she more cruel than Medusa were, Such praises will to love incline her ear. Yet do not counterfeit apparently, Nor let your countenance your words deny. Hid Art will profit, sham'd if seen it makes, And future credit from your language takes. In Autumn when the year is fairest found, And the full Grape doth with red Wine abound: When th'seasons sometimes hot, and sometimes cold, Bodies do not in constant temper hold.
May she be well; but if upon her bed, She lye by th' unkinde Aire distempered, Then manifest your love to her, then sow What you may after with your sickle mow. No loathe in you of her disease be found, What shee would have with your own hands com∣pound. Before her weep, to kiss conceive no fears, And let her dry lips drink your dropping tears; Promise her any thing in that estate, To make her merry pretty dreams relate. Make the old woman that doth dress the rooms, Burn in her trembling hand, some choice persumes. And let your grateful care in all things go, Many their Mistress beds have come to so. Hate for such offices you will not gain, Then with sedulity 'bout her remain. No meats or broths give her that bitter are, But may your rival for her such prepare; Those sails with which you from the shore do put, Must be tane down when deeper Seas you cut. By exercise love strengthens when 'tis young, And if it's cherisht, will in time grow strong. You fear the Bull with which a Calf y'have plaid, You under th' tree which was a sprig are laid. A River small at first, and bigger grows, Receiving water that into it flows. Inure your self to any thing that will Obtain your Mistress, be it ne're so ill. Incline her ear, be alwaies in her sight, Present your self before her day and night. But when your language findes beleef in her, Your frequent visits for some time defer. A field made fallow, will afford more grain, So ground long parcht drinks up descending Rain.
Phyllis indifferently did Demophoon love, Until ith' Sea she saw his sails to move. Penelope laments Ulysses stay, So for (22) Phyllacides, Laodamia. Absent not long, lest time should cure her pain, Make her old Loves forget, new entertain. Hellen (her husband absent) could not rest Alone, but lodg'd in a warm strangers breast. What madness Menalaus was't to leave Sparta, whilst strangers did thy wife receive. Who trusts a Dove unto a Hauk to keep, Or to a Mountain Woolf a flock of Sheep? Hellen no crime, no crime did Paris know, He did what thou or any else would do. Thou by occasion didst thy self abuse, For whose advice but thine did Hellen use? A (23) well-bred stranger's come, her husband's gone, What should she do? she durst not lye alone. See Menelaus, Hellen I acquit, She did but make use of a benefit. Neither's the sandy Boar more cruel found, When with his tusks he at the Doggs turns round. Nor th' Lioness which to her whelps gives suck, Nor the small Viper by some rash foot struck: Then th' wife that in her husbands bed doth finde A pretty Wench: her looks express her mind. To fire and sword she flies, shame doth not know: Born like an Arrow from th' (26) Aonian Bow. This will the firm, the best knit-love divide, Such crimes as these, to wise men are deny'd. (25) Phasias most barbarously her own sons destroies, For to revenge their Fathers perjuries. Such a Dire Mother hath (26) you Swallow been, And still her blood may on her breast be seen,
I bid not Ladies onely one bed know, Young wives can hardly be contented so. Use (27) stoln delights, but let them be conceal'd, No credit's got by such a crime reveal'd. Give no reward, lest any should it see: Nor let your pleasures at a set time be. Suspiciously let none espy you set, Nor must you often in one place be met. And when you write, peruse that writing well: Some understand more than the Letters tell. Wrong'd love sharp darts will send, just wars main∣tain She that erewhile did grieve, makes you complain. Whilst one Atrides lov'd, that one was true, When he was criminal, she was so too. She hears how Lawrels were in garlands born, And how to (28) Chrysis she was made a scorn. She heard the troubles 'bout (29) Lyrnesis made, And how the war was a long time delay'd. She heard of these, but did the Trojan see: How th' Victor would his captives captive be. So she Aegistus doth her Lover make, Such a revenge did fair Tyndaris take. If any should your privacies make known, Though manifest, you may the fact disown. Be not too much dejected, nor exceed Too much in mitth, it will suspition breed. Spare not to speak, favour by that is gain'd, And Love by often meeting is obtain'd. There are that teach th' effects of herbs to prove, But in my judgement those things poison love. Pepper with (30) biting Nettle-seed they bruise, With (31) yellow Pellitory Wine infuse. The Goddess with no such things love compels That under th' shady hill of (32) Eryx dwells.
Eat the white Skalion from (33) Pelasgis sent, Or garden herbs, which will not love prevent. Or Eggs, or Honey which on Hymettus flows, Or th' Apple Which upon the Pine-tree grows. Erato, why dost thou to Magick turn? A neerer way my Chariot wheel will run. You that by my advice your own conceal, By th' same advice may others thefts reveal. Blame not my levity, alwaies with one wind, The bending Keel doth not a passage finde. Sometimes the North, sometimes the Eastern gales, Oft South, oft West-winds swell the linen sails. The Charioteer doth now let slack his rein, Anon hee curbs his horses in again. There's some that will indulgencies abuse, Though they no rival have, their Mistress loose: Hearts in prosperity more lofty are, Blessings 'tis hard, with equal minds to bear. So strength doth by degrees the fire forsake, On which the Ashes do a covering make. But yet the heap turn'd o're new fire burns: Extinguisht flames, and former light returns. So Love grown dull, must be stirr'd up, and when It falls asleep, it must be rouz'd agen. Keep her mind warm, let fear her heart assail, At the detection of thy crime look pale. How much, how oft, not which my verse contains, Hee's blest on whom an injur'd Maid complains. Shee swounds soon as his guilt doth reach her ears, Bereft of speech, liveless, the wretch appears. I'm hee whose hair shee furiously would tear, To whose soft eyes she would her sharp nails bear, Whom, weeping shee may see, angry looks give, Without whom fain she would, but cannot live.
Ask not how long? shee grieves but a short space: Let not her anger strengthen by delaies. Now both your arms about her white neck cast, And weeping let her bee by you imbrac't. Kiss her lamenting, court the weeping Maid, Ratifie peace, so passion is allay'd. When shee's inrag'd, and doth with anger swell, Request but Marriage-Rites, and all is well; That anger dissipates, there peace resides, And in that place (beleeve mee) grace abides. The Doves that newly fought, will bill and sport, And one another with soft murmures court. Chaos confus'd first without order was: The Earth, the Heaven, and Sea, had all one face. Heaven's put from earth, vast Seas imbrace the land, And Chaos doth in parts digested stand. Wilde Beasts in Woods, Birds in the Aire abide, And Fishes in the watery streams do gli de Then man ith' solitary field did rove, And with meer strength his untaught body move. The wood his house, herbs meat, green leaves his bed, Hee with no other a long time was fed. Sweet pleasure softened his fierce mind, they say, Together man and wife in one bed lay. No skilful Master taught them what to do, How to perform Loves Act, no Art can show. Birds had what they could love, and Fish did meet Ith' midst of th' stream, to taste this untoucht sweet. The Doe the Buck pursues, small worms their kind, And the Salt-Bitch unto the Dog is lin'd. The glad Ew skips, a Bull the Heifer gains, And the Shee-Goat the unclean hee sustains. Keen Mares unto the Horse will finde a way, Nor them can interposed Rivers stay.
Prescribe strong remedies, that will asswage, And onely give a Requiem to her rage. These, than Machaons druggs, are far more sure; If you offend, these pardon will procure. Whilst these I sing, Apollo doth inspire, And with his finger strikes his golden lyre. In's hand a Lawrel, Lawrel doth inclose His sacred brow, which him a Poet shows. Thou Teacher of soft Love (to mee thus spake) Unto my Temple all thy Scholars take. There is a Motto, which through th'world doth go, That every one should learn himself to know. Who knows himself alone shall wisely love, Hee to the utmost his design will move. Hee that a sweet face hath, let it be seen, He that looks red, oft on her shoulder lean. Hee that speaks well, let not his tongue be slow, Or sing, or drink, what hee can best, that do. Let not the learned in his speech declaim, Nor the mad Poet boast his excellent strain. So Phaebus warns, Phaebus advice obey, Credit what ere his sacred mouth shall say. Hee that doth wisely love (to come more neer) Shall by my Art win, and his wisht prize wear. Alwaies the earth affords not her increase, To help the ship sometimes the winds do cease. Small things advantage, great things love oppose, And much a Lovers courage undergoes. As Hares in Athos, or on Hybla Bees, As many fruits as grow on Pallas Trees, As th' shoar of shells, so full is Love of pain, Which wee endure, and which we must sustain. They'l say shee's walkt out, though you her did spy, Imagine 'tis so, do not trust your eye.
Is the gate shut? she promis'd should stand wide, Suffer't, and lay your self down on your side: Perhaps her counterfeiting Maid may cry, What man is that which at the door doth lye? Imbrace the posts, the cruel wench speak fair, In your head Roses from the wall pluckt, wear. If she calls, come, if not, go from the gate, It ill becomes ingenious men to wait. Your Mistress bids, but would not have you go, Those be her words, her meaning is not so. Take nothing ill, her blows imagine sweet, Neither disdain to kiss her dainty feet. But these are toyes, my Muse speaks greater things, Be present all, hear what my fancy sings. Hard things wee set on, virtue's alwaies so, The Art of Love must all indeavours know. Suffer a rival, conquest is with thee, And thou a Victor in Joves Tower shalt be. Think it no man, but some Arcadian Oak, (No more Ile speak of that) that such things spoke. If she but beek, forbear, if write, sit still, And let her go and come whither she will. Such things must married men with wives endure, When they would have sweet sleep, their parts se∣cure. Here I confess my Art imperfect is, What shall I do? I'me ignorant in this? Shall I endure my Mistress to be courted Before my face, with rage not be transported? One kist my Mistress, at which I complain'd, Our love's with so much barbarousness are stain'd. This vice not once hath hurt, he excells mee, That with all hr pretenders can agree. Better let thefts unknown obscured lye, Lest she forget her feigned modesty.
Young men don't strive your failing loves to take, Lest they should vows in their offences make. Dtected loves increase, both being espy'd In the same fault, their loves are faster ty'd. There is a fable through the whole world taught, How Mars and Venus were by Vulcan caught. Great Mars submitting unto Venus love Of a blunt souldier did an Amourist prove. Venus (than whom no Goddess is more kinde) Did condescend to satisfie his mind. How oft the wanton jeer'd her husbands foot, And's harden'd hands, so oft ith' fire put? She with Mars imitating Vulcans pace, Unto her form adds a becoming grace. At first they met and acted privately, The fault it self was full of modesty, The Sun disclos'd (who can deceive the Sun?) And Vulcan knew that which his wife had done. Sol thou didst ills create, let something be Askt for thy silence, she will grant it thee. Mulciber pitcht a net about his bed On every side, by which their sight's misled, A journey feigns to (34) Lemnos, th' Lovers Both naked lye intangled in his net. He calls the Gods, they caught ith' net shew all Venus could scarce abstain from tears let fall. They cannot frame their looks, they are so ty', Nor their obscene parts with their hands can hi One smiling, said, unconquer'd Mars to mee Transfer those bonds, if they a barthen be. Scarce Neptune at thy prayers he them unties, Mars unto Crete, Venus to Paphos hies. It profits not, before they covered it. Which shameless now they openly commit.
'Tis said, thou didst confess thy foolery, And of thy passion hast repented thee. This I forbid, and so doth Venus too, She felt it first, and shee fore-warns it you. Unseen nets do not for your rival lay, Nor intercept his letters by the way. Let those men take such things, if any must, That are by fire and water rendred just. Loe I acknowledge nought but Love is here, Nor do these lines any chaste Matron jeer. What prophane man dares (35) Ceres rites that knows, Or Samothracian sacred things disclose? It is a vertue secrets to conceal, As great a vice things sacred to reveal. For babling Tantalus did want his food, And thirsty in the middle waters stood. Venus would have her sacred rites be hidden, And all divulgers are from hence forbidden. Though Venus Myst'ries are not closed found In Chest that will not with fierce blows resound, Yet chiefly we this observation keep, That they for ever do in silence sleep. If Venus any where discloathed stand, Her secrets she concealeth with her hand. Cattel will generate ith' open day, But seen by Maids, they turn their eyes away. Strong doors and beds unto our thefts agree, In modesty most part must covered be. Opacous clouds wee wish for, and the night: We would have less of the disclosing light. When from the Sun and Rain no roof did shield, But th' Oak both food and covering did yeeld; In Groves and Caves people their pleasures try, So great a care they had to modesty.
Now for our night-work we have titles sought, Nothing unless well prais'd for much is bought. Be constant unto none, that so you may, This I might once have had, of many say. You may such Ladies with your finger show, But it is rudeness if you touch them so. That which if true they would deny, some feign; Saying that they have with such Ladies lain. Though they their bodies cannot, yet their name They will, although not criminal, defame. Go then thou hateful pander, shut the door, And add to it a hundred locks or more. What matter? when her shame about is spread, And what shee is not, shee'd be credited. We sparingly talk of our constant Lover, And her mysterious thefts our Faiths do cover. Let not your love her imperfections know, It avails many to dissemble so. He did not Andromeda's colour scorn, That swiftly on a flying-horse was born. Andromache to others seemed tall, Yet Hector her his little one did call. Acquaintance makes that handsome which is worst, For Love will many faults espy at first. When a young slip begins its root to take, Each blast of wind the tender plant will shake. But being grown, it will resist all gales, And bearing fruit against the wind prevails. So imperfections vanish in a day, What is not handsome, seems so by delay. Young tender Kids will not indure the Goat At first, but he in time inclines them to't. With fit tearms mend her faults, call her brown which Hath a look darker than Illyrian pitch.
Call a squint, Venus; Pallas, a yellow skin, And call her slender that looks lank and thin. A low one, active call; one gross, full face't; So let each fault in some neer grace be place't. Where she was born, her age do not desire, Nor what she to the (36) Censor gave inquire. If she want youth, and be of riper years, Or if she plate her gray-inclining hairs, Oh youths these ages both are fruitful known; These fields will bear good Corn, they must be sown. Pains must in youth and strength be undergone, Age with a silent foot comes stealing on. Either go to the Sea's, or plow the Land, Or to the wars with weapons in your hand. Or else incline your self to court a Maid, This is a war too, this hath rich men made. Add prudence to your work, which all prefers, And custome which makes all Artificers. Their loss of youth with neatness they'l supply, And all means to defer old age will try. In divers manners they act Venus plaies, No Tables can describe more several waies. Husbands and wives both so indifferent seem. We can't think they, stirr'd up delights esteem. I hate the bed which yields not mutual joyes, And that makes mee contemn the love of boyes. I hate her that gives of necessity Being barren, of her wooll doth dreaming lye. Pleasure which duty grants I count not so, No Maid to mee shall such a duty owe. I love to hear her wearied voice desire, That I would longer stay, bid mee respire. May I my Mistress conquer'd eyes look on, Languish with love, bidding her griefs be gone.
Nature to youth gives not these gifts, to some, They do not until past (37) seven Lustra's come. Wine drunk too new is sowre, give mee a cup Of year-old Wine unto the brim fill'd up. Fierce blasts the tender Plane tree will destroy, And Meads new cut will the bare feet annoy. To Hellen could Hermione compare; Is Gorge like unto her Mother fair? Who ere doth vow's to an old Venus raise, If hee remain, merits condign praise. Loe the concealing bed two Lovers hides My Muse before their chamber door abides. There what to say they need not learn, nor will Their wanton hands within the bed lye still. Their fingers will learn how to act their parts. And in what private place love sticks his darts. Thus Hector did Andromache assayl, Hee did not onely in field-wars prevail. Achilles with Lyrnesis did no less, When wearied he would a soft bed compress: Briseis clos'd fast in those arms remain'd, Which he before with Phrygian gore had stain'd. What wanton, did it please thee that hee should In his victorious arms thy body fold? Trust mee, too soon such pleasure must not be Acted, but by degrees and leisurely. If you perceive where she would have your hand, Then let not bashfulness your joyes withstand. You shall behold her eyes dart radiant beams, Like the refulgent Sun in liquid streams. Perhaps shee'l shrieke, or gentle whispers make, Sweetly complain, such yeelding language speak. What once you do attempt, leave not undone, Nor let her in that course before you run.
Keep both together, pleasure is more sweet, In full consent, when both the Sexes meet. This way observe, when leisure will allow, When fear will not to act love's part show how. When as delay's not safe, then ply the Oar, Make use of time, spur a free horse the more. I've done, give mee the palm young gallants now, And place a Myrtle Garland on my brow. Of Surgeons Podalyrius was the best For strength Achilles, wisdom (38) Nestors breast. Sage (39) Calchas; Ajax stout: skilful they nam'd Automedon: and I for love am fam'd. Celebrate mee your Poet, give mee praise, My name an Eccho through the world shall raise. Vulcan (40) t' Achilles, I give arms to you, Vanquish with yours, as hee was wont to do. Who with my steel makes the Amazon bow, Must write, to conquer, Naso taught mee ow. The soft-skin'd Maids desire my precepts too, Loe, my next care shall bee t'accomplish you. The end of the second Book.
Annotations on the second Book OF Publius Ovidius Naso, De Arte Amandi. (1) IO Paean) Iô is an exclamation expressing joy and satisfaction at any thing: the Romans used it in their solemn Triumphs, where the souldiers following, cried out, Iô Triumphe. Hor. Car. 4. Ode. 2. Tu{que} dum procedis, Iô Triumphi, Non semel dicemus, Iô Triumphe. And Iô triumph whilst thou passest by, We many times will, Iô triumph cry. Quae vox exultantium prae gandio est (saith Ascensius upon the place) whence to sing Iô Paean, is to praise or sing hymns to Apollo. (2) Maeonian man) Homer, called also Maeonides from his Father Maeon. (3) The Priameian) Paris, so called from his Fa∣ther Priam, who sailed from Amyclae, a City in Pelo∣ponnesus, with his fair prize Hellen, that exquisite piece of beauty, of whom Dares Phr. describing Castor and Pollux, fuerunt alter alteri similis, capillo flavo, &c. Castor and Pollux were like each other, having yellow hair, great eyes, clear complexions, slender, and extreamly handsome: Hellen was like them, beautiful, of a winning nature, courteous, &c.
(4) Hippodamia) the daughter of Oenomaus King of Elis, who proposing her a prize to him that could overcome him in a Chariot-race, was at last, by Pe∣lops (who bribed his Charioteer Myrtylus) out-run, who together with his course won the fair Hippoda∣mia for his Bride. (5) Minos doth all means of) a King of Crete by whom Daedalus was imprisoned in the Labyrinth which himself had built, for assisting his Queen Pa∣siphae in the satisfaction of her lust. Vide supra. (6) Boôtes nor Orion) Boôtes, Orion, and the Te∣gean Maid are three of the celestial constellations, the first of which is placed neer ursa Minor, the second under the head of Taurus; the laft is the sign Virgo, by the Poets feigned to be Erigone, who was born in Tegea, a City of Arcadia, a Country in Peloponne∣sus, whereof her Grandfather Oebalus was King, after her death translated into the sign Virgo, placed in the Zodiack between Leo and Libra. (7) Samos and Naxos) Samos (for its neer site to Thracia, called Samothrace) Naxos, Paros, and Delos are Islands in the Aegean Sea. (8) The Clarians love) Apollo called Clarius from Clarus a City in Ionia, where he had a Temple. (9) Lebinthus and) Lebinthus, Calydna, and Asti∣palaea, are three Islands of the Sporades in the Medi∣terranean, neer Crete. (10) Aemonian Arts) Witchcrafts from the ma∣ny Witches that in antient time practised in Aemo∣nia, here dwelt the dire Witch Erictho, and here grew all sorts of herbs that were advantagious to their hellish incantations. Lucan. lib. 6. Thessala quinetiam tellus herbas{que} nocenteis Rupibus ingenuit, sensura{que} saxa canentes
Arcanum serale Magos, ibi plurima surgunt, &c. Englished by Mr. May. Besides Thessalia's Fields, and Rocks do bear Strange killing herbs, and plants, and stones that hear The charming Witches murmures: there arise Plants, that have power to force the Deities. Medea there a stranger, in those fields Gather'd worse herbs than any Cholcos yeelds. (11) With Circe) an Inchantresse living at Cir∣ceum, a Promontory in Italy, whither Ulysses com∣panions being driven by a storm at Sea, were by the Witch transformed into Swine; whom Ulysses by his policy perswaded to restore to their pristine forms, which she no sooner had done, but with them he came away, leaving the loathsome habitation of that accursed Inchantresse. Hom. Odys. 10. Meta. 14. (12) Hylas ravisht) the Son of Theodamas King of Scythia, who going with Hercules out of the Ship Argo, to get an Oar in the Woods of Mysia, and lying down to drink on the bank of the River Aska∣nius, hee was by the Water-Nymphs called Naides pluckt in and ravished. (13) Calypso waile) Daughter to Oceanus and Thetys, shee governed the Isle Ogygia, betwixt the Seas Phoenicium and Syriacum, whither the Sea∣beaten Ulysses by a storm being driven, was by her entertained, whom shee falling in love with, admit∣ted to her bed, and detained the space of seven years, till hee was by the destinies commanded thence. Hom. Odys. 1. (14) Simois) a River in Asia rising out of the Mount Ida, and running all along by Troy, after which meeting with the River Xanthus, they toge∣ther make a great Fen or Marish, whence they ex∣patiate
themselves into the Hellespont neer the Pro∣montory Sygaeum. So in Epist. 1. ad Ulyssem. Hac ibat Simois, hîc est Segeia tellus: Hic steterat Priami regia celsa Senis. Here flow'd Simois, this is Segeian Land, And here did Priams stately Palace stand. (15) Dolon's Death) a Trojan of admirable celeri∣ty, who being sent a spy into the Grecian Camp, was taken by Ulysses, to whom in hope of pardon hee revealed the Trojan Counsels, and betrayed Rhe∣sus King of Thrace, who was then journeying to Troy, with the white horses, whereon depended the Trojan fate, after all which hee was slain by Ulysses. Hom. Iliad. 40. (16) Atalanta shun) a Lady of superlative beauty, averse to Venus, but being daily solicited with the many importunities of divers Lovers, she promised her self to him that could over-run her in a foot∣race; which Hippomanes (after the vain assaies of ma∣ny) undertaking, by casting in her way three golden Apples which shee staid to take up, overcame and married her. Metam. lib. 10. O quoties, cum jam posset transire, morata est Spectatos{que} diu vultus invita reliquit! How oft she staid, when she could have out-gone; Unwillingly his face left looking on! (17) Melanion cause) Hippomanes, so called , from his throwing Apples out of his hand. (18) Dice) Players at Dice both by the Elibertine and Constantinopolitan Council under Justinian were punished with Excommunication, and Horatius (lib. 3. Carm. Ode. 24.) saith it was by Law then for∣bidden.
Sou mavis vetita legibus aleae Quum perjura patris fides Consortem socium fallat & hospitem, Indigno{que} pecuniam haeredi properet. Or at the Dice by Laws deny'd His Father's perjur'd Faith doth play, And cheats his friend, so that hee may Wealth for his worthless heir provide. But yet Xenophon (lib. 3. de dictis Socratis) advi∣seth to play at Tables or Dice, to divert from idle∣ness. (19) Foe of Glass) this game of Chess invented (say some) by Pyrrhus, or, as others, by Palamedes at the siege of Troy, was much practised amongst the Romans; their men they made sometimes of Wax, but most commonly of Glass. Martial. lib. 7. Epig. 71. Sic vincas Novium{que} Publium{que} Mandris, & vitreo latrone clausos. You may of Novius and Publius win, With Knights, and with your man of glass shut in. (20) Her bed) The Romans chief time of enter∣tainment was at supper, their Tables were round, a∣bout which were placed three beds, whereon the guests did not sit, but lye along, three usually on a bed, each of their feet behinde the others back, where they put off their shooes because they would not foul the beds, for the most part richly covered. Ter∣rent. Heautont. Accurrunt servi, soes detrahunt Video alios fe nre lect, sternere, coenam parare, Some servants run, away their shooes do bear, Some hasting beds do spread, supper prepare.
(21) He before did) Hercules whom the Poets feign to sustain Heaven upon his shoulder, it be∣ing too ponderous for Atlas, hee being enamoured on Omphale, Queen of Lydia, casting away his Club, and Lions skin, to obtain her love, did not refuse to take a basket of wooll, and a distaff into his hand, which made his wife Deianira cry out. Epist. 9. Quem non mille ferae, quem non Stheneleius host is, Non potuit Juno vincere, vicit amor. Whom not a thousand monsters, Graecian arms, Whom Juno neer could conquer, beauty charms. (22) Phyllacides Laodamia) Protesilaus, called Phyllacides from Phyllace a Town in Thessaly, hee was the first of the Grecians slain by Hector; his wife Laodamia so firmly loved him, that requesting the Gods but to see the shadow of her slain husband, and obtaining, expires in the imbracing of it. (23) A well-bred stranger) Paris, on whom Das Phry. gives this character, Paridem candidum, lon∣gum, fortem, oculis pulcherrimis, capillo molli & fla∣vo, ore venusto, voce suavi. Paris was courteous, tall, valiant, hee had fair eyes, soft yellow hair, a pleasing countenance, and an enticing voice. (24) Aonian Bow) Apollo's Bow with which hee slew the Monster Python. Metam. lib. 1. (25) Phasias most barbarously) Medea, who slew her two Sons that shee bore to Jason before his face, because hee forsook her, and married Creüsa. Vide supra. (26) Yon Swallow) Progne, who slew her Son Itys, to revenge the rape committed by her husband Tereus, upon her Sister Philomela, for which bloody murther shee was turned into a Swallow, whose breast is still stained with her Sons blood. Metam. lib. 6.
—Neque adhuc de pectore caedis Excessere notae, signata{que} sanguine pluma est. —the murthering marks remain Upon her breast, the blood her feathers stain. (27) Stoln delights) the strict Reader may, cen∣suring this place, as judging it too light and wanton to bee inserted by a Christian, detract from the whole; but I hope he will acquiesce with satisfaction, when I shall tell him I intended to have slipt this and some other excrescents from the body of the tree; but considering without declining my resolutions of rendring it an exact translation, without preju∣dice to the Author, and censure to my self, I could not do it, I offer them to modest eyes to be lookt upon, as indeed they are, the documents of a Hea∣then. (28) Chrysis) the Daughter of Apollo's Priest, and Agamemnon's Mistress, who being forced to restore her to her Father, did in her room ravish Briseis from Achilles. (29) Lyrnesis) Briscis, called Lyrnesis from the place where shee was born, whom Arides after the departure of Chrysis, seizd or, which  great contentions betwixt him and Achiller. . lib. 1. Iliad. (30) Biting Nettle-seed) the  of the : Romant, which hath of all other the  stinging quality, and stirreth up . (31) Yellow Pellitory) not that the  or flower be yellow, but hee calls it  the yellow bunch, or knob in the mid  the frow like that of a Daisie. (32) Of Eryx dwell.) Eyx is a M  cily,  (saith Aelian lik. 1.
, where stands a Temple dedicate to Venus. (33) Pelasgis) Arcadia, so called from Pelasgus, sometimes King thereof, who planted many herbs, and made food of the roots of them. (34) To Lemnos) an Isle in the Aegean Sea, fa∣mous for the reception of Vulcan, who for his de∣formity, being ejected Heaven by the gods, fell up∣on this Isle, where, being lamed by the fall, hee for∣ged Thunderbolts for Jupiter. (35) Ceres rites) Ceres Daughter to Saturn and Ops (the first that devised the manner of sowing Wheat and Barly, for which shee was deified) had her rites, which (saith Cicero) longe maximis & oc∣cultissimis Ceremoniis continentur, were contained in great and hidden mysteries, which it was death for any of her Priests to disclose. (36) Censor gave) the Censors were officers in Rome, to whom every one gave in their names, with the full value of their estates: these took notice of all such as were ill husbands, neglected their Farms, or left their Vines untilled. (37) Seven Lustras) a Lustrum is the space of five years, every fifth year the Censors purging the Ro∣man Army with Sacrifice; so that seven Lustras is the space of thirty five years. (38) Nestors breast) the Son of Neleus and Cloris, hee excelled for wisdome and cloquence, by which hee so much advantaged the Grecians, that Agamem∣non said hee doubted not, if hee had but ten Nestors, suddenly to vanquish and overcome the Trojans. (39) Chalcas) a Greeian Augure, the Son of The∣stor: hee accompanied the Grecians in the Trojan expedition, where because hee much excelled in the
Art of divining, many great things were swayed by his Counsel. (40) T' Achilles) Vulcan at the request of Thetys, forged a sute of Arms for Achilles, the shield was beautified with most excellent workmanship; for in it hee presented the Earth, the Sea, and Heaven, with the Sun, Moon, Planets, and other Constellations, two exquisite Cities, a field of Corn, a golden Vine, and several other admirable curiosities. Hom. Iliad. 18. lib. , . Shee with these glittering arms from Vulcan hies, And like a Hauk down to Olympus flyes.
The third Book OF Publius Ovidius Naso, De Arte Amandi. The Argument. Venus commands, the Poet doth obey, Affords her Sex his skill: how Ladies may By Art the faults of Nature rectifie: What Books to read: what waies for love to try: What places to frequent; how to insnare The Amourist: what persons to beware: How to revive dead flames, and to beguile Their wary Guardians: at what times to smile Upon their servants; last of all to flye By Procris story, baleful jealousie. THe Greeks I first have harness'd; now remain Arms for (1) Penthisilea and her train. Go both alike prepar'd; they upon whom Venus and Cupid smile will overcome. For th' naked to resist the arm'd 'tis vain, Men by such victories no honour gain. But Snakes why doft thou poison; some will say, Or mak'st whole folds unto the Wolf a prey? Repreach not all, for some's offences done, Let each be as she merits look't upon. Though Menelaus Hellen can accuse, And Hellen's Sister Agaemnon rues:
Though by Eriphiles crime (2) Oeclides fell Alive, on his 'live horses, down to Hell: Yet vertuous did Penelope remain Four Lustra's, till her Lord came back again. Behold Phylacides, whose (3) wife they say T' follow her husband died before her day. Pheretiada's redeemed by his wife, Who for his safety offered her own life. Receive mee Capaneus (4) Iphias cries, Wee'l mingle Ashes so ith' (5) Rogus dies. Ladies are really all vertue, then No wonder if so much they please us men. But yet our Art requireth not such minds, With lighter sails my Pinnace passage findes. Nothing but amorous loves by mee are mov'd, And I instruct how women must be lov'd. Women, love's bow and flames will easily shake, But not so soon on men impression make. Men oft prove faithless, Maids not oft untrue, Such crimes (if thou inquirest) they have few. Unconstant Jason Phasias forsakes, Another Bride into his bosome takes. (6) Thesius Ariadne left alone A prey to Sea-fowls in a place unknown. Enquire so many waies why (7) Phyllis went, And did with careless hair ith' Woods lament? Elisa's (8) Guest did unto her afford, Though shee religious was, a death, a sword. Ie teach what loft you, ignorant in love, You wanted Art, and Art doth love improve. They'd never know, but Cythera commands That I should teach, whil'st shee before mee stands, What have the wretched Girles discern'd, saith shee, That men are am'd, and they unarmed bee?
Two books have made them Artists, here's a part, Remain to bee instructed by thy Art. Who to's (9) Therapuean Bride reproach did raise Since on a happy Lyre hath sung her praise. If you be wise, don't handsome Maids disdain, But whilst you live labour their grace to gain. This said, her head being bound with Myrtle, shee Did pluck a leaf, and gave some grains to mee. Wee feel the sacred gift, Heaven brighter shines, And at this time all care my breast declines. Ladies whil'st wits be ripe, my Arts require, What modesty, her law, and rites inspire. Remember that old age will come, and so You' let no time from you neglected go: Whi'st youthful age permits it, you must play, Years like to current waters steal away. For to recall past streams, it is in vain, Nor shall an hour once past return again. Lay hold on time, which goes, and comes no more; So pleafing follows not as went before. These withered stems I Violets have seen, From this bare Thorn I've got a Garland green. The time will come, thou that dost love deny, Grown old, forsaken in thy bed shalt lye. Ith' night thy door shall not with blows be prest, Nor th' entrance in the morn with Roses drest. Alas how soon the face lets furrows in, And colour fades, though set in purest skin. Your tresses will grow thin, and you will say, That from a childe they ever have been gray. Snakes with their skins do cast their age off too, And Harts their horns being cast, their strength re∣new. Helpless your time doth post to get, don't stay, The flower which ungot doth soon decay.
Childbirth makes youth to age the sooner yeeld, Continual harvests make a barren field. Luna at her (10) Endimion did not blush, Nor is Aurora 'sham'd of (11) Cephalus. Venus, to pass by Adon', how, tell mee, Had'st thou Aeneas and Hermione? To follow goddess waies yee mortals try, Nor to desiring men your sweets deny. Though they unconstant prove, what do you lose? No loss at all, though thousand times they use. Iron will wear, and Flint by use grows less, No fear of that parts loss doth ere oppress. To light at others Torches who'l disdain; Or who the vast Sea labours to restrain? Some women do not profit, thus they'l speak, What? is all water lost but what you take? My Art none prostitutes, but doth reprove Your idle fears, no loss proceeds from love. Soft Gales serve whil'st ith' Haven we do ride, But stronger winds, when in deep floods wee glide. I with their dress begin, trimm'd Vines abound With Wine, and rank Corn grows in well till'd ground. Form is Gods gift, and all thereof are glad, Although the greater part that gilt ne're had. Care will give beauty, which neglect decaies, Were it like to th' Idalian goddesses. Though Maids of old did not take so much care, Nor men such curious apparel wear. What if Andromache's cloaths did not surpass, No mar'l, her husband a blunt souldier was. What should the wife of Ajax, unto whom A sevenfold shield was made, adorned come? Formerly they were rude, now Rome doth rise, And th' wealth of all the conquer'd world injoyes.
The (12) Capitol with all that it hath see, And you will say, it might Jove's Palace be. The (13) Curia, worthy such a Councel gain'd, Was covered with straw when Tatius reign'd. These Palaces that glitter 'gainst the Sun Were places once for beasts to graze upon. I'm bn in the last age, I'm glad of it; Old  please some, these do my humours fit. Not  gold is found in the earths womb, Nor 'cause that Pears from divers shoars do come; Not because Marble from the Hills wee dig, Nor 'cause wee Vessels to the green Sea rig. But 'cause w'are civiliz'd, neatness maintain, Nor antient rudeness to our times remain. Your cars with stones too costly do not store, Which the tann'd Indian gathers on the shoar. In cloth of gold, grave women, do not joy: That wealth by which you seek us, oft lay by. Neatness will take, your hairs in order place, It is the hand that makes or marrs a face. There's more than one dress, that which is most cult Mke choice of, but first with your glass consult. Long viag'd with a parted hair shows well, S aodamin's tresses did excel, Th that round visag'd are disclose their ears, And in their forhead a small peak appears. Here one doth with her hair neglected stand, Such thou art Phoebus with thy Lyre in hand. Another like Diana is attir'd, When sheet' oretake a frighted beast desir'd. It becoms this to waft her hair ith' wind, And that it doth impede her looks to binde. This bedeckt with Cyllenian shells is brave, And that an Apron wears like to a wave.
You cannot count leaves on well branching trees, Nor number Alpine Beasts, or Hybla's Bees: Nor can I every dressing represent, Each day doth several new Modes invent. Neglected hair doth many grace, you'l say, What's newly comb'd was not since yesterday. Art covers much, Iole Alcides spies, No sooner seen, but I'm in love, hee cries. Bacchus for thee (14) forsaken Gnossis, cares, Satyrs rejoycing into's Chariot bears. O how indulgent nature is to you, How many waies you may things lost renew! If bald, or hair through age fall off as fast As leaves from trees blown with a Northern blast: Or gray, it may with German herbs dy'd ore Receive a better tincture than before. Some women will, that have their hair well grown, Wear others, and for gain cut off their own. Shame not to buy't in publick; I've seen some Openly 'mongst a throng of Virgins come: Why stay I upon cloaths, ruffs do not buy, Nor Wooll that's twice dipt in a Tyrian dye, When enow colours are at cheaper rates: They're mad that on their backs wear their estates. Behold the colour of the sky, when clear, And in the warm South no dark clouds appear. Or (15) Phryxus colour choose, which hee, 'tis said, And Helle got by Ino's craft betray'd. This's like a wave, and thence a name it had, With this I do beleeve Sea-Nymphs are clad. That yellow imitates, the Goddesse shines In yellow, that th' (16) light-bringing horses joyns. This Purple Amethist, this Paphian green, As th' Thracian Crane, or as white Roses seen.
Acorns and Almonds Amarillis pull: Some kinde of wax doth give a name to wooll. As many Flowers as in the Spring earth bears, When Vines put forth, and the cold winter wears: So many Dyes wooll takes, what doth become Chuse: any colour sutes not well with some. For brown light colours, fair Briseis sad: And shee that's ravisht is in mourning clad. White becomes black, it pleas'd Cepheus, who In such Attire did to Seriphos go. How oft I've warn'd that lust do not prevail, Nor that long hairs do your rough leggs assail. I do not teach the Girls of Caucasus, That drink the streams of Mysian Caicus. What? must I teach your teeth, how to keep fair, Or t' wash your mouth each morn in water clear? You, how with wax to make them whiter know: What is not red by Nature, Art makes so. By Art the wrinckle of the brow's unspyde, A little leather hollow cheeks will hide. Be not asham'd flames in your eyes to show With Saffron, which doth nigh to Cydnus grow. I've writ one little book, yet great for care, In which I teach lost beauties to repair. Ye blemisht Maids from hence your helps obtain: My Art hath alwaies for your goods took pain. Let not your Lovers finde your Boxes laid Upon the Table, Art conceal'd will aid. Whom will not painting of the face offend, Which laid too thick doth to the bosome tend? How Oesipum doth smell, though sent from Greece, Being dry, 'tis taken from a dirty fleece. My advice is, not openly to take Dee's marrow, or your foul teeth whiter make.
They grace a face, but odious be to sight, Many things doing loathe, though done delight. Th' Statue which does for th' work of Myron pass, Sometimes a shapeless and hard substance was. To make a Ring, the Gold is beaten full: The clothes you wear sometime were baltered wool. The stone was rough should shadow nobleness, And Venus naked in a shower express. Adorn your selves, when fast asleep wee deem: Drest by a curious hand you'l fairer seem. Why should I know the cause you look so fair; Be private when you do your looks prepare. Men should not all things know, they hate the sight Of things, that don't if unconceal'd, delight. The guilded streamers ore the stage, behold, Waving, and th' wood ore-laid with thin leaf-gold. No people there, before 'tis fram'd, must sit, And whil'st 'tis making, it will none admit. I don't forbid in publick t' dress your head; Nor that your locks your dainty neck ore-spread. But that you be not peevish then beware, Nor do too oft untie your loosened hair. I hate those Ladies that their Maids will bite, Scratch them ith' face, and with their Bodkins fight. Being blooded it will make her curse and swear, And crying, lug her Mistress hateful hair. Shee that's ill-hair'd, to lock her door had best, Or alwaies be in some close Cloyster drest. I suddenly my Mistress came upon, Surpriz'd her hair she wrong side out clapt on. Let such disgraces happen to my foe, And the like shame to Parthian women go. Lame may their cattel be, their pasture bare, May their trees have no leaves, their heads no hair.
Nor Semele, nor Leda need bee taught, Nor (17) she, whom a feign'd Oxe to Sidon brought. Nor Hellen, whom Atrides would regain, And whom thou Trojan Paris dost detain. Both fair and foul come to learn from my Art, But still the fairer are the lesser part. The fair to learn my Precepts have less need, Their Beauty is a gift doth Art exceed. The Sea compos'd Sea-men at ease may lye, But when it swells, must all their skill imply. Most faces have some faults, which hide and doo As much as may be, mend your body too. If low, sit down, lest standing you should show As though you sate; or to a bed couch, go, Where being thrown, that none your stature spy, Upon your feet let some loose mantle lye. Shee that's too small, may have a vail, which cast About her shoulders, hangs beneath her waste. Shee that's too pale, with Purple dye her cheek, Shee that is black, the Pharian fish must seek. An ill-shap't foot hide in a dainty shooe, Nor from your measled leggs your strings undo. Her that's crook-shoulder'd, stuffings will prefer, A breast too flat's rail'd with a stomacher. What ere shee saies, be sure shee point at none, Whose hands are fat, or nails be dirty grown. She must, whose breath's unsweet, not fasting speak, Neither a seat too neer her servant take, If your teeth black, or out of order grow, Take heed lest you should them by laughing show. Who'd think that Ladies should be taught to laugh; Yet that done handsomely will set them off. Let not much mirth your hollow cheeks reveal, And ever with your lips your teeth conceal.
Your bodies with much laughter do not strain, Y'are loud at any thing that's light and vain. Some will in laughing draw their mouth awry, Others do frame a face as they would cry. And such a ditty make with their rude voice, (18) As when an Ass at th'Mill doth make a noise. Whither will not Art extend? women are taught, And how to weep in handsome manner brought. In some 'tis handsome not to speak so plain, But to lisp out, their tongue some words constrain. It is a handsome fault, and pleaseth more, To learn to speak less than they could before. When these do profit you, approve my care; And with a stately step your body bear. There is a state in going, which doth take, Carriage doth Lovers, or Neglecters make. This moves by Art, the wind her garment swells, And being proud, shee in her gate excels. That looking ruddy like an Umbrian Bride, Doth in her walking take a spacious stride. But there a rustick mode in this may be, One rudely walks, another leisurely. Let both your shoulders and your neck be bare For them to see, which your admirers are. But this white skins must do at th'sight of this I use, as far as it is nak't, to kiss. Syrens (Sea-monsters) with their notes could stay A floating ship, if it came that away. Ulysses hearing these, did neer relax His body, his (19) friends ears close stopt with wax. All (20) learn to sing, for singing is a grace, The voice is oft a pander to the face. Now repeat what you from the stage did bring, And then a verse in wandring measures sing.
Ladies in (20) Musick also should have skill, Their left hands hold a harp, their right a quill. Wilde beasts and stones at (21) Orpheus harp did stir, The lake of hell, and the three-headed Cur. Thou just revenger of thy Mothers fall, The stones themselves at thy voice made a wall. The Fish are thought the Musick to desire, In the known fable of Arions Lyre. Learn with your hand the Psaltery to strike, To that, for musick sweet, no musick's like. Callimachus, and Coan Poets scan, Or th' Tejan wanton muse of the old man. The wanton Sappho read, you also may Read Geta's Father, who so well could play. And thou Tibullus read Propertius verse, Or some of Gallus, or thine own rehearse. Phryxus thy Sisters golden fleece so fam'd By Varro must amongst the rest be nam'd. Aeneas flight, th'Original of Rome, No extant work more fam'd in Latium. My name perhaps amongst the rest is found, My writings shall not be in Lethe drown'd. Read over, some shall say, our Masters charms So excellent, where hee both Sexes arms. Or the three books which stil'd Amorum be, Must with an active eye be searcht by thee. With a clear voice sing his Epistles ore, Which hee did make, unknown to all before. Phoebus grant this, yee Deities divine, Bacchus renown'd, grant this yee Muses nine. I also (21) dancing in young Ladies love, As you are taught, your active fingers move. Motion upon the stage doth chiefly take, Their very action them a grace doth speak.
Small things I shame to teach, as how to name A cast at Dice, or how to throw the same. Sometimes shee casts three Dice, well skill'd what throws Should lye at bottome, what to call for knows. At Chess shee must play heedfully, be wise Her man is taken with two enemies. A man by odds surpriz'd may move, but then Returning, oft renews the game agen. Light (22) balls must also be with rackets struck, And you must stir no balls, but what you took. Play such a trick at Cards, by which appear How many months are in the moving year. How on a board three stones on each side lye, Which shee keeps last, that gets the victory. Use many sports, to sport young Beauties know; For oftentimes love takes deep rooting so. It is an easie thing to use your throws, But harder far your carriage to compose. They are unwise that play with too much care, Then oftentimes their breasts too open are. They'l rage unhandsomely, contend and brawl, And for their winnings will at variance fall. To make a clamorous noise it doth displease, Or t' call th' offended gods for witnesses. There is no faith at Tables found: how I Have seen some at their games to fret and cry: Jove grant that none may so themselves discover That any care would take to please a Lover. These idle sports nature to women gave, But men must far more active pleasures have. To toss a ball, or shoot in bows well tride, To learn to fence, or a proud horse to ride. Maids must not in the fields, or cold air go, Or upon Seas, that do unpleasing flow.
But they may gently walk in Pompey's shade, When hot by Phoebus, Virgo's head is made. Or walk in Laureat Peans Palaces That Paretonian ships sunk in the Seas. Which things his Sister and his Wife had found, Whilst his head was with naval honours crown'd. The Altars of the Memphian heifer see, Or the three Theaters that famous be. See the (23) Arena sprinkled with warm gore, Or the Goal by th' hot Chariot wheel run ore. What is unseen's unknown, no love profest, 'Tis pity a good face should want a test. If Orpheus or Thamyras you surpass In singing, yet unknown, you get no grace. Had Venus not been drawn b' Apelles skill, Shee in the waves had layn forgotten still. What do the sacred Poets seek but fame, The cusp of which is onely all our aim. Formerly Poets were by Kings maintain'd. And rich gifts have the ancient Chori gain'd. Their names were celebrated with regard, Then they did Poets with stor'd gold reward. Callabrian Ennius deserv'd to be Great Scipio contiguous to thee. The Ivy without honour lies, a name Of Idleness usurps the Muses fame. Fame must awake it self, had Homer slept, Eternal fame his Iliads had not kept. Had Danaë all company refrain'd Till old, she might have in her Tower remain'd. Fair creatures, it will much advantage you, Often to walk out into publick view. The Wolf for one prey to the whole flock hies: At a whole team of fowl Joves Eagles flies:
Let a fair Maid in publick place be found, One shee perchance may 'mongst amany wound. Be studious to please in every place, To get a fame, act all things with a grace: 'Tis accidental: still hold out a hook, Where you least think sometimes a fish is took. The hills in vain sometimes by Hounds are sought, Whil'st that a Hart unforc't ith' Net is caught. What could Andromede less hope than that Her tears should any Lover penetrate? Oft at a Husbands grave a new one's gain'd, Her careless head and tears will grace though feign'd. Avoid those men that over-curious are, That do their locks in mode and figure wear. What to a thousand they to you will say, And in no place their wandring loves will stay. What won't a woman, when a man's more light; Though to have other men perchance shee might. You'l scarce beleeve, yet trust, Troy had not fell If Priams Councel th'had observed well. There be under pretence of love that cheat, And onely gain basely desire to get. Let not the hair deceive with Jessamy, Nor the small Bracelets which unfolded lye. Be not deceiv'd with clothes that do adorn, Nor all the Rings upon his fingers worn. Perhaps this spruce youth may a cheater be, And more in love with thy fine clothes, than thee. Give mee my own, oft Maids despoil'd of all, Restore my clothes, will through the Forum call. Appiades and Venus did behold These strifes from Temples bright with burnisht gold. There are some Ladies  dishonest fame, From many faithless learn to be the same.
By others, fear lest you should once complain, No man accounted faithless, entertain. Athenians trust not Thesius though hee swear, Whom hee invokes, gods of his making are. Right heir of Theseus crime Demophoon thou Phyllis deceived'st: no faith remaineth now. Make vows to them, if they make vows to you If they perform, perform your promise too. Shee may as well extinguish (24) Vesta's fire, And from the Temple sacred things desire, For men Aconitum with Hemlock bruise, As Venus, once reward receiv'd, refuse, Hold in the reign my Muse, I'l come to thee, Nor with the moving wheel disturbed be. Let letters try the foord first, written fair, And a fit messenger those letters bear. Observe his language as you read it ore, Whether hee feign, or from his heart implore. After some time write back to him, delay Doth love increase if not too long you stay. Give not your self away too easily, Nor stifly, what hee shall request, deny. Make him both fear and hope as oft as you Remit his faults, make him less fearful too. Write handsome words in an accustom'd phrase, And a smoothe stile, neat form of speech gets praise. Lovers at dubious words are oft-times wilde, Without good language a fair face is spoil'd. Though you the (25) honoured Vittae do not wear Your servants oft by you deceived are. By Boys or Maids you may your Letters send, But to no Lover any gifts commend. How I have seen Maids at such loss look pale, And sorrow ever after, them assail.
Hee's faithless truly that such gifts detains, But his breast burning Aetna-like remains. To repel fraud, let fraud be used now, Arms against Arms to take, the Laws allow. T'write many hands you may your selves inure, They're lost that would such things from mee pro∣cure. Unless his seal you break, write not again; Nor let one Letter several hands contain. Ladies the Writers loves, subscrib'd must be: Think oft on her, that often thinks on thee. If wee from small to great our minds may lead, And our full sails in curved Havens spread. It concerns beauty anger to asswage, Peace becomes men, 'tis fit for beasts to rage. Rage swells the cheek, black blood ith' veins doth start, Makes eyes look like to angry Gorgons dart. Hence rage, a pipe's not so much worth to mee, Said Pallas, who her self ith' brook did see. Ith' height of rage, if to a Glass you go, Your face to be the same you'l hardly know. A proud and stately look no Lover brooks, Love is increased most with gentle looks. Too much disdain wee hate (trust one that knows) The countenance the seed of hate oft sows. If hee looks, look; and if hee smile, smile too: Make signs to him, if hee makes signs to you. Thus whil'st hee toyes, the Boy his wand forsakes Sharp (26) pointed Arrows from his quiver takes. Wee love none sad, Ajax Tegmessa lov'd, With sprightful Ladies cheerful men are mov'd. Andromache, Tegmessa unto mee, Neither of you two should a Mistress be. I scarce beleeve (but that a birth doth show) You to your husbands ere in bed you go.
But Ajax melancholy wife hath said, Light of my soul, which a glad husband made. Who will examples from great things refuse, Or any great Commanders name not use? That this a Troop gives to be disciplin'd, Horse-men to this, ensigns to that assign'd. Look so on us for what use each one shews To fit the best, in his sure place dispose. Let rich men give, and hee that reads the Laws, Being eloquent, defend a Clients cause. Wee that are Poets only verses send, Who before others do to love pretend. Wee spread abroad the praise of a sweet face, Wee honour Nemesis, wee Cynthia grace. Orient and Occident knew Lycoris, Many inquire who my Corinna is. Dece it is not by sacred Poets us'd, But by our Arts good manners are infus'd. Nor pride doth us induce, nor love of gain, Wee for a bed or grove all sports refrain. W'are easily caught, wee burn with fervent heat, And our affections are as firm as great. Nature by curious Art is gentler made, By exercise behaviour will bee had. Ladies kinde to Aonian Poets prove, All power they have, and them the Moses love. A God is in us, wee with Heaven commerce, Hee doth his rayes from airery Seats disperse. 'Tis sin, with Poets riches to expect, Ah but alass! Maids do this sin neglect. Yet at first sight do not your selves disclose, New Lovers will, the nets espy'd, oppose. Naggs that are newly mouth'd Grooms do not ride, With the same bits they well-way'd horses gude.
To catch one stay'd in years, and a young man, Neither the manner or same course is tane. Hee's rude, in Loves Tents never had a place, That as a new spoil would your bed imbrace. Hee knows none else, to you alone is bound, Great hedges must such grain as this surround. Competitors remov'd, your love you'l gain, For love and rule no sharers entertain. Old men do by degrees affection take, They will accept what young men will forsake. They'l force no doors, nor burn with boundless rage, Nor on their Mistress face commit a strage. Neither their own, or Mistress clothes they'l tear, Nor shall th'have cause to wail their pluckt off hair. Such things those act, with youthful flames inclos'd, But these Loves Darts receive with breasts compos'd. Old men like Torches into water put, Burn with a lingring fire, like wood new cut. These Loves are sure, those short, yet full of May, Then crop the fruit that will so soon decay. Open to th' foe, let all delivered bee, That faith may be found in dissoyalty. Love easily granted will not long remain, Then some denials in sweet language feign. Let him attend the gate, cry cruel door, Now threaten much, and then as much implore. Wee love not things too sweet, sharper are found To cure us: ships with too much wind are drown'd. This is the cause men do their wives neglect, They shew them at the first too much respect. Let th' Porter their access sometimes deny, For love neglected burns more ardently. Dull swords reject, now fight with active steel, I'm sure the force of my own shafts to feel.
When the young Amourist falls in your snare, Hoping that none with him your love shall share, Seeing a rival to participate, But for these Arts his love would soon rebate. The horse, the (27) Barriers left runs well, if more Follow him close at heels, or run before. Scorn will revive flames quite extinct, loe I Cannot love those that cannot mee deny. Yet not to make him grieve much, or suppose Being troubled, there is more in't than hee knows. Your Porter may console and let him know Hee troubles more than hee hath cause to do. Pleasure with safety purchased, less wee prize To be more free with Thais, fears devise. Though you might let him in at th'door, yet through The window take him, and seem frighted too. Instruct your subtil Maid to come in post, Cry hide the Gentleman, or w' are all lost. Yet you must mix his fear with love, lest hee Should think a night cannot worth so much be. I'd like to have omitted how you may Your Guardian and watchful Nurse betray. Let wives their husbands fear, guard their own fame, Law, Duty, Modesty command the same. Thee whom revenge hath ransom'd who'l indure To be restrained, aid from my Art procure. Though Argus many eyes attend, you shall By giving fair words oculate them all. If by your Guardian you should be deny'd To write, then (28) waters at fit time provide. What if your will-obeying Maid complies, And in her bosome doth a way devise To carry Letters, bring back in her shooe Delightful papers, what can Guardians do?
The Maid being of your Councel may give leave To write upon her back, which will receive Your characters, if them in (29) Milk you write, Rubb'd with a Coal are manifest to sight. On Paper made of humid line well drest, Your characters may be unseen exprest. Acrisius of his Daughter care did take, Yet shee a Grandfather of him did make. What can a Guardian, whil'st that Stages be Ith' City, whil'st you may horse-courses see? Or whil'st you may to (30) Pharian Isis go, Busied in sacrifice, the rest not so. Or whil'st the goddess from mens eyes if they Approach her uncommanded, turns away: Ladies the (31) Baths do many pleasures hide, Then let your Guardian at the door abide Watching your Gown; or else feign a disease, So to your Chamber admit whom you please. Whil'st a false key may reach you what to do, Or a Postern a way desired shew. A Guardian also is deceiv'd with Wine, Or with the Graps pluckt from the Spanish Vine. And there are soporiferous cups will keep, And drown'd their eyes in a Lethean sleep. So him despis'd your complice doth not stay With lingring pleasures, or a slow delay. But what need I so many waies prescribe, Since with rewards you may your Keeper bribe: Gifts, trust mee, will both men and gods beguile, And Jove himself will at an offering smile. What do the wise since fools do presents love, Hee that reward receives, will secret prove. Your Keeper purchas'd once, hee's ever so, Hee'l ne're refuse that aid hee once did show.
Of your companions I am to complain, That hurt, to men doth not alone pertain. Beleeve mee, they will of your pleasures share, And others Hounds pursue your wanton Hare. The Maids that doth about the beds attend, Trust me, more times than one, hath been my friend. Keep not too fair a Maid, for oft-times shee Hath better than her Mistress pleased mee. Fond man what do I; make my self a prey, Open my breast to foes; my self betray? Birds teach not Powlers how to be undone, Nor do the Deer instruct the Dogs to run. I'l publish this, which help to Maids affords, And arm them to my loss with Lemnian swords. You may with ease make us beleeve y'are kind, The Amourists, with forward faiths, you'l finde. Look on your servant, sigh and ask why hee Hath been from you so long; then let him see Some tears let fall, for him deep sorrow feign, And in your countenance your fingers stain. Credulous and compassionate hee'l be, And say, shee doth this for the love of mee. If hee be spruce, and loves to look in's glass, Hee'l think the goddesses dote on his face. Grieve not though wrong do ne're so great appear, Neither be jealous though strange things you hear. Trust not to tales too soon, they injure love: Procris example may no light thing prove. There is neer to (32) Hymertus Flowery head A sacred spring, the earth with soft grass spread: Low Groves, where Arbutes with the grass do meet, Rosemary, Lawrel, shady Mirtle sweet: There thick-leav'd Box, and Tamarix also, There the low Shrubs, and lofty Pine-trees grow.
So many sorts of leaves, grass tops so fair Were shak't by Zephirus, a wholesome Air. Cephalus grateful rest, his Hounds forsook, The young man in this place his ease oft took. Come gentle moving Air, hee us'd to say, Come to my breast and fan this heat away. Some that by chance his words did over-hear, Bore back the sound to his wives trembling ear. Air for a Harlots name, poor Procris guest, Swounding shee falls, with jealousie possest. Looking as pale as Grapes late gathered, Or leaves with winters frost enveloped. Pale as full Quinces which depress the Tree, Or Corn before 'tis fully ripe, can be. Her sense return'd, shee tears her clothes, and now Her dainty cheeks, with her sharp nails, doth plow. Baging, away shee hies, disperst her hair, Like Bacchus Priest that doth the Thirsis bear. When she approacht the place, she would take none, But silently enters the Wood alone. What wretched Procris had thy mind possest, To lurk, what ardour beat within thy breast? Thou thoughtst that Air would come, whatever she, And that her vertues should discovered be. Thy coming grieves now 'cause thou wouldst not take Now't pleaseth, these unstedfast love doth make. The place, name, guide command belief from thee, And what the mind fears, it concludes to be. Thus when shee saw the grass with feet deprest, Her trembling heart did beat against her breast. Now Middaies Sun gave shadows less extent Ortus and Vesper equal in assent. Loe Cephalus Cyllene's stock to th' place Returns, and with spring-water cools his face:
Sad Procris is conceal'd; oth' grass being laid Come Zephyrus, come gentle Air, hee said. Now when shee saw the error of the name Into her face a lively colour came. T'imbrace her husband shee in hast doth rise, And'mongst the bushes makes a rustling noise. Hee (the sound heard) did for a wilde beast look, And bravely up his Bow and Arrows took. Wretch, 'tis no beast, what dost? hold fast thy dart; Ah mee! th' hast struck a woman to the heart. Ah thou hast hit a faithful breast, said shee, This place hath ever had a wound by thee. Before my day I dye, in jur'd by none, This place made mee suspect thee faithless grown. From mee my breath, to Air suspected, flies, I dye; with thy lov'd hand close up my eyes. So said, her breath her careless breast did leave, Which her unhappy husband did receive. Hee doth her dying in his arms imbrace, And with sad tears washeth the wound apace. But wee'l return, and in these things be plain, That her wisht Port my wearied Keel may gain. You look to Banquets, I should you conduct, And with fit postures for that place instruct. Come late, and in a handsome dress appear Not to be forward, speaks most welcome there. If you be black, yet there you'l seem most fair, I th' night all imperfections covered are. The manner must be learnt to carve and eat, Don't with your fingers oyl your face at meat. Feed not too much on dainties, but forbear, And rather let your stomach want is share. Had Hellen greedy seem'd to Pari ves, He would have loath'd, and disesteem'd his prize.
To drink is far more handsome, Maids, for you, Bacchus with Cupid joyn'd no hurt will do. Yet do not drink your heads to discompose, Nor till in your eyes, each thing double shows. Women will, madifi'd, with too much Wine, In any sordid copulation joyn. Nor after meat lye down to ease your eyes, Many disgraceful things from sleep arise. I shame to teach you more, but Venus shee, Affirms our subject chiefly shame to be. Each one must actions from her body take, And postures all alike, you must not make. You that are fair, lye upwards with your face, Shew you your back to whom your back's a grace. Melanion Attalanta's legs between His shoulders bore, if neat they must be seen. Low women ride (33) Thebais being tall, Married, ne're sate on Hector's horse at all. Shee that would have her curious waste espyde, Must sit upon the seat, her neck aside. Shee whose sweet form presents no fault to th' eye, Carelesly stretcht upon the Couch may lye. Shame no, like Phillis Mother, to untie, And 'bout your shoulders let your loose hair fly. You on whose breasts Lucina's wrinkles light, Like the swift Parthian, keep your back in sight. Love hath a thousand waies perform'd with ease, To lye half Supine oth' right side, may please. Not Phaebus Tripos, nor horn'd Ammon shows More Truth to you, than doth my Muse disclose. If there be truth in Art by long use gain'd, Beleeve't our verses have that truth obtain'd. Women arriv'd at full maturity May these perceive, two sharing equal joy.
Nor pleasing voices, nor sweet tunes refuse, And you sometimes must amourous language use. You to whom nature Venus sense denies, With a mendacious tongue pretend sweet joyes. Unhappy Maid is shee whom sense doth leave, Where man and woman equal sweets receive. Yet let not them perceive that you do feign, And active motions will beleef obtain. To mention what doth please us best, forbear Modesty bids, yet secret signs declare. Shee that reward, Venus perform'd, requires, Not that her prayers should ere be herard desires. Let not the light your marriage-beds come neer, Many things should bee undiscovered there. The Play is done, 'tis time they should return That have our yoak upon their shoulders born. As youths before, my crowd of Maids write thus Upon your spoils, Ovid instructed us.
Annotations upon the third Book OF Publius Ovidius Naso, De Arte Amandi. (1) PEnthisilia and) a Queen of the Amazones, Post Orythiam Penthisilea regno potita est, cujus Trojano bello inter fortissimos viros, &c. (saith Justin. lib. 2.) After Orythia Penthisilia obtained the govern∣Trojano bello inter fortissimos viros, &c. (saith Justin. lib. 2.) After Orythia Penthisilia obtained the govern∣ment, who amongst the most couragious Captains in the Trojan war, made large proof of her valour a∣gainst the Grecians. Shee was slain before Troy, but by whom it is uncertain. Dyctis Cretensis lib. 4. saith, Achilles inter equitum turmas Penthisiliam nactus, hast a petit, &c. Achilles amongst the troops of horse finding Penthisilia wounded her with his spear; and dragging her miserably by the hair, slew her. But Dares Phrygius saith, Penthisilia Neoptolemum sauciat, ille dolore accepto, amazonum ductricem Penthisiliam obtruncat. Now such as shall desire to know what these A∣mazons were, I shall indeavour to satisfie out of Justin. lib. 2. Ulinos & Scolopitus per factionem Opti∣matum, dome pulsi, &c. The two young Princes, Uli∣nos and Scolopitus being by the Primates of Scythia, expelled their Country, drew along with them a considerable company of young men, who seating themselves in Capadocia neer the River Thermodon, occupied the fields of the Themiscyrians, whom they
had subjected, and for many years accustoming themselves to rob and spoil their neighbouring con∣fines, were at last set upon and slain by the people. The wives of these men perceiving all hopes of po∣sterity were in their husbands cut off, fall to arms; first defending themselves at home, afterwards transmitting the war to their neighbours: with whom they disdained to marry, calling it slavery, not matrimony, have dared, a singular example of all ages, to inlarge without the assistance of hus∣bands, the bounds of their republick. Now incou∣raging themselves in the contempt of husbands, that some might not seem more happy than others, they slew those men that remained amongst them, and with the daily slaughter of their neighbours, they prosecute the revenge of their murthered husbands, At length by war obtaining peace to preserve the state of their Government, they prostitute their bo∣dies to men of neighbouring Countries: their male∣children they destroyed; but the Girls they careful∣ly brought up, instructing them in the exercise of fencing, riding, hunting, and the like: They were called Amazons ab  & , from the burning of their breast, that it might not impede their shooting. (2) Oiclides fell) Amphiaraus, called Oiclides from his Father Oicleus; a Grecian Prophet, the husband of Eriphiles, whom King Adrastus would take with him to the war of Thebes, but hee foreseeing hee should never return, concealing himself, was at last discovered by his wife Eriphiles to Adrastus for a chain of gold: with whom going to Thebes, an Eagle at feast stooping, snatcht Amphiaraus dart, and soaring up with it, let it fall; which fixing in
the ground, became a Lawrel: Amphiaraus going to cut it down, was by a sudden rupture of the earth swallowed up together with his Chariot and horses; which Themis foretold in Metam. 9. Subducta{que} suos manes tellure videbit Vivus adhuc vates— A living Prophet shall his own Ghost see Swallowed ith'earth— (3) Wife they say) Laodamia, who died imbracing the shadow of her slain husband. vide supra. (4) Iphias cries) called also Evadne, the wife of Capaneus, whom she loved so intirely, that when he was slain by a Thunderbolt at Thebes, and his Fu∣neral solemnized, shee cast her self into the fire to be consumed with him. (5) Rogus dies) It was antiently a custome not to bury the dead bodies in the ground, but to burn them with fire, to prevent the Tyrannous abuse of their enemies, who were wont to take up, after their conquests, the dead corps, and execute their malice upon them. This fire being made in a dead pile, was called Pyra, when burning, it was called Rogus. When the dead body was laid upon the Pyra, his eyes were again opened, to shew him Heaven if it were possible, and a half-penny put in his mouth, which they supposed to be the wages of Charon, for ferrying him over the Stygian Lake. (6) Theseus Ariadne) Vide supra, in Not. ad lib. 1. (7) Phylis went) the Daughter to Licurgus King of Thrace, who prostituted her body to Demophoon, upon promise of marriage, after the composing of those differences that his absence had incurred at
home: but hee by the weight of his Country af∣fairs, being detained after the limit of his promised time, gave her leisure to suspect her self despised, and despairing of the performance of his promise, hanging her self, was turned into an Almond-tree without leaves, after which Demophoon returning and imbracing the naked trunk, it presently budded and put forth. (8) Guest did) Aeneas, who (saith Virg. lib. 4.) by the commands of the gods leaving Carthage; Di∣do, who was passionately in love with him, after his departure, slew her self with the Trojans sword which hee had forgot behinde him; yet in truth Dido lived (according to the best Chronologers) eighty odd years after the Trojan, though the Poet in his Romantick Poem take the liberty to make them contemporaries. (9) Therapnean Bride) Laeda the wife of Tyndarus, who at Therapnae, a Village of Laconia, brought forth the Tyndarides. (10) Endimion doth not) a Shepherd whom Jove received into Heaven, but ambitioning the love of Juno, was first deceived with a cloud, and after for his pride ejected the caelestial habitations, and doom∣ed to perpetual sleep, whom Luna falling in love with, concealed in a Grott on Latmus a Mountain of Caria. (11) Cephalus) a young man, the husband of Pro∣cris, with whom Aurora falling in love, when shee could by no means make him decline his chastity, ravished him by force. (12) Capitol) a famous Tower in Rome, built by Tarquinius Superbus, on the Tarpeian Mount, after called Mons Saturnius, or Saturns Mount, where
the glorious spoils of the Roman Conquerers were hung up. It was called the Capitol, because when the foundation was laid, a mans head was digged up fresh and lively, as if it had been newly buried, it being supposed the head of one Tolus long before deceased, whence from Caput and Tolus it was called Capitolium. (13) Curia worthy) There were in Rome several Curia's, of which chiefly one built by Tullus Hostili∣us, thence called Curia Hostilia, which was the chief Councel-house, whither the Roman Senators as∣sembled themselves for the determining of state∣matters. (14) Forsaken Gnossis) Ariadne, whom Theseus forsaking, Bacchus found and took to wife, bestow∣ing on her the Cnossian Crown, beautified with se∣ven stars, which hee before received of Venus. (15) Phryxus colour) Phryxus the Son of Atha∣mas, King of Thebes, who with his Sister Helle, to escape the cruelty of their Stepmother Ino, mounted on the back of a golden Ramm, crossing over the Pontick Streights, Helle fell off and was drowned in the Sea, which from her name was called Helle∣spont. But Phryxus arriving in safety at Colchos, sa∣crificed his Ramm to Jupiter, hanging up his golden fleece in the Temple, whence it was afterwards ta∣ken by Jason, and the rest of the Argonantes. The Ramm in his pristine form was placed among the Stars, and is known by the Vernal Equinoxial Sign Aries. Impositam{que} sibi qui non bene pertulit Hellen Tempora nocturnis aequa durna facit. Hee that in safety did not Helle bear, Gives day and night of length an equal share.
(16) Th' light bringing horses) the four horses of the Sun brought out by Aurora, the goddess of the morning, their names are Pyrois, Eous, Aethon and Phlegon, according to Metam. lib. 2. —Volucres Pyroeis, Eous & Aethon Solis Equi, quart us{que} Phlegon.— (17) Shee whom a feigned) Europa whom Jove carried in the shape of a Bull. (18) As when at the Mill) I may well expect some Ladies frowns at the translation of this rude Simile, but I hope they will vanish into smiles, when they shall know I acknowledge it to be so. (19) Friends ears) Ulysses premonisht by Circe of the inchanting melody of the Syrens; with soft wax closed up the ears of all his companions, and cansed himself to be fast bound to the Mast, that hee might hear them, but though never so much attracted, not be able to get loose, by which means hee escaped their allurements, though at the air of their bewitch∣ing voices bee called upon his friends to unbinde him, indeavouring to unloose himself. Hom. Odyss. lib. 12. (20) Learn to sing) musick) dancing) here gentle Reader, give mee leave out of Lucian. de saltatione to answer those censorious and Eschilean pated (for I cannot term them hairbrain'd) men, that go about to vilifie those princely recreations, Scio vos illecebris hisce, &c. I know if you did but hear them play, you would bee so ravished with the sense of them, that you would (let mee add, if your corporeal de∣lapidations have not rendred you incapable of such exercises) dance for company your selves. Yea
Scaliger himself so famed by all the Criticks, saith, in musicis supra omnem fidem capior & oblector, &c. I am extraordinarily taken and delighted with mu∣sick; I am hugely detained with the grace and beau∣ty of women; I do gladly behold them dance, and am pleased to be idle amongst them. And Epicurus used these as means to recover his sick patients; hee laid them on a down-bed, rowned with a Garland of sweet smelling flowers, in a perfumed closet, deli∣cately set out, and after a potion or two of cordial drink, hee brought in a beautiful young Maid to play on a Lute, sing and dance. (21) Orpheus) an excellent Poet and Musician of Thrace, who made the barbarous people, yea the ve∣ry trees and stones to dance after his Harp. Met. lib. 11. Carmina dum tali Sylvas animos{que} ferarum, Threicius vates & saxa sequentia traxit. Having lost his wife Euridice, hee descended to Hell to seek her, where with his Harp hee so charm∣ed Cerberus, Pluto, and Proserpine, that hee had his wife restored to him, but looking back before hee was got out (the thing only excepted in the restaura∣tion) shee was again taken away. martial. lib. 14. Epig. 165. Reddidit Euridicen vati, sed perdidit ipse dum sibi non credit, nec patienter amat. The Poet got Euridice, but shee Was with distrust lost, and impatiency. (22) Balls must) Ludum parvae pilae is commended
by Gallen, whether with the hand or racket; it was of great request amongst the antient Greeks, mention∣ed by Homer, and was first invented by Aganella, a Maid of Corcyra, who presented the first Ball ever made to Alcinous his Daughter, and taught her the use of it. (23) Arena sprinkled) the Amphitheater, a shew∣place in Rome, where the Gladiatours were wont to fight, all sorts of wilde beasts were brought to tear one another in peeces. Aulus Gellius in his fifth book de Atticis Noct. affirms that a certain slave being brought hither to be an Actor in these beastly Tra∣gedies, a Lion of immense greatness came from a∣mongst the rest, and fawned upon him, not suffer∣ing any other of the wilde beasts to injure or mo∣lest him; at which the Citizens wondring, inquired the cause, to whom the wretch told, that flying from his Master into a certain desert, hee concealed him∣self in a great cave, where hee had not long abode before a mighty Lion came halting in, with a legg bloody, and deeply wounded; the Lion instead of devouring (which hee only expected) came for∣ward, looking pitifully, as though hee would com∣plain to him of his pain, at which, taking courage, hee applied some herbs to the sore, binding it up as well as hee could, which hee had no sooner done, but the Lion made out for his prey, and brought in certain peeces of raw flesh, which hee made his dai∣ly food of. At length, wearied with this savage life, left the desert, and betaking him to his travels, was caught by his old Master, and brought from Aegypt hither to be a Gladiator; since whose de∣parture it seemed the Lion was also taken and brought to Rome. At which the people gave him
the Lion to lead through the streets, as a Miracle. de Arena, vide supra. (24) Vestas fire) the Nunnery of Vesta stood neer to Castors Temple, to which belonged six Virgins or Votaries, whose office was chiefly to keep the sacred fire, for the extinction of which, they were had into a dark corner, stript naked, and scourged by the chief Pontifex. (25) Vittae do not) a filler with which the Vestals bound their hair. Vide supra. (26) Sharp pointed Arrows) If any shall wonder at this adjective to Arrows, concluding them all to be sharp pointed, I shall satisfie him out of Metam. lib. 1. that Cupid had of two sorts. Deque Sagittifera prompsit duo tela Pharetra, Diverforum operum: fugat hoc, facit illud amorem. Quod facit auratum est, & cuspide fulget acuta: Quod fgat obtusum est, & habet sub arundine plum∣bum. Englished by the admired Sir George Sandis. Two different Arrows from his quiver draws, One hate of love, the other love doth cause: What caus'd was sharp, and had a golden head, But what repulst was blunt, and tipt with Lead. (27) Barriers left) the Romans had at the end of their Circus, certain Barriers called Carceres, that is places railed in, from which the horses began their Races. (28) Waters at fit time) waters to write with, as the water of Chalchantum, Alum, or Sal Armonia∣cum, with the two first, what ever you shall write on Paper cannot be read, till held in water, the last, betwixt you and the fire.
(29) Milk you write) the Milk of a Figg-tree, with which you may write upon any part of your body, being dry, it will not be read till rubbed over with a Charcoal. (30) Pharian Isis) Aegyptian Isis, to whom there was consecrate a Temple in Rome. (31) Hymettus) a Mountain of Athens abounding with Bees, and plenty of honey. (32) Thebais being tall) Audromache, the wife of Hector, and daughter to Aetion King of Thebes, whence shee is called Thebais. Dares Phrygins gives us this character of her, Andromacham oculis claris, candidam, longam, &c. Andromache was fair eyed, courteous, tall, lovely, modest, affable and discreet; which vertues may be truly asserted inherent to the Major part of her glorious sex, which gives mee oc∣casion to conclude with that of my Author. lib. 3. Ipsa quo{que} & cultu est & nomine faemina virtus: Nec mirum populo si placet ipsa suo. Ladies are really all vertue, then No wonder if so much they please us men. FINIS.
