P1209 12742813 93156
To all such as Complain that they want Power, not applying themselves to yeild subjection to what of God is made manifest in them, upon a pretence of waiting for Power so to do. THe Lord God of eternal power, who made Man in his own Image, he stretcheth forth his Arm to save and re∣deem his lost Creature. It is his power alone, that ef∣fecteth the work of Redemption. He quickneth man, who is dead in Trespasses and Sins. He keepeth alive, and lead∣eth on the quickned soul in the path of Life. He conquereth, scattereth, and subdueth all the enemies round about the Soul, even all the losts, corruptions and temptations, which lead un∣to and entangle in Perdition. Yet the Lord God requireth somewhat of the man whom he saveth, without which being found in man, and returned to him from man, he saveth him not. Quest. What doth he require of Man? Answ. He requireth of Man, Repentance, Faith and Obedience. That he should turn at his Call, from the Darkness to the Light; that he should trust in, and cleave to the Light, but believe the spirit of Darkness no more; and lastly, that he should obey the Light, follow the Light, walk in the footsteps of the living to∣wards the Land of Light; work the Works of God in the Light. Quest. How can Man do this? Answ. Of himself he cannot: But being touched, being quickned by the Eternal Power, being turned by a secret ver∣tue and stirring of life in his Heart, then he can turn towards that which turneth him. Being drawn by the Life, by the Power; he can follow after the Life, and after the Power. Finding the sweetness of the Living Vine, and his soul made alive by the Sap of the Vine, his heart can now cleave to, and abide in the Vine, and bring forth the Fruit of the living faith and obedi∣ence to the Husband-man, who daily dresseth the Heart, that waiteth in the Living Principle for further life from the Foun∣tain,
that it may bring forth the fruits of Life more and more. Now mark: Is it possible for any man to come to the Eternal Rest, that travels not the Path? Or is there any Path, but the repentance, faith and obedience of the Living Spirit, even of the Child begotten by the Eternal Power, who is taught by its Fa∣ther to abide and walk in the Life, and in the Power? God putteth forth his Hand all the day long, to fetch home lost man. He hath given him a Talent, a living Talent, which is able to work man into the life, and to bring forth the fruits of life in man. Man overlooks the Talent, joyns not his heart to it, brings not forth the fruits of Life to the giver, but cries he wants power, and what is he? what can he do? can he cleanse his own heart? can he kill his corruptions? can he quicken himself? &c. Now mark again. There are several dispensations of God to mankind, in all which man (of himself) falls short of the Life, of the Power, of the Glory, an comes under Condemnation. God layes the blame on man, for not hearkning, for not believ∣ing, for not walking with him. Man layes the blame on God, and says he wants power. Look on him who is not obedient to the light, which he cannot but confess to shine in his heart, and often to reprove him; ask him why he doth not obey it? is not this his plea, that he wants power? Now let men consider, will this stand before the Throne of God? This is the condemnati∣on, that men do not believe the Light of Life, do not obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; do not trust and follow the Light which would lead them to Life, but trust and follow the darkness which leads into death and into everlasting Condem∣nation. Their plea is, they want power so to do. Is this true? I confess the power doth not so flow forth to man, as man ex∣pects it: but the power of life works man out of death in a mistery, and begins in him as weakness. There is all the strength, all the power of the enemy, against the work of God in the heart. There is but a little thing (like a grain of mustard-seed) a weak thing, a foolish thing, even that which is not (to man's eye) to overcome all this: and yet in this is the power. And here is the great deceit of man: He looks for a great manifest power in or upon him to begin with, and doth not see how the power is in the little weak stirings of life in the heart, in the rising up of somewhat against the mighty strength of corruption in him,
which he turning towards, cleaving to, and wa upon the Lord in, the strength of the Lord will be made a in its sea∣s, and he will be drawn nearer and nearer to the Lord, and his enemies be overcome and fall he knows not how. But he that waits for such a mighty appearance of power at first, looking so to begin, and after that manner to be preserved and carried on, can never in this capacity so much as walk in the path Eternal, nor is not in the way of receiving the power, which springs up as weakness, and leads on and overcomes enemies in a mysteri∣ons way of working, and not in such a manifest and direct way of conquest, as man's wisdom expects. The seed of the kingdom is sown man knows not how, even by a sound of the Eternal Spirit, which he is not a fit Judge of: and it grows up he knows not how: and the power appears and works in it, in away that he is not aware of. He looks for the Kingdom, the Power and the Life, in a way of his observation, answerable to the thoughts and expectations of his heart. But thus it never comes, but in the way of its own eternal motion, it springs in the hearts of many, and they overlook the thing, and turn from it daily, not knowing its proper way of appear∣ance, but expecting it some other way. And thus the enemy holds them in the bands of death, and they are captives in the strange land, refusing the Prince of Life in his daily offers of Life, because they look not for him thus, but after another way and manner. And till this eye of observation be put out in them, they can never clearly see the appearance of the Saviour to them, not feel the efficacy of his saving of them from that, from which none but he can deliver. Now for the sakes of such as are single-hearted, and yet with∣held from the enjoyment of the Life of God and of his pure Pow∣er, through away of wrong expecting it, I shall say a little con∣cerning the operation of the power in quickning, and leading on the quickned soul, as also concerning the way of its springing up in the heart, and the necessity of this way. I my self was long withheld from obedience to the Light Eter∣nal, in its low appearance of discovering and convincing of sin, through this very deceit, believing that my condition required the manifest appearance of a very great power to help me: and so when sin overcame me, I did only mourn over it, crying af∣ter
and waiting for power, but was kept from joyning with and cleaving  that, wherein the power springs up and manifests it self according to its own pleasure, quite contrary to the way of man's expectation. The operations of the Power are divers and gradual, according to the condition and necessity of the soul whom it visits, and reacheth forth its hand unto. 1. There is a discovery of the darkness, and of the erring of the heart from God. This is power; for this should never be in any heart, could all the powers of darkness there withstand it. 2. There is a rising of the heart against the evil, with a de∣sire of deliverance from it, and of the springing up of the good in such power as might conquer it. This is a further appear∣ance of power than the former, and a good beginning towards believing or joyning with the redeeming Arm, which all the Powers of darkness (with all manuer of subtilty) endeavour to divert the heart form. 3. There is an upright frame of sirit begotten, and a truth of heart formed towards the Lord, from which desires, and cries, and groanes after his life and presence, and for delive∣rance from the enemy, and from under the power of his deceit, spring more and more. 4. There is a fear begotten in the heart of being deceived by the enemy, of being drawn from the feeling of and panting af∣ter the Life and Power of God. 5. There is an hope and trust in the Lord's Goodness and Mer∣cy, with a daily waiting for his appearance, for the manifestati∣on of his Spirit and pure Presence, and for the springings up of his frsh Life and precious Vertue. 6. There are overturnings of the enemy, battering down his strong holds, breaking of many snares, beating back of many furious assaults, and causing the plant of Life to grow up, and Triumph over all the powers of darkness. 7. There are secret stayings and upholdings of the heart in the hour of darkness, when God sees necessary to let forth the power thereof upon the Soul, and to Eclipse his own Power. when the enemy buffets, tempts, prevails, and gets ground up∣on the Soul, is drawing it back under the vail, even into the Pit, and nothing appears near to stop it or Rescue the Soul from
death, and from the power of the Grave, but the sting there∣of enters and deeply wounds the Soul; yet even then the power is near, secretly upholding, preserving and watching over the Soul, and waiting for the proper season of Deliverance. Never∣theless I am continually with thee, thou hat holden me by my right hand, said David, when his feet had almost slipped into the griev∣ous snare of desperate unbelief, and murmuring against God's dealings with him and the rest of his people. Many more operations of the Power might be mentioned, e∣ven of its tabernacling and glorious appearing in some vessels in various wayes, both delighting it self in the heart, and also fil∣ling the heart with delight and joy in the pure Life: but these things are better enjoyed and sweetly felt, in the silence of the fleshly part, then spoken of to that ear, which is not fit to hear the sound thereof. 2dly. The way of the Powers springing up in the Heart, which is, 1. In its turning from the Darkness, in the Faith and in the pure Obedience, which flowes from the faith. For us the Soul turns, from the power of darkness and death towards the living Power, towards the power of the Eternal Spirit of Light: so the Power meets it, embraces it, appears to it, and manifests it self in it, proportionable to its present capacity and condition. And as the soul, being touched with the living Vertue, gives it self up to believe, & to trust the power which draws: so the power mani∣fests it self in the heart, according to the proportion of the faith which the Eternal Vertue hath begotten there. And as the soul, in the faith gives it self up to obey: so the power appears & works the obedience. For we can do nothing of our selves: but being called, being drawn, being required to do that which is far beyond our strength, and giving up thereto, the Life springs, the Power ap∣pears, which does the work. This the Philippians had experience of, to whom the Apostle gave that exhortation, Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling: for it is God which worketh in you, both to will and to do of his good pleasure. It is the unbeliever hangs back, and cries where shall I have power? But the faith fol∣lows the moving and drawing of the spirit, and the Power never fails the Faith. But that which cries, how shall I get out of Egypt? which way shall I ever be able to pass through this intricate wilderness? how shall I overcome those mighty Enemies, which
already have the possession of the Land I should inherit, and  strongly senced in it, and mighty in strength to keep their hold therof? This is not the right Seed, this is not the true Israel, for whom the everlasting inheritance of the life, and of the pure Power is prepared. 2. Under the Cross, under the yoak to the corrupt (yea and to the very natural) the power springs. The false birth would have the power spring in a way pleasing to it self; at the time its Wisdom sees necessary, and in the way its Will would have it: but the power springs up according to its own wisdom, at its own time, and after its own way. When the man would have it, then it flyes from him: and when it is not expected nor perhap desired, (at least in that way wherein it chuies to appear) then it springs up and puts forth it self. Most men, that have felt any thing of God, cannot but desire his Life and Power: But most fly the Cross, wherein it hath chosen to appear; and so they can never meet with, but are still complaining for the want of it. In the power is the ease, the rest of the Gospel. Take my Yoak up∣on you, and learn of me, saith Christ, and ye shall find the rest which flowes from the Power. This made Paul rejoyce in the Cross of Christ, whereby the fleshly lusts were brought down in him, and the Life and Eternal Power sprang in the Seed of the Kingdom: For under the Cross the seed grows up and flourishes, and the flesh withers and dies. And as the power of flesh and death wasts, so the Power of Spirit and Life Increases. 3. The power springs under the fear, and in the uprightness and love which God hath begotten. I put these together, for there is a close unitie between them. The fear is the dwelling of the upright heart, and the love is within the fear. He that distrusts himself, feels his own nothingness, finds no power to do any thing God requireth; and yet also fears to stay behind the light of God's Spirit, in any thing it requires; and so finds  putting on forward in the faith; in him the power delights to appear. He that would feel strength beforehand, and act in the sence of that strength, from him the power withdraws: But he that is weak and hath no strength, but still as it freely drops into him from moment to moment, this is the vessel the power chuseth to manifest it self to, and to be continually appearing in. This is the New Covenant, I will put my fear in their hearts, and
where the fear of the New Covenant is found, so much life, pow∣er and eternal vertue, as is necessary for the present state of that heart, cannot be far off. So in the upright-hearted, in the heart that is true to God, the power of deceit cannot dwell, but the Power of Truth delights to fill it, in a way sutable to the state of the Spirit, and so as may be seen by the eye of the spirit, and felt by the spiritual sence. And in the Love is the constraining power, which constrains from the evil path, from the path of un∣belief and disobedience, into the Path of Life. Thirdly, The necessity of this way of the springing up of the Power, and not in such a manifest way as man's heart desires, and as man's eye expects. It is necessary in several respects. In respect of God, in reference to the creature, and in reference to the Soul's enemies. 1. In respect of God. It is necessary that his Power and Life should spring up in the creature in its own way, according to the counsel of his own wisdom, suitable to his own nature, and not in the way which the creature chalks out and expects it in. God must be like himself, and walk in his own Path in every thing he does. He is a God that hideth himself in the mystery of his work∣ing, throughout the whole trac of man's redemption: and man must be wrought out of himself, out of his own thoughts, ex∣pectations, gathered apprehensions concerning the Kingdom and way to Life, & led in a path he doth not know (nor ever can know any longer than he is in it) and in wayes he hath not been acquainted with. The way of Life is still new, every moment fresh and living; and the earthly part of those, who may have in some measure felt the power of regeneration, cannot know it, nor walk in it. Consider this, O ye that fence your selves a∣gainst the present appearance of the Spirit, and against the Con∣victions, Demonstrations and Drawings of its Eternal Light and Power, by somewhat which ye have formerly felt and known. 2. In reference to the Creature, the Power of God must needs appear thus hiddenly and in such a misterious way. 1. That the creature might go through all those exercises of Spirit, which are necessary to fit it for its inheritance in the ho∣ly Land. There are Straits, Wants, Tryals, Temptations, inward Weaknesses, buffetings from the Enemy, withdrawings of the life, &c. which God seeth necessary to Excercise the Spirits of his with,
that he might fit them for himself, and for a safe enjoyment of his life in fulness; which could not be, if there were such a ma∣nifest power to begin with, and continually at hand to perform all in and for the Soul, as many men wait for and think necessa∣ry to have. 2. That the fleshly part might be throughly worn out and de∣stroyed. When the Power appears and works mightily in the soul, there is somewhat apt to get up, to exalt it self by the Power, and to abuse the Power: and if the Power were not withdrawn, and this tormented and famished in the absence of the Power, and in the withdrawing of the sweet appearance of Life, a wrong thing would be stealing into the Inheritance, and the soul would never be throughly purified, nor come to a pure enjoyment of the Power. Therefore doth the Lord appear in this misterious way, that the promise might be sure to the Seed; that the Seed which is the right Heir of the Power, might come alone to inherit the Power, and the false birth not touch the least enjoyment of it, but feel the bitter stroaks of death and destruction from it. What had become of Paul, if he had had Power to resist the buffettings of the enemy, as he desired? would not his fleshly part have remained in the exaltation, and not have been brought down? (2 Cor. 12. 7.) 3. In reference to the Enemy. The enemy could never be wholly conquered, his strong holds in the heart broken down, & the redemption from under his hand perfected, were it not for this misterious way of the appearing and working of the Power, even out of the sight of man's eye, and contrary to his will and expectation. For had man such a power as he desires, still pre∣sent with him; had he faith in his power, or obedience in his power, or could he take up the Cross in his power, or have strength to fight against the enemy as he desires and expects, the enemy would still find enterance into him, and keep his hold of him. But God, who knoweth the state of the creature, with the strength and passages of the enemy into man, by work∣ing with his mighty power in man according to his own will, and in the way of his own Wisdom (contrary to what man can desire or expect, but as he is taken into, and comprehended in the Eternal Will) carries on his work sweetly and safely, and perfects the salvation of those who will not, who run not, who
desire not to be any thing, but wait to feel and know his Power, and to become subject to it, and lie under, even in the lowest way of its manifestation and appearance. Object. This may be true in the ordinary way of Redemption of Souls; but there are deep captivities (even the captivity of Babylon inwardly and spiritually) which surely will need a very great appea∣rance of the Power of God to deliver out of: and what can that soul do, but wait there under the captivity, untill that mighty power arise? Answ. It is true; The Power must needs be very great, and the appearance of it wonderful, which delivers out of such a captivi∣ty: but yet the beginnings of it may be small, and out of the sight of that eye, which looks and waits for so great an appea∣rance. Hast thou not light enough already to begin thy travel out of Babylon? Hast thou begun thy travel? Dost thou walk in the light, which shineth upon thee in that dark land, to gather and lead thee out of it? Or wilt thou not begin to come out, till the very glory and brightness of Sion shine upon thee? If there be but light & power enough, to lead thee one step out of the land of darkness, & confusion of Spirit, towards obedience to the lowest or meanest Truth, that is sufficient for thee at present: & as thou art found faithful here, more will spring in thee. But if thou stop here (or at any time after thou hast begun and made some pro∣gress, because of any thing which falleth out contrary to thy ex∣pectation) then that, which should lead thee on and strengthen thee, stops also; & thou meetest nor with that, which is found & enjoyed by other in the way, because thou passest not on in it, but baulkest thy proper path, judging somewhat more necessary towards thy beginning or progress, then the Lord judgeth or yet seeth fit to impart to thee. Thus the enemy betrayes thee, & holds thee in his chains, which might be loosed & cast off by little and little, didst thou singly give up, to the little appearance of that light and power which is able to unbind them, and not ex∣pect more at first (or afterwards) then the Lord hath allotted for thy present condition. And let me tell thee this from certain knowledge and experience; That thou, who hast been high, and hast tasted much of God, but hast abused it, and fed the wrong part with it, both in thy self and others: Thou must be brought lower than the rest, and for a long season be kept lower, that the pure seed (which hath deeply been buried in thee) may over∣grow and sink all thy knowledge, experiences and observations
concerning the Eternal Life, and its way of appearance, which formerly thou hadst some true taste of, but now holdest out of the Life. Thou must come down, thou must become nothing by de∣grees, thou must lie at the foot of the reprovings of that Light, which thou thinkest thou hast gone far beyond, and be glad of a little help now and then in the lowliness and humility of thy Heart, which must not chuse what appearance and manifestation it will have from God, before it will begin to follow him, but be glad of never so little, that the infinite Wisdom sees good to give forth by the hand of his Mercy. Who ever have been high, and are still waiting and expecting in the heights of their own wisdom and observations concerning the Kingdom, let them take heed of despising the day of small things, and know that their proper beginning (yea the very path of eter∣nal Life it self) lies in the lowness, in the humility, even in that nothingness which bows before the least light of the day, and with gladness of heart enters into, and walks in it. For this I cer∣tainly know, The wise, the observing-eye, the vast comprehend∣ing heart, which waits for such an extraordinary Power, judging it cannot begin following the Light, which daily appears to check and reprove, without some great manifest appearance of power, This cannot see the low little path of Life, which is pro∣per for it to walk in, and to the end whereof it must travel, if ever it come to sit down in the Kingdom, or to inherit the power of the endless Life. Pretious is the dispensation of this Age, great is the Power and Glory which is arising: but the wise and knowing of this Age, are shut out of it, as they have been out of the life and truth of the dispensations of God in all Ages, Happy is he who is not above that, wherewith God visiteth his Soul to redeem it. A POST-SCRIPT. THat persons, who have not travelled into the Land of Life, want power, that is out of doubt. The state of Israel in its travels, is a state of weaknesses and wants. How can they in the Wilderness but want that, which is to be possessed in the Holy Land? But dost thou want power to begin the travel with? dost thou want what proportion of power the Lord fees necessary for thee in thy present estate? Is there nothing at all discovered to
thee which is contrary to God, either in thy Heart, or in thy Conversation, or in thy Worship, which thou dost not so much as strive to give up to the Lord in, waiting upon him for his power and strength to appear in helping thee. The Light ap∣pears to discover and lead out of the Darkness. Now in giving up to the Light, and not doubting but that, which calls and draws out will give strength; and enable to come out, the Power is met with unawares. But that which stands gazing and looking out after a power, which it expects to meet with, before it will so much as begin to follow the Light; that cannot but abide in the captivity, and miss of that Power which redeemeth from it. Therefore, I. Wait to feel the Light of Life discovering and drawing from the evil: and let it chuse what it shall please first to disco∣ver and draw from. And though it be little, and very incon∣siderable in thine eyes, yet dispute not, but where the light first begins to lead, do thou there begin to follow. Then in this waiting and subjecting to the manifestations of the light, out of the self-will, self-wisdom, self-knowledge, self-judgement, in the lowliness and abasedness of the mind and spi∣rit before the Lord, the begettings of life in the light are felt, and the renewing into his pure Image. Afterwards that which is begotten (and begun to be renewed in the Divine Image) is by degrees taught more distinctly to know, discern and walk in the path of Life. And after this, to that which is thus begotten, and taught the living faith and obedience (which is wrought by the mighty pow∣er of God, though running in alow, secret, hidden way from the eye of the creature) the great Power is Revealed, and he grows strong in the Power for God, and against the enemies of his Soul: and by this strength and feeling of Gods presence, they fall daily and continually before him, and then his victory over them goes on with joy. But he that stops at first may grow wise and conceited, con∣cerning the things of the kingdom after the flesh, and may hope for great things at last; but by the deceit of the subtilty, is kept out of the living path, wherein they are to be waited for, reap∣ed and enjoyed. Now for the encouragement of such, as are willing to travel on in the weakness, yeilding up their members to the present ma∣nifestation
of the light, and waiting for the further appearance of the Power: It is on my heart to add a letter of a dear friend and brother of mine in the Truth, who hath been a deep traveller and fellow-sufferer with me formerly, before this help came forth from the Throne of God, since the day-spring from on high hath vouchsafed to visit us, and to guide our feet in the way of everlasting peace. The letter is as followeth. Dear Friend, MY dear and tender love salutes thee, in that love from whence I had my being, and from whence sprang all my Fathers Chil∣dren, who are born from above, Heirs of an everlasting Inheritance. Oh! how sweet and pleasant are the Pastures which my Father caus∣eth all his Sheep to feed in, there is variety of plenty in his Pastures, milk for Babes, and rong meat for them of riper Age, and Wine to refresh those, that are ready to faint, even the Wine of the King∣dom, that makes glad the heart, when it is ready to faint, by reason of the infirmities; Sure I am, none can be so weary but he takes care of them, nor none so nigh fainting but he puts his Arm under their heads, nor none can be so beset with enemies on every side but he will arise and scatter; nor none so heavy laden and big with young but he takes notice of them, and gently leads them, and will not leave them behind, unto the merciless Woolf, because they are his own, and his life is the price of their redemption, and his blood of their ransome, and if they be so young that they cannot go, he carries them in his Armes, and when they can feel nothing stirring after him, his bowells earn after them, so tender is this good Shepheard after all his Flock: I can tell, for I was as one that once went astray and wan∣dered upon the barren Mountains, and when I had wearied my self with wandring, I went into the Wilderness, and there I was torn as with briars, and pricked as with thorns, sometimes thinking this was the way, and sometimes concluding that was the way, and by and by concluding all was out of the way, and then bitter mourning came upon me, and weeping for want of the interpreter, for when I sought to know what was the matter, and where I was it was too hard for me; then I thought I would venture on some way where it was most likely to find a lost God, and I would pray with them that prayed, and fast with them that fated, and mourn with them that mourned, if by any means I might come to rest, but found it not, until I came to see the candle light∣ed in my own house, and my heart swept from all those thoughts and
imaginations, and willings, and runnings, and to die unto them all, not heeding of them, but watching against them, lest I should let my mind go a whoring after them; and here I dwelt for a time as in a desolate land uninhabited, where I sate alone as a sparrow upon the house top, and was hunted up and down like a partridge upon the mountaines, and could rest no where, but some lust or thought or other followed me at the heels, and disquieted me night and day, until I came to know him in whom was rest, and no occasion of stumbling, in whom the Devil hath no part, and he became unto me as a kiding place from the storms, and from the tempests; then came my eyes to ee my Saviour, and my sorrow to fly away, and he became made unto me all in all, my Wisdom, my Righteousness, and my Sanctification, in whom I was, and am compleat, to the praise of the riches of his Grace and Goodness that endures for ever. Therefore be not discouraged, Oh! thou tossed as with tempests nor dismaied in thy self; because thou seet such mighty hosts of enemies rising up against thee, and besetting thee on every side, for none was so beset and tried, and tempted, as the true Seed was, who was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, but be thou still in thy minde, and let the Billowes pass over, and Wave upon Wave, and fret not thy self because of them, neither be cat down, as if it should never be otherwise with thee, sorrow comes at night, but joy in the morning, and the dayes of thy mourning shall be over, and the accuser will God cast out for ever; for therefore was I afflicted, and not comforted, and tempted, and tried, for this end, that I might know how to speak a word in due season, unto those who are tempted and afflicted as I once was: as it was said unto me in that day when sorrow lay heavy upon me, therefore be not disconsolated, neither give heed un∣to the reasonings and disputings of to thy own heart, nor the fears that arise therefrom, but be strong in the Faith, believing in the light which lets thee se them, and his Grace thou wilt know to be sufficient for thee, and his strength to be made perfect in thy weakness, and so wilt thou rather glory in thy infirmities, that his power may rest upon thee, then in thy earnest desires to be rid of them, for by these th;ings thou wilt come to live in the Life of God, and Joy in God, and glory in Tribulation; when thou hast learned in all conditions to be con∣tented, and through tryals, and deep excercises, is the way to learn this lesson. These things in dear love to thee I have written, being some∣what sensible of thy condition, and the many snares thou art daily liable unto; therefore watch, that thou fall not into temptation, and my God and Father keep thee in the Arms of his eternal love over all, unto the end, unto his Praise, Amen. John Crooke.
Some Queries to the strict and zealous Professors of this Age (such as stick in the Letter, but are strangers to the Life and Power) to provoke them to Jealousie, least the Heathen and Open Sinners out-strip them, and enter into the Kingdom of the pure everlasting Light before them. Query 1. WHether God, since the Fall of Man from the purity and glory of his State, doth truly and really desire the Salvation of all mankind; and so would have them come to the knowledge of the Truth, that they might believe it, receive it, walk in it, and so obtain Salvation thereby? or, whether he would have only some few of them to receive it and be Saved, and the rest to Perish? Query 2. If God would have all men to be Saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth, which is the means of Salvation: Then, whether there is sufficient done by God to convey the knowledge of his Truth to all men, so as they may come to the knowledge thereof and be saved? or, whether there is such a defect on Gods part, that some men never had sufficient means to come so far to the knowledge of his Truth, as that they might come into the way of Salvation thereby? Query 3. Though God doth please to adde superabundant means, in the Riches of his Grace, towards some more than others: as to the Jews under the Law, and to the Disciples of Christ under the Gospel: yet whether there is not so much light of the Spirit communicated to all, as if followed, might lead them out of the Darkness, and from un∣der the Power of it? Query 4. Whether God be not so near to every man, as that possibly he may seek after him and find him? and if he do find him, and his heart cleave to him: whether it can possibly be, but vertue should issue forth from God, to draw him out of the alienation from him, and out of the power of sin, Death and Hell. Query 5. Whether if a man feel God and cleave to God, and be∣gin to discern the streamings of light from him, and follow the Lord therein: Whether God will not accept this man therein? and whether his Divine Light let into him (being believed in and obeyed) will not purify him from the darkness, unbelief and disobedience? and whether God will not impute to this man what Christ performed on man's behalf in the flesh, he being in unity with▪ and in subjection to the light and poer whereby it was wrought (wherein is the fellow∣ship with the blood, and wherein alone it washeth from the sin) though as to the outward knowledge of what was outwardly done, the man
may possibly be ignorant? And seeing it is not absolutely necessary to∣wards the involving in the guilt of Adams sin, the outward knowing what Adam did; but the proceeding from, and being found in the same spirit and nature doth sufficiently convey it: So whether being gather∣ed into and found in Christs Spirit, even in faith, obedience, and sub∣jection to the light thereof in the heart, whether this is not also suffi∣cient to convey the Righteousness of Christ? and wheher God will fail to impute it to that man? Query 6. Whether True Religion, Spiritual Worship, & the Salva∣tion of the Soul do not depend upon the Spirit of the Lord, who is near to every heart with his eternal Light, which he can easily convey to any heart, whose ear is opened to hearken to his breathings and draw∣ings? So that it is easy to the Lord to save any of the Sons of men, even in the darkest and remotest corners of the earth: and he can cast off those who seem highest in zeal, and most flourishing under any out∣ward means of Salvation. Oh wonderfully infinite is the Lord! who shall bound his Spirit? Happy is he that feareth before him, and in his fear learneth to depart from iniquity, and walk in the good Path that his Spirit teacheth. He is near to God, and shall tast of the good things, and shall not be rejected for want of outward knowledge; but what ever was done for lost man, he that is found in the light of Life (and in the obedience to the spirit of Life) shall reap the benefit of. But he that boasts in his knowledge of these things, and of his Faith in Christ Jesus; yet not being found in the true, living, eternal light of the Spi∣rit (but an enemy to it, and ignorant of it) the Lord will rend his confi∣dence from him, in a day that he is not aware of. 'Glorious was the dispensation of the Law, and great was the advantage to the Jew thereby above the Gentiles. Yet they missing the Spirit and Life of it, (and growing wise in their own apprehensions and interpretations about it) fell beneath the Gentiles, becoming greater strangers to the power & wisdom of God, & harder to be reached & brought in under the subjection of the Go∣spel. More glorious was the dispensation of the Gospel to the Christians, and much greater was their advantage, than that of the Jews. But an Apostacy coming, and they loosing the true Power and Spirit, & growing wise by a lit∣teral knowledge of some of the things of God in the earthly part, & forming interpretations of Scriptures, and entring into practises in that wisdom; they are now become at as great a distance from this powerfull visitation of God by his Spirit (which raiseth the Seed, and springeth up freshly in the hearts of those, whom the Lord our God doth call out of their fenced Cities, and allure into the Wilderness) as the Jews were at from that appearance before the A∣postacy: and in as great danger are the Children of the Kingdom to be cast out now, as then. Oh that my God would please to open the ear of some tender and upright-hearted among them to hear this testimony, that they might no longer stumble at that, which alone is able to lead them to God, and to make them happy in God.
Is there any uniting with God, or enjoying of God, but by his Spirit? is there any receiving of Gods Spirit, but within in the heart? doth he not appear there by his Light, & in his Power? What if God please to give forth a measure of his Eternal Light in the hearts of his Chosen, to open that to thm which they could never see before, and to bring them into a nearer unity with him than ever they knew before? may he not do it? Nay, is not such a thing need∣ful to help out of the deep & intricate Apostacy (wherein have been so many twistings & twinings of the subtle Serpent, about every step or appearance of Reformation) and to gather the wandring sheep, who were scattered up and down, and sorely distressed, for want of the Tongne of the Learned, to speak a word in season to their estates and conditions? Have not every sort bent the Scriptures, in the Reasonings of their own Minds, and made them speak ac∣cording to their own hearts Lusts? And is not every one wise in his own Eyes, and strong in his own Tower and fenced City? Surely there was great need of an appearance of the Lord to shut out the Wisdom of Man, and to help the Poor, the Needy, the Fatherless, the weak Panting-Babes. And bles∣sed be the Lord God, who hath appeared; and blessed are those who have seen his Light, and bowed at the Feet of his living Appearance, and felt the Vertue of his Saving Arm, scattering their Lusts and Corruptions, yea also raising up and bringing forth his Pure Seed in the feh Power, Dominion, and Authority of his perfect life, which reigneth in the hearts which the Lord hath Regenerated and Sanctified for evermore. O my Friends, my Friends, that the eye might be once blinded in you, which hinders your sight of God, and the eye opened which beholds his Glory, and also taketh pleasure in his lowest Appearance. The Babe alone hath the Misteries of the Kingdom revealed to him (the Wise and Prudent are excluded: the birth after the flesh in every one must be famished and destroyed) and he alone can see in the Eternal Light, this Dispensation of the Everlasting Gospel after the Apostacy, which the Lord hideth from those, who are wise in the Letter of the former Dispensation of the same Gospel, but cannot read it as it was given forth in the Spirit then, nor as it is now again held forth in the same Spirit and Power. O my Friends, This is the Truth to you, (wait on the Lord that ye may understand it from him) Your right Eye must be put out (which will never cease offending you and causing you to stumble, so long as it is able to see) and all your knowledge which ye hold out of the Life, become as dross and dung to you, if ever ye tast and come to enjoy the Excellency and Glory of this Appearance of God in his Eternal Spirit, who hath descended from on high into the Hearts of his Chosen to prepare thm for his Spiritual Temple, that he may dwell in them, and they in him. And he will dwell in them, and they shall dwell in him, to the full delight and satisfaction of their hearts, and to the confu∣sion of all those, who remain despising and reproaching this his Glorious Appearance, and his people in whom he hath appeared. The day is not far off, wherein this will be made manifest, wherein great bitterness and anguish of Spirit will befall those, who can onely see the Glory afar of but cannot Inherit it, be∣ing found in that nature and spirit which is separated from it, and eternally shut out of it. Isaac Penington the younger. LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-Spread-Eagle and Windmil in Matins l' Grand, 1661.
