P1448 R20576 12355376 60133
Peppa: OR, The REWARD OF CONSTANT LOVE. A NOVEL. Done out of French. With several SONGS set to MU∣SICK, for TWO VOICES. By a Young-Gentlewoman. Licensed, 1689. JAMES FRASER. LONDON, Printed for William Crooke at the Green-Dragon without Temple-Bar. 1689.
TO THE HONOURABLE THE LADY ISABELLA ROBERTS. MADAM, IT was a considera∣ble Time before I could resolve up∣on a Dedication; but,
knowing that few Books, (and especially Novels,) are wanting in this Point, I then presently fix'd my Resolution; trod in the steps of those that went before; and submitted to the Ty∣rant Custom. I was not long in resolving to whom I ought to dedicate it: Your Honour became in∣stantly the Object of a Thought lofty, and
aspiring, which hur∣ried me to this Bold∣ness. Yes, Madam, you will think it is a new way of being grateful for past Fa∣vours, to ask new ones: And yet this very Absurdity do I now commit; but I am sensible of your generous Temper, and relying upon that alone, I beg this one Favour more, your Patronage, and
Acceptance of this Virgin Essay, the Pro∣duct of my leisure Hours. This piece in all its Designs, aims at what is great and generous, and is founded partly upon Truth; many of the material Cir∣cumstances having been really acted at Genoa but few years a∣go: It insists chiefly upon two Subjects;
the effects of an un∣parallel'd Friendship; and the Force, and Reward of Constant Love. It appear'd first of all in French; and tho now naturaliz'd into our good-na∣tur'd Climat, and be∣come English, yet it has lost nothing of its French Vanity, and Presumption, but da∣ringly hopes to crow'd into your Ho∣nour's Closet, there
expecting the hap∣py Time when, Ma∣dam, you will be pleas'd to throw a∣way some spare mo∣ments. Those Readers who have not yet been bless'd with your Ho∣nour's Acquaintance, may perhaps say, This is not like a Dedicati∣on, and their Reason for it will be, because it is not stuff'd with ful∣some
Flattery, and because I have not describ'd to 'em either your Person, or Ver∣tues; but I must tell them (whosoever they may be) that I am a very ill Encomiast, and a worse Flatterer: However, rather than Men should go away discontented, if in few words a plain un∣deniable Truth will satisfy 'em, they shall have it; that your
Birth, Nature, and E∣ducation have con∣spir'd together to make you every way truly agreeable, which, tho it has procur'd you the strongest Envy of our Sex, it has attract∣ed no less the high∣est Admiration of theirs. One Favour more I importunely crave, that for some Rea∣sons
(which by you, Madam, shall be com∣manded from me at any time,) I may be permitted to refrain the publishing my Name in Print; tho really nothing is so sensible a Grief to me, as that I am forc'd to stifle my greatest Ambition, which is, to declare to the World, the Name of her, who, among all the Crowd of
your Admirers, is the most zealously, Madam, Your Honour's Most Humble, Most Faithful, And most devoted Servant, A. C.
PEPPA: OR, THE REWARD OF CONSTANT LOVE. GEnoa is a City of Italy, not less famous for its Antiqui∣ty than for the flourishing Condition it is in at pre∣sent, maintain'd chiefly by a Commerce, and good Correspondence with almost all the Nations of the Uni∣verse; and is now esteem'd one of the richest Towns in Europe. As this City is very Ancient, so there is in it many Illustrious Families, and some that are allied to Soveraign Princes, amongst whom, the Prince
Mark Antony Doria made no small Fi∣gure, being in as great esteem for his vast Riches and Possessions, as for the Nobility of his Ancestors; and having an earnest desire in these latter Times, to make the Glory of his Family shine out in his own Person, he apply'd his youthful Time and Courage, for some years, in the Service of the Spaniard; but not meeting with those Honourable Rewards which his Courage had meri∣ted, he discontentedly retir'd to Genoa; where, some little time after, he marri∣ed the Sister of the Marquess Durazzo, a person of an exquisite Beauty. All People look'd upon this Marriage as ve∣ry happy, seeing the assiduous care the Prince Doria took to please his Wife, who in requital lov'd him with an ex∣tream Passion. About a year after they were married, she was deliver'd of a Daughter; but her lying in was follow'd with a Consequence so fatal, that tho all means were us'd, she relaps'd into a great weakness of Body, and, after ha∣ving languish'd five or six Months, dy'd. The Prince was so sensibly touch'd with this loss, that he withdrew himself for a long time into a Monastery, without seeing any body, avoiding even those
very persons who were only capable of giving him some Comfort. The little Princess, who was nam'd Peppa, was brought up under the Tuition of her Aunt the Marchioness Durazzo, who had a Daughter of the same age. The Prince Doria led a life very retir'd for four years, not endering to hear of a second Marriage; nevertheless his Re∣lations and Friends did urge him with such pressing Arguments, that having at length determin'd to give them satis∣faction, he courted a Lady of the House of Spinola It was not long be∣fore he married her, but she had never the fortune to be with Child; so that Peppa, who in her tender Infancy had already the marks of a perfct Beauty, was look'd upon as one of the greatest Fortunes of all Italy. The Princess Doria, now after a seven years Marriage, despairing ever to give her Husband a Successour, found some Comfort in thinking, that she might one day unite the two Houses of Doria and Spinola, by the Marriage of the young Marquess Spinola her Nphew, with Peppa; and to the end that she might have the opportunity of prepa∣ring betimes the Mind of Peppa, she ear∣nestly
entreated her Husband to recall his Daughter into his own House, as∣suring him, that she had an extream af∣fection for her, and that she did now look upon Peppa as her own Child. The Prince Doria lov'd his Daughter most entirely, was in an extasy of joy to un∣derstand the desire of his Wife, and did not delay the satisfaction which she desir'd. Peppa was receiv'd into her Father's House with all the Testimonies of Love and Affection that she could expect from a Mother-in-law, who would be no longer such towards her, for she de∣sir'd her Husband to let Peppa call her Mother; and she would give her the name of Daughter. Peppa, who was of a fine Wit, answer'd with an obliging readiness to all the kindnesses express'd to her by her Mother-in-law. The Princess on her side did whatever she thought would please her Daughter-in∣law; and being inform'd that Peppa was much troubl'd to part with one of her Cousins which she lov'd entirely; he intreated the Marchioness Durazzo, to permit her Daughter Julia to be bred with Peppa in the Family of the Prince Doria. The Marchioness, who had ma∣ny
Children, and could not maintain them according to their Quality, had design'd them Nuns. 'Twas for this reason, that with much difficulty she was brought to yield, that Julia should live with her Cousin. Nevertheless Pep∣pa wish'd it with so much eagerness, and her Relations, who had a great deal of kindness for her, so earnestly desir'd this of the Marchioness, that she no longer oppos'd it. Peppa and Julia suf∣fer'd not the displeasure of being part∣ed, and the delights of living always together, contributed still further to the strengthening that perfect Union which was between them. The Princess Do∣ria, who had her Interest in prospect, let slip no opportunity of entertaining Peppa with the Grandure of the House of Spinola, the famous Captains that it hath produc'd for the Honour of Italy, and a great many advantages considera∣ble that it had above the other Families of Genoa. She added, that she was much deceiv'd if the young Marquess Spinola, who had already a delicate Meen, and a great deal of Wit, did not maintain with Splendor, the Glory of his Ancestours. Peppa listen'd to the discourse of the Princess, without making
the least Reflection; but in the end per∣ceiving that they made the Marquess of Spinola be more than ordinary assiduous, in rendring her his Devoirs, and that her Mother-in-law, cunningly ingag'd to make now and then Appointments of Diversions with the Marquess, she com∣plain'd to Julia of this constraint of her Humour, finding her self only pleas'd when she was in her company; and all the means that the Princess Doria us'd made Peppa have the greater aversion for the Marquess. In the mean while, tho Peppa was yet but fourteen years old, all that saw her, spoke of her Beauty with admiration; she was of a fine shape, the Features of her Face were very delicate, curious yes, a fine Skin, and she had some∣hing in her Face that was so taking, that it was impossible to look on her without having an infinite esteem for her person. Julia was not so perfect Beauty, but she had much Spriteliness, and not a lit∣tle Sweetness appear'd in the whole Cy∣metry of her Face. She would some∣times say to her Cousin, That she was of a different Humour from all other young Maids, who are always troubled
that they are not handsome enough, whereas nothing discompos'd her more than to hear the World say she had Beauty; for had she been depriv'd of it, she could have quitted the World with∣out any Regret, and past the rest of her life in a Convent, as she was design'd. Peppa endeavour'd to comfort her, by letting her know, that she was not made for the Cloister, and that some∣thing might happen which would cause a change in the Will of her Parents. The fame of Peppa's Beauty was car∣ried over all Italy, and that she was the only Heiress to the House of Doria. All these reasons oblig'd several Persons of eminent Quality to esteem the Possession of her to be a Fortune that would crown their utmost desire. There was one, even a Soveraign Prince, who de∣sir'd her for his Son, but the Princess Doria rais'd secretly so many difficul∣ties, that the business was at last broke off. The Marquess Spinola, who found Peppa very agreeable, and perceiv'd the great advantages that would accrue to him by this Alliance, made it his whole study to please her; and now through his own Inclination he began really to love her, who till then had but seemingly
done it, out of compliance to his Relati∣ons. He perceiv'd that Peppa was not in the least touch'd with his Love, which made him resolve to try, whether he could not take the advantage of the Carnaval-time, for to give to his Mi∣stress the most publick marks of the Passion he had for her. This Carnaval is a time of Rejoicing, (or rather, mad Frolicks) in most Countries of Europe, (especially among the Romanists), and lasts from Christmas till Shrove-Tuesday at night, at which time their madness ends; for which, during the Lent, they seem to do Penance: This is some∣thing agreeable to an old English Pro∣verb; Sweet Meats will have sower Sauce. But to return to our Marquess, he came to all the Balls with a magnificent Ap∣pearance. There he danc'd several times with Peppa; and when she retir'd, he took care that several Violins should always attend her Coach to the Door, and there stay the greatest part of the night. Nevertheless, as all things seem insipid to a person that has no Tast, Peppa made no returns to his pressing So∣licitations, and acknowledg'd to Julia, in private, that she did not find her self at all dispos'd to receive Addresses from
the Marquess, and that she well foresaw, she should be the most unhappy person in the World, if her Parents did oblige her to marry him. The Chevalier of—and another French Gentleman, by chance happen'd to be at Genoa during this Carnaval, and going to several Balls in Masque∣rade, as being the Custom of the Coun∣try; they, hearing that there was to be at the Palace of the Marquess Justiniano a great Feast, which was to be concluded with a Ball, were resolv'd to go thither, disguis'd in the form of Sea-Monsters. It being an unusual sort of Masquerade, every one was strangely surpris'd to see a spectacle so extraordinary, and which frighten'd some of the Ladies; the two Gentlemen perceiving it, they untied only a small string, by the help where∣of they slipp'd out of their monstrous Habit, and appear'd extreamly gallant. The Chevalier of—was one of the handsomest Men in the World, and his shape was not less admirable, which at∣tracted the Eyes of all that were present. They both danc'd with a very good Grace, and particularly the Chevalier, that the other Gentlemen durst scarce dance after him. All the Assembly re∣main'd
not a little satisfy'd, crowning them with all the Applause imaginable. The Chevalier of—having observ'd that Peppa and Julia were in discourse with two other Ladies, went and plac'd himself by them. The Ladies gave him infinite praises, assuring him, that they never saw a Man so gentilely habited, nor that danc'd so finely. The Chevalier answer'd very modestly to all their Com∣pliments, but with a great deal of Wit. The Ladies, who knew him not, and were ignorant even of what Nation he was, because he spoke very well their Language, were very curious of his Acquaintance. They had all no small respect for his Person, and the more he utter'd any thing that charm'd these La∣dies, the more their Curiosity encreas'd: At last it came to that, that they desir'd him to take off his Mask for a moment. The Chevalier, who was satisfy'd that they did not know him, had the Com∣plaisance to do what they desir'd, and let them see a Face, which if disagreeing with the rest of his person, was only so by being too handsome. He put on his Mask again not long after, and remain'd some time conversing with them. He observ'd Peppa very at∣tentively,
and thought her the most beau∣tiful Creature that he had ever seen. He began to take a great delight in be∣ing near her, and was just about exami∣ning all the Features of her Face, when the Marquess Spinola came to desire her to dance. Peppa, who was in discourse with the Chevalier, and not a little pleas'd with it, was so troubled at the Marquess's Compliment, that, tho she rose to give him her Hand, she scarce knew what she did; and she had not danc'd long before she was seiz'd with such a Faintness, that forc'd her to quit the Ball before it was ended. The Chevalier of—went out presently af∣ter, and the next morning went aboard his own Vessel to return to France, where he discours'd to all his Friends of the charming Creature that he had seen at Genoa; he himself wondring at the same time, how he could command himself so far as to leave her, and take a Resolution of departing. Notwith∣standing, as he was no less skilful in Musick and Poetry, than in the Dance, he had not the power to withstand some soft moments, wherein he com∣pos'd several Sonnets in praise of the fair Peppa; among which here is one.
WHen Phillis first I saw, that lovely Maid, how great was my sur∣prise: She in a moment did my Heart invade, wi'th' Magick of her Eyes: She in a moment did my Heart invade,
wi'th' Magick of her Eyes; wi'th' Magick of her Eyes. 2. Approach I did, but with so great an Awe, I trembling speechless stood: Ʋnusual heat did all my Veins o'reflow, Then chill'd was all my Blood. Unusual, &c. 3. Confusion did my Resolution bind, Scarce could I speak, or move: Despair had took possession of my Mind, And check'd my hopes of Love. Despair, &c.
As soon as Peppa was alone with her Cousin, she unbosom'd her thoughts to her, and declar'd, That she would never pardon the Marquess Spinola the sensible displeasure he had done her, by his interrupting the Conversa∣tion which they had with the Stranger, whom they found so obliging. Have you ever seen, continu'd Peppa, a Man so handsome, that had so fine a Wit, and so agreeable, and that danc'd with such a Majestick Air? If we had discours'd long∣er with him, interrupted Julia, we might perhaps have discover'd who he was. I must needs own, cry'd Peppa, blushing, the sight of him has made no small impression in my Thoughts, and not to make any further secret of it between us, I cann't but ac∣knowledge, that ever since that time I have felt such emotions, whereof till then I was wholly ignorant. In the mean time I don't know him, neither can I tell the Countrey he is of, and perhaps we shall ne∣ver see him more. These last words were ended with a sigh, which discover'd, that this Stranger was not indifferent to her, and altho her Cousin gave her some hopes that she might meet him at another Ball, yet this hope was too weak to bring her much Comfort. These
two Ladies met at almost all the divert∣ing Pastimes that were perform'd at Ge∣noa, during the time of the Carnaval. Peppa, who found not what she look'd for, was always in a Melancholy Hu∣mour, and complain'd still to her Cou∣sin of her bad Fortune. She sometimes oblig'd her to keep her company the greatest part of the day at the Window, where they could see all that past by, without being seen by any, flattering her self, that she might at last see him, who was now become the sole object of her Thoughts. But notwithstanding all this trouble for a whole month, it was to very little purpose, since that the Chevalier of—was now in France, where all his Estate and Fortune lay. The Count Centurione of Genoa, who had been acquainted with him in Italy, happening to be at Paris, after his return from a Voyage in Germany, was over∣joy'd to find the Chevalier there. He went to see him, and was receiv'd with a great deal of kindness. It was not a∣bove two days after that the Count was in a troublesome Affair with an English Gentleman. They fought, and the English Gentleman was much wounded; but the greatest danger was, that they
were both seiz'd, and as none doubted but that it was a Duel, (which Crime in France finds no Favour) their Trial came on. The Chevalier, who was ad∣vertis'd of it, by a Note from Centuri∣one, took this Affair in hand, but fore∣seeing that they could not escape being convicted, and that his Friend thereby would run the hazard of losing his Head, he thought it not convenient to endeavour any thing from the Judges, who, he knew, lay under indispensable obligations of proceeding to give Sen∣tence according to Evidence; but ha∣ving understood, that they who saw the Action were People of a mean Quality, he privately search'd them out, and by great Rewards oblig'd them to steal out of Paris, so that there might be none to witness against his Friend. This took the desir'd effect, for the Judges finding no proof against him that was valid, were forc'd to acquit him. Cen∣turione out of acknowledgment for this generous proceeding of his Friend, would have made him a considerable Present; but the Chevalier refus'd it, assuring him, that he was fully recom∣pens'd for that care he took to bring his Affair to a happy end, by the Plea∣sure
he receiv'd in being serviceable to a person of his worth. The Count Cen∣turione return'd back into his own Coun∣try full of grateful Acknowledgments for the generous Action of his Deliverer, having always before his Eyes the obli∣gations that lay on him for so signal a piece of Service. In the mean while, the great Dis∣course at Genoa, was of the Marriage of the Marquess Spinola with Peppa, it be∣ing look'd upon as a thing agreed on between the two Families. The Prin∣cess Doria, who most passionately de∣sir'd it, press'd several times her Bro∣ther, and her Husband, to procure a meeting of their Relations, to make an end of regulating all matters: But Pep∣pa, who was always full of the Idea of her Stranger, and who, not seeing which way to evade this Marriage, which she now was afraid would be too certain, fell into a languishing illness, which equally put a stop to the Design of both Houses; so that they deferr'd their meeting to seal the Articles to a longer time. The Physicians, tho they were ignorant of Peppa's Distemper, prescrib'd her several things, and through their Advice, she was carried
to a Countrey-House, which the Prince Doria had at Sancto P. di Arena, for a change of Air. Julia, who alone could administer any Comfort to her, because she knew her Secrets, did in vain re∣present, that she fill'd her Thoughts with the Idea of a Man, whom proba∣bly she should never see again, and blam'd her infinitely for resisting her Father's Will, who would make sure to her his whole Estate, upon her Marri∣age with the Marquess Spinola. Peppa rested satisfy'd with the Reasons al∣ledg'd by her Cousin; but at the same time affirm'd, That 'twas impossible to alter her Mind, and to drive from her Thoughts the Image of her dear Stran∣ger. The illness of Peppa caus'd so much trouble in the Mind of the Marquess Spi∣nola, who now really lov'd her, that his Relations thought it sit to dissipate his too great care for his Mistress, that he should go and see most of the chief Towns that were in Italy. Of this Pep∣pa was soon inform'd: And as it would prolong the Marriage, it became a mat∣ter of great Consolation, and from that moment she grew better, and be∣gan to shake off her Distemper: Julia
forgot nothing that might divert her, and perceiving that she did not speak so often to her of her Stranger, there having been almost two years gone without hearing any news of him, she instantly begg'd, that now she would banish from her Mind, that fatal Idea, and consider, that the happiness of her Person, and of two Illustrious Houses depended solely upon her own Will, since it was in her power to be the hap∣piest person in Italy, and to taste the greatest Delights that any rational Creature can here either expect or hope for. Peppa answer'd not a word to this Discourse, which Julia took as a good Omen; judging by her silence, that by little and little she would yield to Reason: Her Health, which daily augmented, fortify'd her Opinion, that the Stranger did not now so much dis∣quiet her. The Marquess Spinola was at Rome when he heard that his Mistress was per∣fectly recover'd of her Indisposition. So good News exciting his Passion, through the Impatience it caus'd in him of seeing this charming Person, he thought of nothing but to dispatch his Voyage to Genoa: And having heard
that at Civita Vecchia, there was  Squadron of French Ships ready to Sa which were to put in at Genoa, he pr∣sently left Rome, in company of two o∣ther Gentlemen of Genoa, who were glad to take the same opportunity, for to return to their own Country. They arriv'd at Civita Vecchia the same day that the French Ships were to depart. The Chevalier of—that commanded the whole Squadron, receiv'd them with a great deal of Civility, taking them aboard his own Ship. As he had not been ignorant of the Name, and Qua∣lity of the Marquess Spinola, he treated him with a singular Respect. His Ta∣ble, tho serv'd with all sorts of deli∣cates, was the least of the Entertain∣ment. They often drank the health of Ladies, which oblig'd the Gentlemen of Genoa to tell the Chevalier, that the Marquess had a Mistress, who was cer∣tainly the finest person in Italy. The Chevalier infinitely commended the Beauty of the Ladies in their Country, and confess'd, That being at Genoa in the time of the Carnaval, he went in Masquerade to a Ball, whereof he re∣lated to them the particulars; but that he never was in his life in so great dan∣ger
of taking leave of his Liberty, and  he was forc'd to summon all his son, to resist a secret inclination for ery amiable person that he had seen at a Ball, whose Name he nevertheless had not enquir'd after. He now thought certainly, that he should never be in love, since that he had escap'd so great a danger. After this Discourse the Che∣valier drank the Health of the Marquess's Mistress, and to do him the greatest Honour that could be done at Sea, he fir'd all the Guns of his Ship. The Marquess, overjoy'd, told him, Tha his Mistress was not unworthy of this Honour, and promis'd him, that he should see her as soon as they came to Genoa, where they arriv'd soon after. Peppa was overperswaded by Julia to receive favourably the Marquess, altho she design'd to defer her Marriage as long as she could. As soon as the Mar∣quess was arriv'd, he went to wait on the Princess Doria his Aunt, who was not a little glad of his return. She carried him into the Appartment of Peppa, who answer'd him with expressi∣ons more of Compliment than Love, to all the obliging things he said to her. After several Civilities pass'd,
the Marquess let them know the great obligations he had receiv'd from the Chevalier of—when he was aboard his Ship, with all the marks of Respects that he could wish, so far as to fire eve∣ry Gun of his Vessel at the drinking the Health of the fair Peppa. He then gave them a very advantageous descrip∣tion of his Person and his good Quali∣ties; and seeing that this recital dis∣pleas'd not the Ladies, he inform'd them of the Adventure that happen'd to the Chevalier in his Masquerade, and how far he forc'd his Inclination to de∣fend himself from being in Love with a lovely Person, that he had seen at a Ball. Peppa, who at first found that the Description of the Chevalier was very like that of her Stranger, remain'd much disturb'd all the time that the Marquess was speaking of what had pass'd at the Ball, and of all the other Circumstances which so exactly resem∣bl'd her Adventure, that the Company might easily have perceiv'd the disorder that she was in, if at the same time, the Marquess had not turn'd about to speak to his Aunt in private, for to entreat her to find some means to make good his Promise which he had made to shew
the Chevalier his Mistress The Prin∣cess, who had a great deal of kindness for her Nephew, took it upon her self to obtain her Husband's Consent; and to accomplish the better her design, she told the Marquess, that she would have on the morrow, at her House, a Con∣sort of Musick with a Collation, to which she would invite the Ladies of the Neighbourhood, and that he might bring with him his Friend. The Mar∣quess retir'd well satisfy'd with the Ex∣pedient that his Aunt had found out, and did not in the least perceive the perplexity wherewith the Mind of his Mistress was agitated. As soon as he was gone, Peppa gave an account to her Cousin of all that she had learnt; and as her Father had an esteem always for the Spaniards, and therefore she being educa∣ted all along with Sentiments of Aversi∣for the French, she shew'd no little trouble that this Gentleman, whom she had found so agreeable, was a French∣man. Julia acquiesc'd in her Opinion, and added several strong Arguments to per∣swade her from thinking any more of him. Peppa promis'd to follow her Counsel; but she conjur'd her once more to lend her Assistance to find some way
whereby she might see again that dan∣gerous Gentleman, assuring her, that she had no other design, but that of discovering, whether this was the Stranger that caus'd all her disquiet. Julia full of tenderness for Peppa, and altogether as curious, promis'd to con∣tribute her utmost to satisfy her in this point. They were both busying them∣selves to find out some means to see this Chevalier, without being seen by him, when the Princess Doria entring the Chamber where they were, told them, That the next day she would give them a Consort of Musick with a Collation, and that she would invite some Ladies, whom she nam'd to them. She advis'd them to dress themselves with all the advantage they could, For may be, (said she) the Marquess Spinola will bring some French Gentlemen, that came from Rome with him. Peppa, o'rejoy'd that Fortune offer'd so happy an oppor∣tunity, whereby she might satisfy her Cu∣riosity, spent all the night with much impatience. She therefore retir'd be∣times to her Chamber, and went to bed sooner than her usual hour, as if that would hasten forward the night, and occasion a quicker return of the morn∣ing.
Nevertheless she found the time very long, and was not a little uneasie in her thoughts. One while she pleas'd her self to think, that she should con∣template, at leisure, that dear Object, which before she had seen but a moment, and which had made so great an im∣pression in her Mind: Then again, she was afraid to see him, and represented to her self, a train of inevitable Mis∣fortunes, that would be the Conse∣quence of her resisting the Will of her Parents. In spight of all these Reflecti∣ons, the fear of being deceiv'd in her hopes, caus'd her greatest trouble; for when she began to think that the Che∣valier of—might not be the Stran∣ger that she look'd for, and that all her assurance for it, was but the Re∣port that she had receiv'd of the Adven∣ture of the Chevalier, which seem'd to be like that of her Stranger; she there∣fore would willingly see him without running any hazard. In this incerti∣tude, she took a great deal of care the next day to dress her self with all the advantage she could, and she did not fail in her design; for the Princess Do∣ria and Julia agreed, that they never saw her in a Dress so magnificent as she was then. The Princess being perswa∣ded,
that she did it to please the Mar∣quess, appear'd extreamly satisfy'd. It is certain, that the richness of her Dress gave so much Lustre to her natu∣ral Beauty, that all those who saw her, could not forbear crying out, That they had never seen so fair a Creature. The Marquess and the Chevalier, ac∣companied with several of their Friends, came to the Consort. As soon as they were enter'd into the Ladies Apart∣ments, Peppa, who easily singl'd out the Chevalier from the rest, was in a great Confusion. She found, however, such infinite satisfaction in seeing him again, that she forgot those Reflections which she lately made. The Marquess pre∣sented his Friend to the Princess Doria, who receiv'd him with much Civility. They then offer'd their Respects to Peppa, who had scarce the Courage to look up. The Marquess transported with Joy, seeing the great splendour of her Beauty, could not hold from saying to the Chevalier, That now he might judge, whether she did not merit the Ho∣nour he did her, when he drank her Health at the report of all the Guns of his Ship. The Chevalier, who immediately knew her to be the same person that appear'd
so beautiful at the Ball two years before, was in so great a surprise, and beheld her so attentively, that he gave no An∣swer to what the Marquess said to him. This Affection which cost him a great deal of trouble to overcome the first time that he had seen Peppa, was now renew'd; and he found by some pri∣vate motions of his Heart, that it would be impossible for him to resist. Peppa, who sat next to Julia, had al∣ways her Eyes fix'd on the Chevalier: She found him so much to her liking, that far from repenting of those amo∣rous Sentiments she had for him whilst he was yet unknown to her; she re∣proach'd her Cousin for her having so often blam'd this Amour; and she en∣deavour'd to make her observe in his person, the new Agreement that she each moment discover'd. The Marquess, who was wholly taken up with the Mu∣sick, listen'd to it with so much atten∣tion, that he did not perceive the Con∣fusion the Chevalier was in, and he flat∣ter'd himself with the imagination, that his own presence might in some measure be the cause of the Joy which added so great a Lustre to Peppa's Beauty. As the Chevalier spoke nothing to him in
praise of the Musick; he ask'd him if he did not like it? The Chevalier answer'd him freely, That altho he was always a great admirer of Musick, yet he had not any relish for it now, when he had before his Eyes the most beautiful person of the World. The Marquess perceiving well that Peppa had the greatest share in his Answer, assur'd his Friend, That the Custom of Italy could permit of a familiar Con∣versation, he would also be satisfy'd, that her Wit was no ways inferiour to her Beauty. The Collation being serv'd up, the Marquess pray'd the Princess Doria to place the Chevalier next to Peppa, to which the Princess easily con∣descended, to please her Nephew. Al∣tho Peppa and the Chevalier had a sensible delight to see themselves so near together, yet they were uneasie in being depriv'd of the pleasure of beholding one another; but the Chevalier not be∣ing willing to lose so happy an opportu∣nity, found means to speak to Peppa, without being overheard by any of the Company, That he saw it was impossi∣ble for a person to withstand his Desti∣ny; and as for him, he never would complain of his, for he was sensible, that he was born to adore her all his life.
The Modesty of Peppa would not allow her to give him an Answer to these Expressions, nevertheless something in her Actions let him know, that she was not displeas'd with what he had said. The Chevalier satisfy'd with the progress he had made in his Amour, enter'd into Conversation with the other Ladies, and took care to say nothing afterwards but what every one might hear. The Banquet was concluded with much Mag∣nificence; alho the Chevalier did not believe it had lasted long enough, yet before he retir'd, he had the pleasure to meet the kind looks of his Mistress, and by this mute Language of their Eyes, they fully discover'd the Senti∣ments they had for each other. The Chevalier spent the night with∣out sleeping; the lovely Peppa appear∣ing always in his Thoughts, and he thought himself the most happy Man in the World, when that he repass'd over in his Mind, that she had heard him without being displeas'd at it, that even her Eyes had let him understand, that she had not an indifferent Affection for him; but presently making Reflecti∣ons upon the state of his own Prefer∣ment, foresaw, that being advanc'd in
the Service of his King, he could not receive into his Breast so great a Passion, and particularly at Genoa, without great hazard of ruining his Fortune. In spight of all these Reflections, his Amour got the Victory of all these Com∣motions, and he could not tell which way to take a Resolution of parting from his Mistress. An Order that he receiv'd upon his Arrival at Genoa to depart immediately for France, put him into the greatest disorder imaginable; but knowing how nice the King was in all that related to his Service, he re∣solv'd not to admit of the thoughts of deferring his Voyage one moment, al∣tho he probably believ'd, that he should never get such another occasion, or to agree with her what Methods and Measures to observe for the time to come. In this extremity he resolv'd to write to her, for to let her understand, the real motions of his Heart: He de∣ferr'd it not till it was day; for having call'd his Servants, he ask'd for a light, and writ this following Letter. I Once had the thoughts that I should never be in Love, since I had the pow∣er to resist its force, when I saw you two
years ago. I was confirm'd in this Opi∣nion by infinite Arguments; but I had no sooner seen you a second time, when that all these Arguments, which before had ap∣pear'd to me invincible, became weak; and now far from endeavouring to preserve my Liberty, I repent of my former Resistance, and I esteem the time past as lost, not be∣ing able to comprehend, that there can be a Felicity in this World, equal to that of loving you. A Duty most cruel, but yet not to be dispens'd with, obliges me to re∣turn suddenly into France. I should have met with a far greater resistance, in re∣solving this absence, had I not believ'd, that that Man must be unworthy of you, who can fail in his Duty to his King. This reason alone makes me go without hesi∣tating, but with a resolution to make a spee∣dy return, to find you out in what place soever you are; to adore you continually; and to sacrifice my Life to a Love that is perfect, and constant. He found this Letter exactly confor∣mable to his Mind; but he was in a great perplexity, how to give it to the charming Peppa, for he very well knew, that the greatest part of the Nobility of Genoa live extreamly retir'd, and
that it would be very difficult to have access into their Houses, and particu∣larly, near their Wives or Daughters. He fear'd, that if he should commit this Se∣cret to Mercinary Persons, they would act but faintly in his Affair; and especi∣ally in his absence. He was thus disquie∣ting himself, when that the Count Centu∣rione enter'd his Chamber; he began to chide him for his unkindness, that he came not to lodge in his Palace. The Chevalier excus'd himself upon his short stay, having an Order to make Sail from Genoa with all expedition. The Count perceiving him to be very unea∣sie, conjur'd him to let him know, whether he could contribute any thing to his satisfaction; assuring him, that he would expose both his Life and For∣tune in his Service. The Chevalier, sighing, confess'd, That he had plung'd himself in the most cruel Affair that he ever met with in all his Life: This oblig'd the Count to renew the offer which he had made him before, add∣ing all that he could think of, to per∣swade him, that he should esteem him∣self the most happy man in the World, if he could find an occasion to testify to him his Acknowledgment. The
Chevalier without any further difficulty, made him a Confident in his Secret. Having in short acquainted him with the beginning of his Adventure, he confess'd, that he was in Love; and that notwithstanding he could not pre∣vent his departing, and absenting him∣self from the only person he could love. The Count represented to him, the al∣most invincible difficulties that he would meet with in his Enterprise; but however he offer'd him all the Assistance in the World; and assur'd him, that he would stick at nothing where his Service was in Question. The Chevalier shew'd him then the Letter which he had writ, and told him, That he should depart with less trouble, if he would take the charge upon him, to convey it to Peppa. The Count ingag'd himself with a great deal of Joy, and promis'd to take such exact Measures, that he might rely upon the safe conveyance of his Letter to his Mistress. They had some other Conversation together be∣fore the Chevalier embark'd, to whom it was a matter of great Consolation to find a Friend so truly grateful. Peppa past the night with as little rest as the Chevalier: She would some∣times
start as she began to close her Eyes, and then would imagin, that all which had pass'd the day before, was but a Dream; but when she recollected her self, how that she had seen distinct∣ly the Chevalier, and that he had also spoke to her in such tender Expressions; she found no little delight in repassing in her Mind, those very words he had us'd; and banish'd all Reflections that might diminish her Joy. As soon as it was day she went into Julia's Chamber, whom she awak'd, to talk of her Lo∣ver. She made her take notice how much Wit was in all his Discourse, and even applauded his Discretion, for his having spoke so little to her in private. Julia, either to do Justice to the Cheva∣lier, or out of Complaisance for her Cousin, own'd, that if a weakness of this nature might be pardonable in a young Maid, she was far less criminal than another, since the Chevalier in all his Actions appear'd so graceful. After a long Discourse, Peppa, who flatter'd her self, that Love might still procure some new means for her to see him a∣gain, took no little care in adorning her self. She was all the day long mightily discompos'd, and, under
some pretext or other, visited the Bal∣conies, and all the Windows of the Pa∣lace Doria. She was in this diligent search, when she heard the sound of se∣veral great Guns, which mov'd her Curiosity to enquire into the Reasons: And being told, that the Gallies of the Republick saluted the French Ships which were under Sail. This news much surpris'd her, because she could not have imagin'd, that the Chevalier, after the declaring himself to her as he had done, was capable of departing, without letting her hear from him. She was sensibly touch'd with this appea∣rance of Contempt, and call'd to her Remembrance all that she had heard re∣ported to the disadvantage of the French Nation, who had this general Chara∣cter in their Neighbouring Countries, that they could easily ingage themselves in any Amour, and as easily quit it a∣gain, without the least concern in the World. She bemoan'd her misfortune to Julia, and in the angry humour she was in, endeavouring to lessen all that was charming in the Chevalier, she pro∣mis'd her never to think more of this Ingrate. We must now leave the Chevalier
pursuing his Voyage to France in a stormy season of the year, and upon an unruly Sea; but whether that or his Passion was his greatest care, this Song, the product of his solitary Thoughts, will best testifie. He sent it with the first Ship, for his Friend Centurione at Genoa, who till a long time after, could not meet with an opportunity of putting it into the Hands of the fair Peppa. OH my Zelinda! could you see the fury of each foaming Wave, you'd think, that the tempestuous Sea
would e'ry moment be our Grave: But, oh Zelinda! could you view the greater Tempest in my Heart, you'd know that it was rais'd for you;
So sad, so sad 'tis to depart; so sad, so sad 'tis to depart. 2. Come to my aid some gentle Wind, And thus my Am'rous Message bear; Tell all the troubles of my Mind, And whisper how I love my Fair: Tell her my Fancy all the day Doth still enjoy her glorious sight; But tell her too, that absence may Involve me in eternal Night. Involve me, &c.
The Assembly of the Relations of both Families, which should have met long before, upon the treaty of Mar∣riage between the Marquess Spinola and Peppa, but which was then deferr'd by reason of Peppa's illness, met two days after the Chevalier set Sail. They re∣gulated the Affairs on each side, and resolv'd to have them married immedi∣ately. Peppa, who could not forget the Chevalier, in spight of all his Ingrati∣tude, being inform'd of this Resoluti∣on, went presently into the Chamber of her Cousin, where she gave her self wholly up to her Grief and Tears, without having the pow'r to utter one word. Julia did what she could to comfort her, and advis'd her to obey willingly her Parents, and not to ha∣zard the Content of her whole life, by a vexatious opposition. She added, That it was part of her good Fortune to be undeceiv'd of the Chevalier, since she had now found by her own Experience, that he never had a true kindness for her. I believe all that you say, interrupted Peppa, but yet you must acknowledge, that I am the most unhappy person that breaths, seeing that I am going to be sacrifis'd to a Man that I can never love, when he a∣lone,
whom I thought worthy of my Love, shuns me. The many sighs and tears, which stifled her Voice, hinder'd her from proceeding any further in her Complaints. In the mean while that Julia, who shar'd in her Cousins sorrow, lamented with her, the Count Centurione, who was to convey to Peppa the Letter gi∣ven by the Chevalier, try'd all manner of ways to gain one of the Women that waited on her. After several In∣treagues, finding that his endeavours to win her to him prov'd fruitless, he told her at last, as a secret, that she might deliver it without the least apprehensi∣ons, since that this Letter came from the Marquess Spinola, who did only de∣sign to surprize his Mistress, and to see if she could guess whence it came. The Servant being overperswaded by this false appearance, took charge of the Letter, and presented it to her Lady. Peppa something amaz'd at this novelty, demanded from whom she receiv'd it. The Servant answer'd her, That she was forbid to tell, but that she would soon know in reading it. Peppa, who at first consulted only her Honour, re∣fus'd to receive it, but as soon as she
was alone, she repented that she had let it go, imagining, that it might have come from the Chevalier. A hundred times was she going to have ask'd her Servant for it, and as many times her Modesty and her Fear, that it was the Marquess Spinola who had sent it, hin∣der'd her. In fine, after several Irre∣solutions, her Curiosity, or rather, her Love, got the victory. She sent after the Servant, and threaten'd to turn her away, unless she would declare from whence the Letter came. The Servant, still reserving that as a Mystery, deli∣ver'd it without making her any An∣swer. Peppa, for all her Modesty, had not the power to resist her Curiosity to know what was in it; she read the Let∣ter, and immediately retir'd in pri∣vate, to abandon her self without any constraint, to all the transport of Joy that this pleasant perusal had caus'd in her. She read it a thousand times, and a thousand times she repented of the disadvantageous Opinion that she had had of her Lover. Her Marriage, which was brought now to a conclusion, was a trouble to her not to be imagin'd. Her Love, notwithstanding, gave her still some hopes to find out a Pretext to de∣fer
this Marriage: She resolv'd, eve at last, to feign her self sick, and t make use of all her Address, to preven this Affair from being concluded. I the mean time she busied her Thoughts for an Answer to the Chevalier; which near upon was express'd in these words. THE Rules of Modesty would fearce permit me to answer a Letter that was so full of Gallantries as yours, but the same Destiny which has ingag'd you in an esteem for me, does likewise compel me to do that for you alone, which I thought never to have done for any. I would therefore have you believe, That your Cares for me will not be unwelcome, and that I shall receive no small delight when I may see you again. Peppa, supposing that the Chevalier had found the safest way to hear from her, was content to take no further care, but only to remit this Answer in∣to the Hands of the Servant who gave her the Letter, not doubting but that she would be faithful in the delivery; her Modesty not permitting her to enquire into the measures that were to be taken. This Maid being prepossess'd, that the
Count Centurione was of the Plot with he Marquess Spinola, and that the An∣wer which her Mistress gave her was eally for the Marquess, met him by hance a moment after: She was so leas'd with her Negotiation, that it was impossible for her to hide her Joy. You save me the trouble to go any further, said she to him, in giving him the Let∣ter from Peppa. She withdrew without staying for his Answer, for fear that she should be seen to talk with him. The Marquess, who knew the Hand of his Mistress, tasted before-hand all the Pleasure that a passionate Lover can con∣ceive in having a Letter deliver'd to him from a person whom he entirely loves; but after that he had perceiv'd in reading it, that it was design'd for ano∣ther, and not for him, he was seiz'd with Horrour and Amazement, never having had the least thoughts that Peppa was capable of a Love Entreague: His Indignation and Anger gave him not leisure to make any further Reflections; he enter'd the Chamber of the Princess Doria full of grief, and giving her the Letter, utter'd a thousand Reproaches, that she would have had him marry'd a person who was so false to him. The
Princess surpris'd at this fury of he Nephew, and the Expressions so littl respectful which he us'd, read the Let∣ter which he gave her. She ask'd the the Marquess, to whom this Letter wa directed, and by what adventure it fe into his Hands. I cannot satisfy you i that, answer'd the Marquess, I know very well that Peppa preserves all her Love for another, whilst that I am going to marry her. It was one of her Women that gave me this Letter; you see hereby that she was mistaken, and it must be without doubt that she was not well in∣structed. The Princess made the Wo∣man be call'd, whom the Marquess had nam'd, and after having told her, that she should undergo the severest effects of her Anger, if she did not declare the truth; she aks'd her the meaning of this Letter. The Woman confess'd, That the Count Centurione had given her one to deliver to Peppa, that she had acquitted her self of the charge laid up∣on her, and had got an Answer, which she put into the Hands of the Marquess Spinola, believing, as the Count Centu∣rione had assur'd her, That they were both of Council together, and that it was all one to deliver the Letter to
either of them, since that the Count d no other design, but what was only or the Interest of the Marquess. This nswer made them believe, that the Woman had been deceiv'd. The Princess conjur'd her Nephew to have a ittle Patience, and to let her have ime to search into the bottom of this ntreague, assuring him, that she would be the first that would break off his Marriage, if she found that Peppa held the least Correspondance with the Count Centurione. The Marquess dis∣sembled, as well as he could, his De∣spair, promising, that he would pati∣ently expect the event, and so retir'd. The Princess without losing one mo∣ment of time, secur'd first the Servant, shutting her up in a Chamber, whereof she her self kept the Key. She pass'd from thence into the Apartment of her Daughter-in-law, and told her as soon as she came in, That she would ac∣quaint her with such News which would surprize her. Peppa was impatient till she knew it. We have discover'd, con∣tinu'd the Princess, that the Marquess Spinola is so strictly ingag'd with a Lady of Rome, that it is not in his power to marry any other, which makes your Father
resolve to hearken to the Count Cent∣rione, who earnestly demands you in Mar∣riage: He gave me a charge that I shou make you acquainted with his design, a to prepare you to receive kindly this n Lover, whom he himself will offer to yo to morrow. Peppa was wholly surpriz' at this Discourse which she so littl expected. She conjur'd her Mother-in∣law, with tears in her Eyes, to hinder the effects of so sudden a Resolution, telling her, That she could not take up a Resolution of marrying a Man whom she had never seen, and hardly knew his Name. However, answer'd the Princess, your Father did not determine this Affair, but upon the consideration that he was assur'd you have a great kindness for this Count. Peppa protested to her over again, That she did not know him, and declar'd, that she had ra∣ther live all her days in a Nunnery, than to consent to such a Marriage. I have never heard, answer'd the Princess, in a serious tone, that when one writes kind Letters to any person, they do not at the same time know who they are. Peppa touch'd with these last words, answer'd her coldly, That she knew not what she meant; and that without doubt
some person, envious of her happiness, ade use of this Contrivance to ruin er in the Opinion of all her Friends. The Princess said, She was sorry that he must be forc'd to convince her; nd to let her see that she had invented othing of her own Head, told her, That she need only follow her; she brought her to the Chamber wherein he had shut the Maid, whom she call'd by her Name, as soon as she had open'd the Door; but was mightily surpriz'd to find no body. This Maid frigh∣ten'd by the threatnings of the Prin∣cess, had found means to escape out by a private Door that was behind the Hangings, and she left Genoa with so much Diligence and Caution, that it was impossible for the Princess to discover, whither she was gone. Peppa, who was really innocent of any Intreague with the Count, but yet had fear'd the discovery of her Affair with the Cheva∣lier, from the mouth of this Servant, became now more bold, by the absence of the only person that could confront her, and reproach'd the Princess for her Injustice, in suspecting her so light∣ly. The Princess touch'd with the Re∣proaches of her Daughter-in-law,
hop'd still to convince her by the Let∣ter that was in the Hands of the Mar∣quess, to whom she writ, for to pra him to send it her; but it was in vai for the Marquess, not being capable  receiving Comfort for the Infidelity o his Mistress, nor of pardoning th Count Centurione the Artifice that h us'd to make the Servant take charge o his Letter, resolv'd to fight him; and having met him by chance the same day, he made him draw, after having torn in his presence, Peppa's Letter, al∣though the Count declar'd, that he was not his Rival, and that this Letter was not directed to him. They fought some time with an almost equal advan∣tage; but in fine, Fortune declar'd for Centurione, and Spinola was worsted. This Affair made great noise at Genoa; there was scarce a person but what talk'd of it, and strove to search into the Subject of their Quarrel. These two Gentlemen, had nevertheless so much Discretion, that no body could disco∣ver, that the Daughter of the Prince Doria had any share in the Action. The Princess inform'd of the Misfortune of her Nephew, and of the Declaration which Centurione had made to him be∣fore
he would draw his Sword, began to believe that there was some Mystery hid in this Affair, and that may be some person, who envy'd the Grandeur of the two Families, had us'd this perfidi∣ous stratagem to breed a Disturbance, when they oblig'd the Servant to de∣liver the Marquess this Letter of Pep∣pa's, whose Hand without doubt they had counterfeited. All the circum∣stances of this Intrigue, and particu∣larly, the flight of this Servant, con∣firm'd her in these thoughts; and as one is apt to believe those things which one wishes, she rested satisfy'd, that Peppa had been betray'd, and was re∣concil'd to her. The Princess was then willing to undeceive the Marquess; but whether that he was not so easie to be perswaded as his Aunt, or that he was asham'd of the advantage that Centu∣rione had had over him, he went from Genoa without taking leave of any one, and pass'd into the Emperours Army, which was then in it's March to raise the Siege of Vienna. The sudden absence of the Marquess Spinola surpris'd every body, and much troubl'd the Princess Doria, who here∣by saw all her hopes frustrated, and the
Union of the two Families as far off a ever. Her Husband himself was muc offended at so extravagant a way o acting, and began to hearken favoura∣bly to the Proposals that one of hi Friends made to him, which was to give his Daughter to the Marquess of Vill Mediana Celi, first Minister of Spain, and who serv'd at Milan, at the Head of a Regiment of Foot. He gave him for example, the Marquess of Los Bal∣bazes, who went for one of the most cunning Polititians that had been in Ge∣noa of a long time, who was more as∣sur'd of the Protection of Spain, by marrying his Children to the Spaniards, than by his long Services. The Prince Doria was mov'd by these reasons, and promis'd his Friend to consider seriously of it. The Marquess of Villa Mediana having had notice of the favourable In∣clination that the Prince Doria had for him, and finding that Peppa was one of the richest Heiresses of Italy, came to Genoa in all diligence. The Prince Do∣ria receiv'd him very civilly; which in∣gag'd him to make use of all the Gallan∣tries which were practis'd in Spain. He walk'd the greatest part of the night under Peppa's Window, and in the day
never fail'd to be at all the Churches that she usually went to; but Peppa, who still flatter'd her self with the thoughts of seeing quickly again the Chevalier, had the malice never to re∣gard this diligence of the Spaniard, who nevertheless did not dispair, but hop'd that in the end his Constancy would prevail. In all his Serenades, Songs were not wanting, that declar'd the strength of a Passion; like this that fol∣lows. LOvely Coelia, let your Ear listen to my humble Pray'r; let it hear your dying Lover;
let it hear, and then discover how innocent, and free I am from flattery. How little all! How little all the World I prize,
to one kind glance fromCoelia's Eyes! To one kind glance from Coelia's Eyes. 2. Welcome Shores to those that are Shipwrack'd, and of Life despair, Or t'Offenders Pardon given. Or to th' Holy Man his Heaven, Not greater Pleasures be, Than Coelia kind to me. So little all the World I prize, To one kind glance from Coelia's Eyes.
In the mean while that he forgot no∣thing that would produce success, the Marchioness Durazzo took her Daugh∣ter home, for to put her afterwards in∣to the Nunnery, whereto she was de∣sign'd. Peppa, who had never hid any thing from her Cousin, and who found a great deal of Comfort in disclosing her Thoughts to her without any con∣straint, was so afflicted at this parting, that she begg'd her Parents to let her be enter'd some time into the Nunnery where Julia went to take the Veil; but her Father would never consent to it, which oblig'd her to lead a life ve∣ry retir'd, scarce going out of her Chamber, and without any other Plea∣sure but what the hopes gave her of the return of her Lover. The Count Cen∣turione had not fail'd to write to France, and to inform him of the Destiny of his Letter, and of all that had pass'd at Genoa, since he was gone; and even gave him hopes, that if he would send another Letter, he would leave nothing untry'd that might procure him an An∣swer. The Chevalier sent him a second Letter, full of passionate expressions, which set his Thoughts on work, how
to deliver it. The Zeal that he had or the Service of his Friend, ingag'd im to write with the most certain promises, that he would procure him greater success in the delivery of this se∣cond Letter, than there was in that of the first. However, as he knew no bo∣dy that had access near Peppa, and she leading a life very retir'd, since her Cousin was not with her, it was impos∣sible for Centurione to convey his Friend's Letter to her. He inform'd himself of all those who had acquaintance in the Palace Doria, if Peppa had not some particular Friends, whom she lov'd to converse with; he understood that she lov'd Julia very well, and that she would admit of no Comfort for her Absence. The Count despairing of doing any thing for his Friend, re∣proach'd himself every moment with his want of Industry, was afraid, that the Chevalier, who had trusted him with an Affair so delicate, might either have some belief that he kept Intelligence with his Rival; or, that he acted but weakly for his Interest, since that he ac∣quitted himself no better in the charge he had undertaken, after he having en∣gag'd
himself in the attempt, and pro∣mis'd even a fortunate success. The remembrance of the great Obligation that he hath receiv'd from the Cheva∣lier, and the generous means that he us'd in his Affair; this put him quite into despair. But when that he con∣sider'd, that the Chevalier might with the soonest opportunity arrive at Ge∣noa, and come secretly to his House in hopes to hear some good news, and yet he had nothing to tell him: Thi last thought put him into so great a confusion, that he could with Pleasure have quitted the best part of his Estate, to find an occasion of being serviceable to his Friend, and to give him a testi∣mony of his Acknowledgment. In this extremity, he took so extraordinary a Resolution, that no example of Friend∣ship can parallel. He had a particular acquaintance with the Marquess Duraz∣zo, who was one of the chief Senators of Genoa. He one day made him a Vi∣sit, and after having declar'd to him in obliging expressions, the esteem that he had for his person, he told him, That he should be very glad to enter into the Alliance of a Man of his worth, and
to become his Son-in-law. The Mar∣quess, who knew very well the great Estate of Centurione, answer'd him, smiling, That his Daughters were not Fortunes for him, nor had that vanity to think of such a Person as he was, who could make Pretensions to any of the richest Fortunes of the City. Centurione reply'd, That he was not of the humour of the other Genoeses, who in setling themselves, minded less the satisfaction of their Minds, than procuring vast Estates; but that for him, he should think him∣self extreamly happy in marrying one his Daughters; assuring him, that no manner of Articles between them should break off the Match. The Marquess charm'd with this noble Action of Cen∣turione, told him, That two of his Daughter were already Nuns, that he had two others remaining at home, one whereof was brought up with the Daughter of the Prince Doria, and just upon taking the Veil; That if he per∣sisted in the same Sentiments he already had declar'd, he might consult with his Friends about it, and returning to him again, should then be able to give him  positive Answer. The Count retir'd
very well satisfy'd; and as he was long before capable of governing himself and his Estate, it was not difficult for him to obtain the consent of his Relations. The Marquess on his side, consulted his Friends: His Wife, who perceiv'd that Julia had no great Inclination for the Cloister, was overjoy'd at the Proposi∣tion of Count Centurione: She was ve∣ry scrupulous of putting her Daughter into a Nunnery against her Will, which made her perswade her Husband to let her want no advantage, rather than lose a Match so important. The Count Centurione, who in marrying Julia, was sure of easily seeing Peppa, and of ad∣vancing towards this fair person, the Pretensions of his Friend, return'd to the House of the Marquess Durazzo, and was receiv'd very favourably both by the Husband and Wife. The Affair being concluded the same day, the Mar∣quess presented Centurione to his Daugh∣ter, and exhorted her in his presence, to acknowledge all her life time, how much she was oblig'd to the Count, who preferr'd her with a small Fortune, be∣fore divers Matches that would have been to him very advantageous. Julia, to whom such a happiness came unex∣pected,
especially in a Country where the Estate regulates the Marriages, re∣ceiv'd the Count with all the Marks of Esteem, and acknowledgement that he could wish, and they were married a little while after with an equal sa∣tisfaction on both sides. Peppa was at all the Ceremonies, and was so joyful for her Cousin's good Fortune, that she gave infinite Praises to the Count, for the Generosity that he shew'd. The Princess Doria who then thought she saw further into this Business than the others, rested satisfied that the Count had been of a long time in Love with Julia, and that the Letter which had caus'd so much Trouble to her Nephew, was the hand of this Kinswoman, who writ much like Peppa, because they had learnt of the same Master. The Count who saw Peppa every day, finding himself capable of serving his Friend, prepar'd a great Feast in his Palace, and did resolve to take hold of this Opportunity for to speak to this lovely Person in behalf of the Che∣valier, delivering into her hands the Letter whereof he had took Charge. And as he was infinitely contented with his Wife, and not enduring to hide any
thing from her, he confess'd to her one day, after having assur'd her of his constant Love, that he esteem'd him∣self the happiest Man alive, in having married her; but that nevertheless he was beholden to one of his Friends for this great happiness, who had rendred him the highest Obligation that ever Man receiv'd. He then told her, that this Friend was in Love with Peppa, and that he had ingag'd himself to speak to her in his behalf; but that he resolv'd not to attempt it without asking her Advice. Julia surpris'd at her Husband's Discourse, counsel'd him forthwith, to ndeceive his Friend, and told as a secret, that her Cousin was already so taken with a stranger, that tho' she had made use of all her Interest to exclude his Memory from her Thoughts, she found it was but to little purpose, and that her Cousin was resolv'd never to forget him. You did then oppose the In∣terest of my Friend, interrupted the Count? I doubt very much, replyed Ju∣lia, whether you know him that I mean. The Count was going to give her an Answer, when he was inform'd that two strangers very earnestly inquir'd for him. He went out to know what
they desir'd of him, and was sometime without knowing who they were. He perceiv'd at last, that he whom he spoke to was the Chevalier—who was come to Genoa privately in a Dis∣guise, and accompanied only with one Servant. The Count was overjoy'd to see him, and carried him into a state∣ly Appartment, that he had already prepar'd for him, and where the Che∣valier chang'd his Habit for that which was more suitable to his Quality. They had together a long Dîscourse. Centu∣rione gave him an Account of all that had past at Genoa since his Absence, and particularly of the Motifs of his Mar∣riage. The Chevalier confounded with these extraordinary Obligations which he had receiv'd from his Friend, could not find words capable of expressing how sensible he was of so true a Friend∣ship. The Count told him that this ve∣ry day there was to be in his Palace a great Feast, the Order whereof the Princess Doria had taken upon her self to regulate, and gave him also to understand, that perhaps he might pro∣cure him the Conversation of his Mi∣stress; but because he had need of his Wifes help to succeed, he resolv'd to
introduce the Chevalier into her Pre∣sence first, and thereupon he enter'd his Wifes Chamber, to prepare her for this Visit. He inform'd her of the Arrival of his Friend; and after ha∣ving exaggerated to her the important service that this Friend had render'd him, he prayed her to receive him with all imaginable kindness for his sake. Julia who desir'd nothing so much as to please her Husband, pro∣mis'd him to follow his Orders, but he assur'd him again, that the greatest piece of Service, and of most Advan∣tage for his Friend, would be to coun∣sel him to think no more of her Cou∣sin. Let not that trouble you, answered the Count, may be that Peppa is not of your Mind. He went out without stay∣ing for her Answer, return'd a mo∣ment after, accompanied with the Che∣valier. Julia, who knew him at first sight, to be her Cousin's Lover, was in so great a surprize, that she could scarce return the Civilities of the Che∣valier, and complaining to her Husband, that he did not reveal to her his Friend's Name. Judge you, answered the Count, whether I had best counsel him to think no more of your Cousin? A Colour that
overspread Julia's Face, hinder'd her from replying. The rest of their Dis∣course was of the Feast; They found it necessary that the Chevalier should not appear; but that he should remain hid in the Count's Appartment. The Princess Doria and Peppa arriv'd some time after at the Count Centuri∣one's Palace. The Feast was carried on with a great deal of Magnificence; and the Marquess of Villa Mediana, who would not lose any Opportunity to be at all the Places where he might see Peppa, appear'd in a Mask followed by several Slaves, wearing about their Necks Collars, with a Motto in Spa∣nish, which signifies in our Lauguage, Our Master has no more Liberty than we; but he was so little disguis'd, that every one knew who he was. Peppa, who could no longer suffer the tiresome Gallantries of this Marquess, drew near to her Cousin, and told her, that she had resolv'd to come no more to these kind of Feasts, that she might be de∣liver'd from the Importunities of this Spaniard, who indeavour'd to infuse Love into her Breast at a Time when she had so much Reason to be afflicted, being separated from her Lover, and
still in an uncertainty of seeing him a∣gain. Julia promis'd her with an Ac∣cent which shew'd the Astonishment she was in at a Passion so constant, that if the Picture of the Chevalier could give her any Consolation, she would shew her one in her Husband's Closet, which represented him so lively, that she would be surpris'd at it. Peppa, whose Curiosity was very great in any Thing that related to her Amour, con∣jur'd her Cousin not to defer the giving her this Satisfaction, and of conduct∣ing her to this Closet. They wanted not a pretence to get out from the Company, and went directly to the Count's Closet, where he was alone with the Chevalier. Never was any Sur∣prize more pleasing than Peppa's, when she beheld her Lover. The Chevalier cast himself at her Feet, and assur'd her, that he would now forget his past Misfortune, since he enjoy'd the pleasure of seeing the Person that in the World was most dear to him. Peppa, who was unprepar'd for a happiness so extraordinary, was at first in some Confusion that her Lover should ex∣press himself so passionately in the Presence of Centurione; and seeking
to save her Honour, which she ima∣gin'd this Interview might blemish, she complain'd to her Cousin of the Cheat she had impos'd on her. Julia presently guessing the Cause of her Confusion, told her that her Husband was infinitely oblig'd to the Chevalier, that they hid nothing from one ano∣ther, and that she might declare her privatest Thoughts before him without any Reserve. Peppa taking Courage at this Discourse of her Cousin, did no longer dissemble the Joy that she had of seeing the Chevalier. They disco∣ver'd to each other all that had passed, and gave an interchangeable Account of all the disturbances they had under∣gone since they had seen one another. Their Conversation had lasted much longer, if Julia, who fearing that the Princess Doria would be in search for her Daughter, had not advis'd her to make haste to return, for fear that she deferr'd it too long, she might be sent for, whereby that which they design'd to keep secret, would be discover'd. Peppa being afraid lest her Mother should find her in this place, prepar'd to follow her Cousin's Advice, but she made so little haste, that Julia was for∣ced
to take her by the hand, and carry her away almost by force. The Count seeing that the Chevalier, being depriv'd of what he lov'd, was in a condition which caus'd Pity, engag'd his Wife to make an Invitation for the next day, and directed her chiefly to get a Pro∣mise from the Princess Doria, that she would bring Peppa with her again. The hopes of seeing one another the next day, diminish'd the Sore that the two Lovers had to be separated; and Julia accquitted her self so well of the Commission that her Husband gave her, that the Princess promis'd to leave her Daughter with her on the morrow all the day long. Peppa appear'd to be in a very good Humour during the Re∣mainder of the Feast. The Marquess of Villa Mediana, who expounded eve∣ry thing to his Advantage, flatter'd himself that his Cares did not displease her; and as he had never seen her so Handsome as she was that day, he all along beheld her with a particular At∣tention. Peppa laugh'd to her self at the vain Cares of the Marquess, and was sometimes so malicious as to cast a Look towards him, but after such a manner as should not give him cause to
have the least Hope; however a Spani∣ard flatters himself much more than a∣nother Man, and particularly in Love. The Marquess of Villa Mediana ima∣gin'd that he was no longer indifferent to Peppa. Upon this ground he writ to the Spanish Court, and let his Rela∣tions understand that he had the esteem of Peppa, and that if the King of Spain would take notice of it to the Prince Doria, his Marriage would infallibly be accomplish'd. In the mean while the Countess Cen∣turione fail'd not to go the next day to the Palace Doria, for to desire the Princess to keep the Promise which she had made her. The Princess who was now very well satisfied with her Daugh∣ter's Conduct, and who endeavour'd to put out of her mind by all sorts of Complaisance, the injustice that she be∣liev'd to have done her in suspecting her of a Love-Intrigue, consented without any difficulty, that the two Cousins should go out together, and promis'd within a little while to come to them. The Chevalier who expected his Mistress with the highest impati∣ence, was in extraordinary transports of Joy at her coming; and whether the
care she had taken in her Dress, or t Pleasure in beholding whom she lov' gave a new Lustre to her Beauty,  fancy'd, that he had never seen her  handsome before. Although their Discourse was hel in the Presence of the Count Centurion and his Wife, it was notwithstanding intirely moving and passionate; and as the Business of the State did touc both their particular Interest, they also spoke of that. Peppa acknowledg'd to the Chevalier, that it was a trouble to her, to behold the Conduct of those that govern'd the Republick, who took no care to put a stop to the Complaints that the King of France had made against them, whereof she fear'd the Consequence for the Interest of her Family, and for the further Ob∣stacle that it might occasion to her own happiness. The Chavalier assur'd her, that whilst he was assur'd of her Love, the differences between the King and the Republick should never give him any Trouble, since that there was not any probability that so many great Men, which, as he had heard, did com∣pose the Senate of Genoa, could think to resist a Monarch who had compell'd
some of the greatest Powers of Eu∣pe to accept the Conditions of Peace hat he had offer'd them. Peppa, and enturione approv'd of those Reasons, nd the Chevalier added, that after all hese beginnings of disorder were over, e flatter'd himself with the hopes that His Majesty would give him leave to eturn to Genoa, and to demand Peppa publickly of her Relations. This lovely Person sigh'd at his Proposal, and as she knew that the Chevalier expos'd him∣self to all sorts of dangers, she conjur'd him to spare himself a little for her sake, and to think how that she should never be comforted for his Loss, and that therefore he ought to endeavour some∣thing in the Favour of a Person whose Life was wound up in his Destiny. So much goodness piercing the very Soul of the Chevalier, made him vow to her, that he was in dispair to think of par∣ting; but nevertheless his Honour, his Duty, and the attendance that he ow'd to the King his Master, oblig'd him to depart instantly for Toulon, there to receive the necessary Orders from Court. Peppa did not disapprove of his Reasons; she prayed him only that he would take all Opportunities to write to her, and
bid him remember that this would be the only Pleasure she should receive in his Absence. She could not utter these last words without melting into Tears, which so sensibly touch'd the Chevalier, that he was ready to dye with Grief at the feet of his Charming Mistress. The Count and his Wife took care to separate them before the Princess came, and were forc'd to deceive them both, for to prevent their Sorrow in taking leave of one another. They told the Chevalier that his Mistress was return'd to her Father's, and assur'd Peppa that her Lover went away, that he might not be the cause of her relapsing into the like passionate Tenderness. And indeed he departed with his Friend, and return'd with the greatest speed possible into France. Peppa remain'd so full of Grief for the departure of her Lover, that with∣out listning to the Reasons that her Cousin alledg'd, to oblige her to over∣come the disorder she was in, for fear lest the Princess Doria should surprize her in this Condition, she abandon'd he self to her Grief, and was in Tears at the very moment that the Princess came. The Countess at first was in
great confusion, both for her Cousin and her self; but she supplied by the eadiness of her Wit, the Indiscretion of Peppa, for it coming into her mind o hide a little Dog, that her Cousin ov'd very well, she went to receive he Princess in an Anti-Chamber, and old her that he came in a good time o comfort Peppa, who was in the ut∣most affliction, because she had lost her Dog. The Princess finding her Daugh∣ter in Tears, told her that her Age did not admit of so much grief for the loss of a Dog, and that it would not be difficult to procure another as hand∣some as that which occasion'd those Tears. The Countess assur'd her, that she would ingage for the finding him again, but Peppa appear'd not the less afflicted, and went away a little while after with the Princess Doria. Howe∣ver foreseeing that her Cousin might perhaps send her Dog the next day, she privately pray'd her before she went out, to keep him at least a Week, that the pretence of her Sor∣row might remain, lest otherwise the Truth might be suspected. The Princess Doria, who had sent a Man that she could trust into Germany,
for to inform her Nephew of the Coun Centurione's Marriage, and for to clear all the doubts which might have still re∣main'd in his Mind, receiv'd, about the same time, a very obliging Letter from the Marquess, which return'd thanks for her kindness, and express'd to her the great sorrow that afflicted him for having displeas'd Peppa; he intreated further his Aunt to speak in his Favour, and that he would expect an Answer at Venice, assuring her, that he would not go from thence till his Mistress had pardon'd him. The Princess, who cunningly manag'd this Affair, waited for a favourable opportunity to shew her Daughter-in-law her Nephew's Let∣ter. In the mean time Don Carlos Ba∣can, Envoy from Spain to the Republick of Genoa, went to the Prince Doria, as from the King his Master, to intimate to him, that this Monarch declar'd him∣self for the Interest of the Marquess of Villa Mediana; and that he could not by a more sensible mark, demonstrate his good Affection towards the Court of Spain, than by receiving this Gentle∣man for his Son-in-law; assuring him, that in favour of this Marriage, he would give him, when Opportunities
did occur, all the marks of Esteem that he could desire. The Prince Doria re∣ceiv'd, with a profound Respect, the Ho∣nour that the King of Spain did him, and assur'd Don Carlos Baçan, that he would immediately advise with his Fa∣mily about it; and that he would ever observe that Submission which was due to the Command of so great a Monarch. The Princess Doria was very much a∣larm'd at this Negotiation; notwith∣standing she manag'd her Husband's Mind with so much Address, and gave him such good Reasons, to let him see that the Marriage with the Marquess Spinola was a thousand times more fit, and more advantageous for Peppa, than with a Spaniard, of whom they had no knowledge, either of his Estate or Fa∣mily, that at last the Prince Doria re∣main'd satisfy'd, and promis'd his Wife never to consent that his Daughter should marry the Marquess of Villa Mediana. In the mean while, the Prin∣cess Doria was resolv'd not to defer a∣ny longer the speaking to Peppa in be∣half of her Nephew, and shew'd her the Letter she had receiv'd from him. Peppa, hiding part of her Resentment, answer'd her coldly, That her Honour
had been too sensibly touch'd to hear∣ken to a Man that had once no esteem'd her worthy of him. Th Princess judging it not convenient t press her any further, imagining that sh should find some means in length of tim to vanquish this nice Punctilio. As the Marquess of Villa Mediana ha writ to Spain, that Peppa would not b sorry to have him, and had the vanity to add several things to his advantage the Prince Doria near that time had  Letter from a Genoese that was hi Friend, who resided at Madrid. H gave him an account, that he had heard talk of the offer that was made him to marry his Daughter to the Marquess of Villa Mediana, and how he also knew that the King of Spain us'd his Interest in the case; that thereupon he could not forbear counselling him as a Friend, that if he aim'd at the Quiet and Satis∣faction of his Family, he ought not to oppose this Marriage, being inform'd from good Hands, that the Marquess had before hand possess'd himself of the good liking of his Daughter, and that therefore he ought, as a wise man, to consent handsomely to a thing that he could not easily hinder.
The Prince Doria receiv'd this Let∣ter with all the Regret and Despair of a Father, who has but one only Daughter, in whose Education he has taken great care, and who nevertheless disposes of her self without his share in the Approbation. Not knowing where to lay the blame, he complain'd of his Misfortune to his Wife, and re∣proach'd her, in shewing her this Let∣ter, with the Liberty that she had given to his Daughter. The Princess had no longer occasion of surprize at the An∣swer that Peppa made her, when she spoke to her of her Nephew. She advis'd her Husband to dissemble his Anger, and cunningly to endeavour to procure from Peppa a Confession of the Truth. Doria went directly into his Daughters Cham∣ber, and after he had exaggerated the Kindness that he had for her, the Care he had observ'd in her Education, and the Pains that he had taken, not only to conserve the Inheritance of his Fa∣thers, but even to augment it; he told her that notwithstanding such manifest Obligations, he was inform'd from sure hands, that she had suffer'd her self to be led away by the subtilty of a Stran∣ger. Peppa answering not a word to
this discourse, her Father continu'd to exhort her to conceal nothing from him and promis'd her, that if she did dea ingenuously, he would pass by all occa∣sions of complaint against her, and would let her see, that he was very in∣dulgent. Peppa, softned by these words and prepossess'd that her Father mean all this while the Chevalier, he being the sole person that she esteem'd wor∣thy of her Love, thought that now she would make good use of the favourable Disposition wherein she saw him, and casting her self at his Feet, her Eyes bath'd in Tears, she confess'd, that it was true, she did love. Her Father in∣terrupted her, without giving her the time to explain her self any further, and after having reprov'd her with the highest Injuries and Reproaches, he re∣turn'd into his Wife's Chamber, for fear that in his Anger, he might be mov'd to any violent action against his Daughter. He was so transported with his Passion, and at the same time so penetrated with grief, that he fell dan∣gerously ill. All means were us'd for his Recovery, which being apply'd in time, did in a little while regain him his former health. His Wife, who every
day saw him extreamly animated a∣gainst his Daughter, promis'd him, that f he would let her manage Peppa by a Contrivance to marry the Marquess Spi∣nola, that she would take such ex∣act measures, that none should know of it till 'twas done. Doria, not endu∣ring the thoughts that a Spaniard should force himself into his Alliance, and be∣come Master of all his Fortune, in spight of his endeavours to the contrary, de∣clar'd, that he would take no farther care what Son-in-law he had, provi∣ded that Villa Mediana was not the Man. Soon after the Prince Doria being per∣fectly recover'd, his Wife, with his pri∣vate consent, feign'd that she had made a Vow to our Lady of Loretto for the recovery of her Husband, and declar'd that she would go for to acquit her self of it. Peppa, who was very glad of this Occasion, to shew that she was no less forward than the Princess in the care of her Father's Health, declar'd, that it would be a great satisfaction to her to accompany her in this Journey; and they set out so secretly, that only the Countess Centurione was advertis'd of their departure.
The Princess Doria assur'd of her Husband's consent, and prepossess'd that Peppa had not any natural Aversion against the Marquess Spinola, altho she had still observ'd some trouble in her Carriage, resolv'd to finish cunningly the work that she had begun so many years ago, and having sent a Man in whom she could confide, to her Ne∣phew, who was then at Venice, she sent him word, that it was time to con∣clude an Affair that the two Families equally desir'd; that therefore, as Peppa was one of the richest Heiresses of Italy, and that new obstacles might probably rise to prevent his Marriage, she had determin'd, thereby to avoid all Incon∣veniencies, to bring Peppa with her to Loretto, to the end, that he might seize upon her at their return along the A∣driatick-shore, where they must of ne∣cessity pass. She added, that it being usual to see Pirate-ships send their Pin∣naces ashore, and take away by force whatsoever they meet with, she judg'd it fit that he should arm a little Frigat, and that he might not render himself odious to his Mistress by this Violence, if he appear'd in it, he should send a Pinnace a-shore with eight or ten of his
Men cloath'd like Turks, who might eset a little before day, a lone House, where she would lodge purposely; and hat these Men, after having carried hem away, and led them into their Pin∣ace, should take care to terrify them by all the appearances of a cruel Slave∣ry, and that the next morning betimes the Marquess should pursue the Pinnace with his little Frigat, and after a short engagement should take it, and deli∣ver them: That if he executed all this with Judgment, Peppa, that was of the Humour of the greatest part of young Ladies, who are always overjoy'd to have those that court them, do some∣thing for them that is extraordinary, would be sensible of the Bravery that he might shew in relieving her, and would think her self very happy to fall into his Hands, after having escap'd from those of the Turks; that thereupon he should conduct her to Venice, where she would take care to have a Priest ready to marry them, whilst the Impression of the great Service he had done in de∣livering her remain'd yet strong in her Fancy. The Marquess receiv'd this Project with all the Joy imaginable, and as
Time and the Advices which the Prin∣cess had frequently given him, serv'd but to make him the more amorous, he prepar'd all things on his side to put in execution. The Princess always lodg'd at her return in small stragling Inns, to bring her Project about. 'Twas in one of these Houses, between Rimini and An∣cona, that the counterfeit Turks, sent by the Marquess Spinola, put themselves in a posture to seize upon the Princess and Peppa, and to carry them off. They soon render'd themselves Masters of the great Gate of the Inn, and having ter∣rify'd the Servants by some violent Actions at their first entrance, they run up into the Princesses Chamber, who had her Daughter in the same Room with her, and rudely forc'd them to dress themselves with speed. The Princess, who saw Peppa very much alarm'd, began to counterfeit a Great∣ness of Mind, and exhorted her to sub∣mit to her Destiny without murmuring, assuring her, (by a kind of a Prophetick Spirit) that Heaven would not aban∣don her. The Chevalier of—who was just upon going to take a great Voyage at Sea, was desirous to take leave of
his Mistress before he imbark'd. He went Post to Genoa, accompany'd with one of his Friends; having understood, when they arriv'd, that Peppa was gone to Loretto, he continu'd on his Jour∣ney, with design to meet his Mistress, since his time would not permit him to stay for her at Genoa. He happen'd to arrive very late at the Inn where Peppa lodg'd that same night that the Counterfeit Turks were executing the design of carrying her away. As this Project could not be put in execution without some noise, the Chevalier, and he that accompanied him, being awak'd out of their Sleep, started up, and quickly dressing themselves, follow'd them so close, that they came up with the Men just as they were preparing to carry off the Ladies on board of their Pinnace. They charg'd them with that Courage, that these suppos'd Pirates, who did not expect to find so fierce a Preventi∣on, left the Princess and her Women, and retir'd in disorder. However, notwithstanding the Confusion they were in, three of the strongest, who probably knew their Masters Secret, seiz'd Peppa, and fled in all haste towards their Pinnace. The Chevalier having o∣verheard
her Voice, pursu'd them so hard, and with so much Courage, that he presently disabled two of them, and went to run his Sword through the o∣ther, when that this wretch fell down, and begg'd him to spare his Life, assu∣ring him, that he was no Turk, but that he and his Companions were em∣ploy'd by the Marquess Spinola, who had agreed with the Princess Doria to steal away this fair person that he had now deliver'd. Peppa was so troubled, both with her Adventure, and with what she heard this fellow relate, that she scarce yet knew to whom she was oblig'd for her Liberty. She just be∣gan to thank her Deliverer in terms full of Esteem and Acknowledgment, when she discerned by the dawning of the ay, that she spoke to the Cheva∣lier of—. Never in so small a time was any one remov'd from a great Terrour into a perfect Joy. A mo∣ment before she thought her self a Slave, and whilst her Mind was still possess'd with frightful Ideas, she found her self in the Arms of a Lover belov'd. So a∣greeable a change is far more easie to imagin than to express. The Cheva∣lier related to Peppa, that he came to
Genoa with a design to see her, and that not having time to expect her re∣turn from Loretto, he had determin'd to meet her on the Road; that he arriv'd last night late in this Inn, where his good Fortune had conducted him so opportunely; thereupon he offer'd to carry her into France, to secure her from the Violence of her Relations. Peppa imagining at first, that the Che∣valier spoke this only to prepare he for a design of forcing her out of the Hands of her Father and Mother, let him understand, that her Father had some knowledge of his Passion, and told him, that she did not despair of gaining at last his Consent for their mu∣tual happiness; therefore she conjur'd him not to destroy the Merit of the Service that he had now done her. The Chevalier, who of all Lovers was the most respectful, threw himself at her Feet, and complain'd of the mean Opinion she had of him, assuring hr, that he would rather die a thousand times, than to have the least thought of displeasing her. They continu'd, saying a thousand kind and passionate things to one another, and gave new Assurances, that their Love should last
with their Lives. The Chevalier, who would not be known by the Princess; and who after he had broke her Mea∣sures, would not have been very well receiv'd by her, desir'd his Mistress to permit him not to appear, and that af∣ter having conducted her safe to the House where she had lodg'd, he might remain undiscover'd, and following her at some distance, might be her Guard till she came to Genoa. Peppa acquiesc'd in his Sentiments, and in parting, when she perceiv'd she was just arriv'd at the Inn, she pray'd him to remember, that working her safety, was employing himself for that person in the World who desir'd most to compleat his hap∣piness. The Chevalier had no sooner left his Mistress, but he met immedi∣tely the Gentleman who had seconded him in attacking the Counterfeit Turks. This Gentleman, who had been trou∣bled all this while for his absence, told him, that he had been careful to attend the Princess Doria, and to prevent any ill usuage that might have been offer'd her during this Confusion, but she shew'd so little Acknowledgment, that far from thanking him, her discourse ap∣pear'd full of Discontent, letting him
know that she was not at all oblig'd to him for his having expos'd his Life for her. This was no matter of sur∣prise to the Chevalier, who presently imparted to his Friend what he had discover'd concerning the private In∣telligence that was between the Prin∣cess and the Ravisners; and the Pro∣mise that he had made to this lovely Creature, to be always near, during the rest of the way to Genoa, that he might be able to assist her, if there should be made any further Attempt. In the mean while the Princess Doria, whom the Chevalier's Friend carried back to the Inn, and who feign'd in the presence of her Women to be much troubled, was comforted in her mind for the Misfortune which had happen'd to her Nephew's Men, being preposses∣sed, as several Persons had assur'd her, that they had carried Peppa off. She began already to think of going imme∣diately to Venice, to authorise the Mar∣riage of her Daughter-in-Law, by her Presence, and by the Consent of her Father, which she had under his Hand, when that Peppa enter'd the Room. At first she appear'd in a very great asto∣nishment; but as Ladies, and particu∣larly
those in Italy, without any Diffi∣culty at all can dissemble their real Sentims, the Princess threw her self about her Daughters Neck, and out∣wardly shew'd an extream Joy to see her escap'd from so great a danger. Peppa, who conceal'd also what she had heard, and who was still sensibly touch'd with what her Lover had just related, about his being forc'd to return imme∣diately into France, embrac'd her Mo∣ther-in-Law, the Tears flowing from her Eyes. They presently parted from hence, follow'd at some distance by the Chevalier and his Friend. While they were on their Journey to Genoa, the Marquess of Villa Mediana made use of all his industry to gain the Prince Do∣ria over to his side. He engag'd his greatest Friend to speak to him in be∣half of his Love, and made him see so many advantages for his Family, and chiefly for his own Person; that Do∣ria was vex'd that he had given his con∣sent to his Wife, to marry his Daugh∣ter to the Marquess Spinola; but when that he understood by a Letter from the Princess, the unfortunate success of this Project, he thought that Heav'n would not permit this marriage, since it rais'd
so many Difficulties, and now no lon∣ger scrupl'd to give Peppa to the Mar∣quess of Villa Mediana, especially when he reflected upon the agreeable surprize this would be to his Daughter, by de∣claring to her such News, as he did really believe would be pleasing. As soon as the Princess and Peppa were return'd to Genoa, the Chevalier being oblig'd to be at Toulon before the de∣parture of the Fleet, quitted this belo∣ved Place, without having so much time as to contrive an Enterview with his fair Mistress. In the mean while the Marquess of Villa Mediana, who was satisfied of the good Intentions that the Prince Doria had for him, appear'd with a most magnificent Livery, and frequented all the Streets, and all Pla∣ces where he believ'd he should see Peppa. As she was thus importun'd with his Services, she took hold of all Op∣portunities to treat him ill, and was so malicious as to place her self in the Church so, that the Spaniard could ne∣ver see her Face. The Princess Doria being inform'd by her Husband, of the Design that he had to marry Peppa to this Gentleman, observ'd several times, that her Daughter-in-Law was always
careful to avoid him, and that she ap∣pear'd to have an extream Aversion a∣gainst him. She had much ado to com∣fort her self for not having succeeded in concluding the Marriage of her Ne∣phew, and this Design running in her Head, the least matter rais'd her hopes. Therefore she gave an Account to her Husband, that Peppa seem'd very far from having any Inclinations for the Marquess of Villa Mediana. The Prince Doria, prepossess'd (as he thought) with the contrary by the confession of his Daughter, judg'd, as all Fathers are easily induc'd to flatter themselves, that Peppa us'd this constraint because she would not displease him. This sup∣pos'd constraint so work'd upon him, that going thereupon to Peppa's Cham∣ber, he declar'd to her, that forget∣ting his own peculiar Interest, and not weighing what would be most advan∣tageous for his Family, he had con∣sider'd only of making her happy, and had determin'd in favour of the goo will that she had for the Marquess  Villa Mediana, to marry her to this Spaniard. Peppa remain'd so amaz'd at a Discourse she so little expected, that it was impossible for her to answer one
Word. A Moment after she fell in a woon upon her Bed. The Prince Do∣ia, surpriz'd and troubl'd at the swoon∣g of his Daughter, call'd for help; eppa's Women ran in to her Assistance, nd the Princess came soon after. When e saw that she was recover'd, she en∣eavour'd to console her by all the ays of flattering and caressing, and at ength demanded of her from whence his Fainting did proceed. Peppa own'd hat she never had a strong Aversion, ut against one only person, and that evertheless she was so unhappy, that er Father had made choice of this ery same Person to make his Son-in-Law. The Princess, after having assur'd her that the Prince Doria would not use such Violence to her Affections, went towards her Husband, and blam'd him very much for having driven his Daughter into Despair, since that he might have remember'd, how she had already perceiv'd that Peppa had no clinations for Villa Mediana. Doria, o comprehended nothing of all this hat he heard, believ'd that his Wife, who as she was ingenious and contriving, had turn'd the Mind of his Daughter, and had ingag'd her to prefer the Mar∣quess
Spinola before the Spaniard, which confirm'd him in the Opinion that he had already of the Inconstancy of the greatest part of Women; but he was nevertheless in a great Perplexity and Doubt what measures to take. In the mean time, as the Senate did not proceed to any Resolution to sa∣tisfie the King of France, upon those occasions of Complaint that he had caus'd to be declar'd to the Repub∣lick, the French Envoy retir'd from Genoa; which rais'd cruel Apprehensi∣ons in the Minds of the greatest part of the Senators, especially since they came to know that there was fitting out at Toulon a great Fleet, and that all the Ships were loaded with a prodi∣gious quantity of Bombs, Granadoes, and Mortar-pieces. The Commonalty maintain'd that all these great Prepa∣rations were made against the Algereens, whom the French design'd to extermi∣nate. The greatest part of the Ge∣noeses believ'd all this to be very pro∣bable; besides they were so possessed, that it was a difficult matter for any State to injure them, that they would never believe that these forces were preparing against Genoa; but the wiser
sort who know that Kings do seldom et Affronts go unpunish'd, liv'd in great fears, and were of Opinion that hey ought to accommodate the matter with that King upon any Terms. The publick Affairs employ'd every Body o hard, and private persons were so ssiduous at Council, and at the diffe∣ent Assemblies that were thereupon summon'd, that none had leisure to think of their domestick Affairs. The Prince Doria, who was without contra∣diction one of the most considerable of the City, was call'd every moment to the Consultation of the Senate, and the little Time that he had to himself, ob∣lig'd him to defer his private Affairs. He determin'd therefore, by the Coun∣sel of his Wife, not to fix upon any Resolution about the Marriage of his Daughter, while this Business which con∣cern'd the publick was not fully de∣cided. While the Affairs of Genoa were in this Condition, Peppa liv'd in continu∣al fears, encompass'd with her Ene∣mies, under the Authority of a Father, who would sacrifice her to a Spaniard, and under a Mother-in-Law, who me∣ditated new Projects to betray her to
the Marquess Spinola. Every thing wa suspected by her, and at last the pub∣lick Calamity became her private con∣solation; for the formidable Fleet tha the French fitted out, and the just oc∣casions of Complaint that the King had against the Genoeses, though a matter of disquiet to all, was the only Sub∣ject of her joy, and the only thing that nourish'd her Hopes, because that if the French King became Master of Ge∣noa, she should then have the Pleasure, by loving the Chevalier of—to be assur'd before-hand of a Powerful Pro∣tector for her Family. As she could not find one Person but what spoke a∣gainst the French, she avoided all Con∣versation: Her Cousin to whom she dis∣clos'd her most secret thoughts, was the only Person that she thought endu∣ed with Reason, since she condemn'd not the French. Much about that time they heard that the Divan of Algiers, more cunning then the Senate of Genoa, had made his Peace with the King, without stay∣ing for new Marks of his Anger, and that he had already sent away Embas∣sadours, to ask this Monarch Pardon for what was past. This news put the
Genoeses quite into Despair, no longer doubting but that the Storm which was gather'd about Toulon, would fall upon their City. The Senate assem∣bled at all Hours in the Day; at eve∣ry turn they were making new Propo∣sitions, but never came to any Con∣clusion. The Wisest were of Opini∣on that it was best to send away Post an Embassador to make their Submissi∣on to the King; others judg'd that it was too late. The Envoy of Spain hereupon arriv'd, promis'd them that they should not want a Fleet bravely mann'd, nor a Warlike Army: And he would send for all the Gold of Peru for their Service. Although their Counsels were very different, they receiv'd however a Spanish Re∣giment into the City, which the Go∣vernour of Millan sent thither. They also recall'd all the Bandits, and as much as the Confusion (wherein they were) would permit them, they distri∣buted through all Parts such Or∣ders as were necessary to put them in a Condition of making a vigorous Re∣sistance. In the mean time the most considerable Persons of the City, sent their Wives and Children to Millan,
and to the other neighbouring Villa∣ges. The Prince Doria, after having most tenderly embrac'd his Wife and his Daughter, would also have them take their Leave of Genoa, and gave them an Equipage more numerous than magnificent. He advis'd the Princess his Wife to retire either to Millan, or to Turin, which she thought most convenient; and above all things recommended his Daugh∣ter to her Care. The Princess Do∣ria, who had still a design for her Nephew, and who fear'd the Autho∣rity of the Marquess of Villa Me∣diana, would not therefore go to Millan, lest she should deliver her self up into the Hands of the Spa∣niards. She retir'd to Turin, where she had some Relations, believing as she had Reason, that she should there have her Liberty more than at Millan. Soon after her Arrival, she writ to the Marquess Spi∣nola, who was still at Venice, send∣ing him Word that she impatiently expected him. The Court of Savoy, which is with∣out contradiction one of the most po∣lite in all Europe, has been an inviola∣ble
Sanctuary for the Illustrious Unfor∣tunate. It would be even a difficult matter to find a Stranger that was ever discontented with his Reception at Tu∣rin. The Officers of the Portuguese Fleet can testify, whether Victor Ama∣deus the Second, who now Reigns in-Savoy and Pmont, has degenerated from the Mgnicency of his Ancestors; and of lae, the Officers of the King of France's Houshold, retir'd from Chbay, loaden with Presents, and so extreamly satisfy'd with their acting after an obliging manner, which doubl'd their value, that at their return, there was not one but what spoke the Elogies of the Duke of Savoy. This Prince had just espous'd Madamoiselle, the Off∣spring of many Kings, and to speak in a word, Daughter to Monsieur of France. Upon the Princess Doria's ar∣riving at Turin, the Duke, who knew her Merit and Quality, receiv'd her with all the marks of Esteem that she could wish or expect, and offer'd her very obligingly, all that was in his Pow∣er. Peppa, who did not want the Assi∣stance of her Birth, to gain the Re∣spects of all wheresoever she appear'd, was regarded by all the Nobility with
Admiration. The Ladies perhap could not see her without some Jealousie, whereof there was no great cause of wonder. Nevertheless she was not at any of the Diversions that the Duke of Savoy had prepar'd at the arrival of the Dutchess, because the Princess Doria pretended to a Preheminence which could not be granted her, without In∣justice to several Ladies of extraordi∣nary Quality, who were at the Court of Savoy. The Nobility, who would have been very glad to have seen Peppa at all the Entertainments, propos'd se∣veral Expedients, to satisfy the Princess Doria; but as it is much more easie to regulate the Interests of Princes, than the Ranks of Ladies, they found it im∣possible to bring it to a Conclusion. The disorder of the Affairs at Genoa serv'd well enough for a Pretence to ex∣cuse her absence from the Diversions of the Court; for there came news, that the French Fleet was before Genoa, that several Voluntiers had landed, and that after having made themselves Masters of the Fort of St. Peter di Arena, they had burnt those fine Country-Houses which were the Delight of the Genoeses; that the Frigats warping close to the City,
had cast into it such a prodigious quan∣tity of Bombs and Granado's, that it appear'd rather a Mount-Etna cover'd with Flames, than that Genoa which was nam'd Genoa la superba; and in fine, that the Consternation was so great, that several Families retir'd to the Mountains, and abandon'd both their Goods and their Houses; esteeming themselves happy if they could secure their persons safe, as well from the Fire, as from the Banditti, who began to pil∣lage the City. There was added to all these Circumstances, that the French had lost several Voluntiers at their landing before the Fort of St. Peter di Arena, and that also a Chevalier of a very great worth, who was one of the most consi∣derable Officers of the Fleet had been kill'd upon the place; and that he was generally lamented by all the Army. All this news was a sensible affliction to the Princess Doria; but when that Pep∣pa was inform'd of the loss that the French had receiv'd, and of the death of a Chevalier, who was a person very deserving; her Love, which at this Re∣port was allarm'd, made her tremble for the Life of her Lover, and all the Circumstances that she had heard of the Merit of this Chevalier, and of the
sorrow that every body shew'd for his loss, encreas'd her Terrour. She pri∣vately retir'd, and before-hand gave her self wholly up to all the Emotions of Grief, which a person that loves ten∣derly can be capable of at such a time. She past over two whole days without mitigating in the least her trouble: Her Grief oppress'd her in a very high de∣gree, and altho she had still a small spark of hopes left her, believing that there must be several Officers of Merit in so great a Fleet as this of the King's, she durst not however enquire of the Parti∣culars of the News, fancying that what∣soever she should hear spoke of the Che∣valier that was dead could be apply'd to none but her Lover. The Princess Doria, who would not be comforted for the Misfortunes wherewith her Country was oppress'd, had not ob∣serv'd the great Disturbance that Peppa lay under. But seeing that she came not out to receive the Ladies that visited them, she sent to her to come into her Chamber for to hear the reading of a long News-Letter in the presence of several persons, giving an account of all that had pass'd at Genoa. Although Peppa had resolv'd to prefer the cruellest troubles wherein she was, before the clearing
her Doubts, which might prove either very Tragical, or else very pleasing, yet she could not resist her timerous and pressing Curiosity to be inform'd of the destiny of her Lover. She enter'd her Mother-in-laws Chamber, where she found several Ladies who impatiently expected her, but rather for to know the particulars of the Affairs of Genoa. The Princess Doria read her Letter, which confirm'd all that she had heard before at Turin. They sent her word, after the several Circumstances of the French landing, that they had lost up∣on the spot, several Officers, and that above all, they were extreamly afflicted for the loss of the Chevalier de Lhery, who was a Gentleman much esteem'd, and who upon all occasions had given proof of his Valour and Conduct. This name which sounded like that of the Chevalier of—, whether or no it was ill spelt in the Letter, or that the Princess pronounc'd it not well in Italian, cast Peppa into such an excess of Grief, that it depriv'd her of her Senses. She understood it to be the Chevalier of—, and at the same moment she fainted away upon a Couch where she sat. The Ladies ran to her assistance, but had no suspicion that the loss of the
French was the cause of her fainting, being perswaded that Peppa, touch'd with the Relation of so many Misfortunes, whereof the French Fleet had been the occasion at Genoa, was thereupon seiz'd with this weakness. They had much ado to recover her, and were forc'd at last to call her Women to her, who having quickly undress'd her, put her to Bed. She was pierc'd to the Heart with this cruel News, and fell into so violent a disorder, that she spent several days with a careless Indifference for every thing, and almost without any visible Sense; and if there was sometimes a small interval from her excess of Grief, 'twas only to make her the more tormentingly sensible of her loss. She reprov'd her self, for her (as she thought) Indifference, for having still had the Courage to live, since she could no longer doubt the death of her Lover; she continu'd many days in these cruel ago∣nies, but at last, the force of her Youth surmounted so far that of her Grief, as to permit her, when she had no Company in her Chamber, to pass some melancholy moments in breathing forth this Song.
COme, come gentle Death,  and close these Eyes; come stop the Current of my Grief; on you my Rest relies, be quick with your Relief: For by the chance of War my Damon's laid,
mangl'd, and  bloody in his Grave: Oh God! Oh God of Battel! No distinction made between the Coward, and the Brave! Zelinda weep, Zelinda weep, until thy Tears
drown both  thy self, and all thy Cares; but hasten sooner, (oh ye Gods!) my Doom, that I may fly, that I may fly to Damon in his Tomb, to Da╌mon in his Tomb.
The Princess Doria, who daily ex∣pected her Nephew, whom she knew was gone from Venice, left nothing untried to manage the Inclinations of Peppa, and although she could not com∣prehend the Reason of the Despair wherewith she saw her oppress'd, she notwithstanding acted with all ima∣ginable Complaisance. The Marquess Spinola, being arriv'd at Turin about this Time, went immediately to find his Aunt, who receiv'd him with inexpres∣sible Joy; but she durst not present him to her Daughter-in-Law, in the Dis∣order wherein she then was. However the next day after his Arrival, she would carry him to see Peppa, but be∣thinking her self of the Anguish that afflicted her, she desir'd the Marquess to stay in the Anti-Chamber, whilst she would go and prepare her to receive him obligingly. She thereupon went into Peppa's Chamber, and after having order'd the Women to withdraw that serv'd her, she told her that the Mar∣quess Spinola was just arriv'd, that he had pass'd through Genoa, and that he could give a more particular account of every Accident that had happen'd there. Peppa, who presently perceiv'd that the Princess aim'd at some new Design in
favour of her Nephew, gave her not time to proceed, but interrupting her with Tears in her Eyes, told her that she would now no longer make a Secret of her Inclinations which she had hid till then, since also she had now nothing more to trust to, being resolv'd to de∣prive her self of Worldly Converse, which was become insupportable to her. She then declar'd that she had all along had some Inclination for the Chevalier of—since they saw one another at the Ball, that was given at the Palace of the Marquess Justiniani; that Sympathy had work'd the same Effect upon the mind of the Chevalier who retir'd into France, for to avoid the Consequence of this Inclination, which forc'd him to love in spite of all his Resolution; that they had run o∣ver two years without either seeing or knowing one another till the time that the Marquess Spinola being by chance return'd from Rome with the Chevalier of—had conducted him to their House, and so had unknowingly given them the Opportunity to revive their first Senti∣ments, to declare a-new their Affecti∣ons, and to love with a Passion most violent and lasting; that in the end, their Love had taught them an Expe∣dient
both to see, and to Write to one another, as well as to exchange on both sides an Assurance to continue firm in their Sentiments. 'Twas he, added Peppa, that arriv'd so opportunely in the way to Loretto, as to deliver me from the Turks, who were not what they appear'd, for one of them confess'd to us, that they were employ'd by your Nephew, who had pri∣vately agreed with you, to carry me off by force. I never yet spoke to you of it, be∣cause being assur'd of the Constancy of my Lover, all other things gave me not the least trouble. I still flatter'd my self with the Hopes that the Senate would make their Peace with the King of France, and that that might facilitate our Marriage; but all these flattering hopes are vanish'd, and I now propose to my self no other Consolati∣on but that of lamenting the Loss of my Lover, all the rest of my Life. She pour'd forth a Flood of Tears, in uttering these last words. Nevertheless she continu'd her Discourse, and told the Princess that she was resolv'd to go throw her self at the feet of the Dutchess, to in∣treat her Protection, and to beg that she might be receiv'd into the Society of the Nuns of the Annunciation. How∣ever, if after the Confession that she had made, there remain'd yet in her Breast
some Sentiments of Compassion for her, she might if she pleas'd easily save her the Confusion that would seize her when she went to inform so great a Princess of her weakness, and prevent her be∣coming the talk of all the Court; where∣fore she expected this promise from her that she might be conducted to this Con∣vent wherein she desir'd to enter without staying for her Father's Orders. The Princess melted into Tears at her Re∣lation, and had scarce the Force either to blame her weakness, or to make her sensible that she shar'd in her Grief. She at last assur'd her, that she would con∣tribute to her satisfaction as far as pos∣sible she could, and went out to enter∣tain the Marquess Spinola, who had o∣verheard all their Conversation, and who was so sensibly afflicted with Grief at the Recital Peppa had made, that 'twas not difficult to be discern'd when the Princess came to him. He was in∣finitely concern'd to have bin thus long a Pretext to his Aunt for opposing a Passion both so real and so tender. He was then of the mind that if he had but known how conformable were the Sentiments of Peppa and the Chevalier, he would have taken no small delight in serving them and favouring their de∣sign. The Princess was extreamly sur∣pris'd
to find her Nephew in this con∣dition, but she was much more so, when he told her that he heard all that Peppa had said to her, and that he was sen∣sibly griev'd, as well for the Sorrow she endur'd, as for the Death of the Chevalier. He mention'd him with the greatest marks of Esteem, and com∣plained to his Aunt of the trouble that she had given the two Lovers. The Prin∣cess assur'd him that she never had any Knowledge of their Passion, and told him urther, that in the condition wherein Affairs were then, she would have ad∣vis'd her Husband not to refuse the Che∣valier his Daughter, since that he lov'd her so entirely, because it might very pro∣bably come to pass that if the Senate did not find some Means to appease the King, this Monarch would reduce the whole State of Genoa under his Subjection. In the mean time the Chevalier of—being inform'd that his Mistress was at Turin, immediately took post thither: As soon as he was landed, he happen'd by chance to stop at the same house where the Marquess Spinola lodg'd. Our Marquess presently knew him, and was so surpris'd to see a man whom he was inform'd was dead, that he look'd at him several times without saluting him, imagining that he was mistaken by the
Resemblance of some Features. The Che∣valier, who judg'd by the surprize of the Marquess that he had knowledge of his Passion, did not forbear coming up to him, and saluting him very civilly. He then told him, that he was perswaded that the same Affair was the cause of both their Journeys to Turin. The Marquess lling himself out of the Surprise he was in, return'd the Complement to the Chevalier, and declar'd to him that (wa∣ving whether or no they came both upon the same Errand,) he knew, that for his part, he esteem'd no Business more im∣portant, then the care he always took to contribute to his happiness. He gave him an Account of the Report that was spread abroad of his Death, by what means he had heard the particulars of his Love towards his own Mistress, of the despair Peppa was in, and of the extraordinary Resolution that she had ta∣ken, to leave the World, and to shut her self up for ever in a Convent. The Cheva∣lier hearken'd with infinite satisfaction to Peppa's Resolution, which sufficient∣ciently justified the Strength of her Pas∣sion; but having heard that she was sick, and that no body was permitted to enter into her Chamber, he believ'd it a very difficult thing for him to see her, especi∣ally
having the Princess Doria against him, who had in Prospect what was whol∣ly opposite to his Love. The Marquess left him still in his Error, and without letting him know that the Princess would be more favourable to him than he could imagine, he only promis'd him that he would find out some means to introduce him secretly to Peppa. This Promise put the Chevalier into a great Extasie. He embrac'd the Marquess, who left him to go speak to the Princess. She appear'd to him much concern'd that Peppa still persisted in her first Resolution, and was continually pressing her to be carried to the Nunnery of the Annunciation. The Marquess told her that he was just come from a Gentleman whom he had known at Rome, and whose fame was very great for his Ability in curing any Distemper of the Mind, and that if she pleas'd, he would bring him that he might give his Opinion of the despair and trouble which Peppa labour'd under; and he would as∣sure her before hand, that this Gentle∣man would diminish much of her trouble assoon as ever he had but spoke to her. The Princess who was still far from su∣specting the Mistery that the Marquess hid from her, conjur'd him to bring this Gentleman the very same day. She ad∣ded
so many things concerning the Joy she should receive, if she could but give Peppa as great an occasion now to com∣mend her, as formerly she had reason to be displeas'd, that the Marquess Spi∣nola thought he might no longer dissem∣ble the happy Rencounter that he had made. He was resolv'd however to know, before he told her that the Chevalier was living, if she would really favour his Passion, as she declar'd how much she wish'd to have been made sensible of it before. He turn'd the Discourse to the Affairs of Genoa; and after he had ex∣agerated the Importance thereof, he told her that he had heard from very good hands, that a general Peace was agreed on, none having had so much care for the Interest of the Republick, as to see that Genoa should be included, the French King having reserv'd to himself what punish∣ment he had design'd them, that this caus'd in him a great deal of Fear for his Countrey, and she might hereby see that the Marriage of Peppa with the Chevalier of—would have been very advanta∣geous to her Family. The Princess who admitted all these Reasons of her Ne∣phew to be very substantial, assur'd him that she should not have oppos'd it, if the Correspondence that the Chevalier
had with Peppa, had but been known to her. Since that you are in this mind, re∣plied the Marquess, it depends now upon you to oblige the Republick with a Protector, who has no small Power in the French Court, and engage Peppa to you by an everlasting Acknowledgement, and to do an Action which will Crown you with Glory. The Chevalier of—is not dead; and to conceal nothing from you, 'tis he that I intend to bring to Peppa, under the name of the Gentleman of Rome, who is Master of such great Secrets in Physick. The Interest of our Republick, as well as the Esteem that I have for him, per∣swades me to propose to him that he should marry Peppa privately; and methinks by all the Reasons which I have urg'd, you must needs receive a great satisfaction in being favourable to the Passion of two Persons who have lov'd so long and so tenderly. Altho' the Princess Doria was convinc'd with these Reasons of her Nephew, she was notwithstanding in a great Perplexity. She fear'd to take upon her an Affair so nice; but the Marquess still alledg'd so many Reasons, and so earnestly beg'd her to grant him the Favour which he ask'd, that she promis'd at last to con∣sent to the Union of these two Lovers. She would however let Peppa take the Pleasure of the surprise, and told the
Marquess that without letting her re∣eive the least notice of the Truth, she would propose to her only to see a Man who would engage for her Recovery. The Marquess return'd to find out the Chevalier, who upon the hopes of the As∣sistance promis'd, did now suffer a most tormenting Impatience for the sight of him. He assur'd him, that he should quickly see Peppa; and the Thanks that he receiv'd for it, convinc'd him so much of the true Passion he had for her, that he believ'd he might now be plain with him. He therefore councell'd him, since that he was so much in Love, to think of con∣triving a secret Marriage, and not to ex∣pose any longer a Passion so true, so re∣ciprocal, and so tender, to the uncertain Events of Fortune, which might still pro∣duce new Obstacles. He promis'd him further, that he would make all the In∣terest he could with the Princess Doria, in his Favour. The Chevalier, who durst not have extended his Hopes so far, was charm'd with this Promise; and embra∣cing the Marquess, told him, That this was giving him more than a Life, to ob∣tain of the Princess, that she would let him marry Peppa. They continu'd a long Conversation together, and the Cheva∣lier shew'd so fervent a Passion, that the
Marquess had much a-do to forbear dis∣closing what Sentiments the Princess had for him. Judge to what great excess was his Joy, when that the Marquess having gone out the next morning, return'd a little while after, he told him, That he had discours'd with his Aunt, and that having let her know that he was still not only alive, but that it was his highest Am∣bition to make Peppa sensible of his Love, by any Obligation whatsoever that might be propos'd to him, he had found her dispos'd to agree to all that he could ex∣pect. His Happiness appear'd so little credible, that he was long in doubt, whe∣ther or no his Sense of Hearing was as good as it us'd to be. He made the Mar∣quess repeat over again several times the Assurance he had given him of the Con∣sent he had obtain'd of the Princess. The Service that he had done for him, exci∣ting his Acknowledgments, made him that he did not know how to leave off re∣turning Thanks, which he express'd with a Zeal that sufficiently testify'd the strength of his Passion. It was indeed too violent, to let him defer any longer the seeing of the Princess Doria. He conjur'd the Marquess to carry him to her, and he had all the reason in the World to be sa∣tisfy'd with his Reception. She assur'd
him very obligingly, That she would not have perswaded her Daughter-in-law to marry her Nephew, but that she was ig∣norant that she was pre-engag'd; and that when she had heard of the secret In∣telligence that had past between them, she lamented his death, which put it out of her Power to make amends for the Disquiets whereof she had been the cause. She added, smiling, That she much fear'd that Peppa was not in a Humour to re∣ceive his Visit; because she had menti∣on'd him as a Man admirable in curing such Distempers that all other Physicians had not the least Knowledge of; to which all the Answer she receiv'd, was, That far from admitting of a Cure, she should die with Grief, if she did believe her self capable of receiving any Com∣fort. I believe, continu'd the Princess, speaking to the Chevalier, that she re∣mains still in the same Resolution of not see∣ing you. I'll once more try if I cann't suc∣ceed this time, then you shall use the Power you have over her. In speaking these words she conducted the Chevalier to her Daughter's Apartment; and leaving him in the Anti-chamber with the Mar∣quess, she went in to Peppa, who had kept her Bed two days. She in vain endea∣vour'd to make her consent to the Visit
they came to make her. Peppa remain'd all along obstinate in refusing. It is not just, said the Princess to her, to have that Complaisance for you, as to let you die without help. At these words she order'd one of her Women, who waited, to in∣troduce the Gentleman that was in the Anti-chamber, and who had boasted to have a sure Remedy for her Distemper. Peppa, whom her Sorrow made always wish to be alone, and who could not comprehend, that there could be any Re∣medy for a troubled Mind, where the Body suffer'd not, complain'd of the Vio∣lence that she impos'd upon her; and perceiving a Gentleman enter her Cham∣ber, she turn'd to the other side, with∣out so much as looking on him, being re∣solv'd to make no Answer to any of the Questions that he might ask her about her Illness. The Princess convinc'd more and more of her real Grief, pleas'd her self with the thoughts of the sudden change that she would find in her condition; and stepping towards the Chevalier, I'll leave you all alone with the sick person, said she to him, The restless condition wherein her Disease has cast her, having made her averse to all manner of Phy∣sick, I perceive she designs not to hearken to you; but I hope, that since you are master of
such an infallible Secret, as I have heard reported, you have also Skill enough to per∣swade her to make use of it. She went out in saying that, to her Nephew, who at∣tended in the Anti-chamber, till 'twas time for him to come in. In the mean while the Chevalier approach'd to the Bed, where his Mistress lay, and for to oblige her to turn towards him; What, said he to her, cann't all my earnest desires of offering you my Service, merit so much as one look? Have you such great reason to hate your life, that nothing in the World can oblige you to preserve it? These words letting her hear a Voice like that of her Lover, cast her into a Disorder which is impossible to describe, she thrust forth a sigh at the remembrance of his loss; and not daring to believe that the news of the Chevalier's death was false, she remain'd still in the same condition, without looking towards him that spoke to her. In the name of Good∣ness, continu'd the Chevalier, disdain not my Care. What fatal Resolution soever you have taken, perhaps you may change it, if you will but admit of my Assistance. He pronounc'd these words with an Accent so tender, that Peppa trembling, and in disorder, turn'd at last towards him, and raising her Eyes up to his Face, she knew
again all those Features, of which her Heart was but too full. You live then, said she to him, with a feeble and unas∣sur'd Voice, may I believe my Eyes, and am I not in a Dream? I do live, answer'd the Chevalier, and while you see that all my Endeavours are to be with you, you would be unjust, if you did not believe, that I live only for you. We must no longer believe it possible to die with Joy, since Peppa could suffer the Emotions which a sight so dear, and so agreeable caus'd in her. The Cheva∣lier transported with Love, told her in the most obliging and softest terms, That he was not in a condition to de∣monstrate openly the greatness of his Passion, but he would sacrifice to her his All, and never part from her more. The Liberty that now was permitted them to speak without Constraint, gave them the opportunity of declaring what they had suffer'd for one another, they made a thousand Protestations of an everlast∣ing Constancy; and their Conversation had not been so soon finish'd upon a Sub∣ject so inexhaustible, if the Princess, who was impatient to participate in their Sa∣tisfaction, had not entred with her Ne∣phew. Peppa at that moment began to re∣flect upon what her Grief had often
made her speak in her hearing; the Re∣membrance hereof put her into a Con∣fusion that would scarce let her look up. The Princess Doria dissipated this trouble, in declaring to her that she might fol∣low the Dictates of her Heart, and that far from opposing the happy success of a Passion that she saw so well esta∣blished, she brought her Nephew to her, who renouncing in favour of the Chevalier all the Pretensions that he had made formerly, came now to assure her that he aspir'd but to this only Advantage of being receiv'd as a Friend to them both. The Marquess Spinola con∣firm'd this Assurance by all that the most real and sincere Friendship can inspire in a generous Heart; and Peppa full of ac∣knowledgement for so great an Instance, answer'd him with all the esteem that he could expect. The Chevalier who was owing to his Assistance for the favorable Sentiments of the Princess, express'd himself again to him in all the obliging things that could be said to a Friend to whom one is infinitely bound; And as his Passion made him protest that he would never more leave his lovely Mistress, the Princess Doria interrupted him, by let∣ting him know, that for both their In∣terests his return to France was indispen∣sable.
She added, that, not to let him have any just occasion of being any longer disquieted, she would have him marry her Daughter-in-law be∣fore his departure, not doubting but that after the manner she design'd to write to her Hus∣band, she should easily gain his Consent, which was necessary thereto; but that for several Rea∣sons which respected the one and the other, she judg'd it most proper, that this Marriage should be kept secret, and that they should not de∣clare it till after that the Affairs of the Re∣publick were come to some Conclusion with the King. It is very needless to say any thing of the Joy that the two Lovers receiv'd from a Proposition which would raise them to such a State that was the final Object of all their Wishes. The imagination of those who never had their hearts touch'd with Love, can't pos∣sibly penetrate far enough to conceive the ex∣tent of such a joy. The Princess Doria wrote to her Husband, and the Chevalier took upon him the care of dispatching a Courier to Genoa. His quick return shew'd that 'twas Love gave the Orders which were executed with so much diligence. He brought the Consent which they expected, and the two Lovers enjoy'd the Plea∣sure of being at last united, after so many Ob∣stacles with which their Passions had been cross'd. FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by M. Crook at the Green-Dra∣gon without Temple-Bar, nigh Devereux-Court. DIVINITY. 1. BRevis Demonstratio, being the Truth of the Christian Religion proved by Reason, in 12o. Price bound, 10d. 2. The Protestant Religion the safe way to Salvation; or an answer to a Book Entituled, Mercy and Truth, &c. Together with the Apostolical Institution of Episcopacy. As also Nine Sermons on Special Occasions; by W. Chillingworth, the 5th. Edition. To which is now added Mr. Chillingworth's Reasons against Popery, to perswade Mr. L. to return again to the Church of England, in fol. price bound 14s. 3. Mr. Chillingworth's Book as before made more generally useful, by Mr. P. with some Ad∣ditions, in 4to. Price bound 7s. 4. The Doctrine of Passive Obedience, Delivered in a Sermon on the 30th. of January, by J. Ellesby of Chiswick, 4to. price 6d. 5. A Discourse about Conscience, in relating to both the Extreams of Popery and Fanaticism. Id. in 4to. price 6d. 6. Mr. W. Howell's Visitation Sermon before the late Bishop of Chichester, 4to. price 6d. 7. Dr. G. Hascard Dean of Windsor his Three Sermons, one upon the 5th. of November, the other two before several Lord Mayors, in 4to.
8. Mr. Manyngham Preacher of the Rolls, and Lecturer of the Temple, his Six Sermons Preached on Publick Occasions, whereof two of them are on Anniversaries, in 4to. price bound 2s. 6d. 9. A Sermon Preached at the Savoy, by Monsieur Des Escotais, now Printed in French and English, Twelves. 10. Hugo Grotius's Catechism, Greek, Latine, and English, with a Praxis to it of all the Greek words therein, in 8o. price bound 2s. 11. The Spirit of Phrophesy, proving that Christ and his Apostles were Prophets; written by the Directions, and recommended to the Press by the late Learned Dr. Peter Gunning, then Lord Bishop of Ely, in 8vo. price bound 2s. 6d. 12. The King-killing Doctrine of the Jesuites in a sincere Discourse to the French King, written by a Roman-Catholick-Gentleman, in 4to. price 1s. 13. A modest Plea for the Clergy of the Church of England, wherein is considered the Reasons why they are contemned and slighted, in 8vo. price bound 1s. 6d. 14. An Introduction to the Holy Sa∣crament, or a short, plain and safe way to the Communion-Table, being instructions for the worthy Receiving the Lord's Supper, Col∣lected for, and familiarly addressed to every particular Communicant, by Dr. L. Addison Dean of Litchfield. To which is added the Communicant's Assistant, being a Collect∣ion of Devotions to be used before, at, and after the Reciving the Holy Sacrament; price plain bound 1s. guilt on the back 1s. 6d. This Book is also bound up with Common-Prayers of several Binding, sold by W. Crook.
15. The Case of Resistance of the Supream Powers stated and resolved according to the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, by W. Sherlock D. D. in 8vo. price bound 2s. 16. Two Discourses, The first concerning Truth, the second shewing Popery the great Cause of Atheisme, by T. Mayningham, Preacher of the Rolls, and Lecturer of the Temple. 8vo. price bound 1s. 6d. 17. The Souls Communion with her Saviour, or the History of our Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, as it was written by the Four Evangelists, and now for the benefit of all pious and devout Chri∣stians digested into Devotional Meditations, by a Reverend Divine of the Church of England; in 12o. price bound 1s. 6d. 18. Bishop Sanderson's Sermons, the last Edi∣tion, in fol. with his Life to it. 19. The Duty and Benefit of Frequent Com∣munion, in a Sermon Preached at St. Peter's Church in Lincoln, upon Passion-Sunday, by W. Leightonhouse, late Fellow of Lincoln-Colledge, Ox∣ford, in 4to. price 6d. LAW. 1. The Jurisdiction of the Authority of Court-Leets, Court Barons, Court Marshalsa's, &c. together with the most necessary learning of Tenures, &c. by J. Kitchin, 8vo. price bound 6s. 2. Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis Angliae, Author F. Clarke, in 12o. price bound 1s. 3. The Reports of Hen. Hobard, Ch. Just. in folio, price bound 10s.
4. The First, Second, Third and Fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, being a Commentary on Littleton's Tenures. An Exposition of the Statutes. Pleas of the Crown, and Jurisdiction of Courts, in 4 Parts, in 3 vol. in Folio. 5. The Law of Charitable Ʋses Revised, and much enlarged, with many Cases in Law both Antient and Modern, with the reading of Sir Fr. Moor upon the Statute of the 43d. of Eli∣zabeth, digested by G. Duke Esquire. 6. Officina Brevium, select and approved forms of Judicial Writs and other process, with their Returns and Entries in the Court of Common-Pleas; as also special pleading to Wrics, in Fol. price bound 12s. 7. A Dialogue betwixt a Student and a Philo∣sopher about the Common Laws of England, by Tho. Hobs of Malmsbury, in 8vo. 8. The several Statutes of Bankrupt, with the Judges Resolutions thereon. 9. The Compleat Clerk, being forms of all Pre∣sidents and Conveyances &c. in 4to. price bound 12s. 10. Les Reports des tres Honourable Edw. Seigneur Littleton, Baron de Mounslow, Custos de la Grand Seale d'Angletterre, & de ses Majeste plais Honourable Privy Councill en le Courts del Reigne de Roy Charles I. in Fol. price bound 12s. 11. The Compleat Sollicitor, entring Clerk and Attorney, fully instructed in the Practice, Methods and Clerkship of all his Majesties Courts of E∣quity and Common Law, Superiour and Inferiour; as well those in Westminster and the City of London, and elsewhere through the Kingdom of England; a Collection more uniform and uni∣versally
advantageous than any extant of the same kind, in 8vo. price bound 3s. 6d. 12. The Reports and Pleadings to them of the late Lord Chief Justice Sir Edmond Saun∣ders Kt. in Fol. in Two Volumes. 13. A new Book of Declarations, and other Pleadings, General and Special, in the most u∣sual Actions in the Courts of King's Bench; as also, a Choice Collection of special Writs and their Returns, together with Observations in Pleading, Instructing the Younger Clarks in the Practice of that Court, Printed from the Original Manuscript out of Court-Hand, to prevent the Errours that doth happen by the Transcrib∣ing; to which is added Appeals of Murther and Mayhence, with Pleadings thereon, which no other Book of this kind hath, &c. Collected, and drawn by John Hansand, Gent. late of Cl. Inn, in Folio, price bound 10s. 14. Two Dialogues in English, between a Doctor of Divinity, and a Student in the Laws of England, of the Grounds of the Laws; in 8vo. bound, price 2s. 15. The New Natura Brevium of the most Reverend Judge Mr. Anthony Fitzherbert, Cor∣rected and Revised; whereunto is now added the Authorities in Law, and some other Cases and Notes by the Translatour, out of the Year Books, and Grand Abridgments of the Law, with a New and Exact Table of the most ma∣terial things contained therein, 8vo. price bound 6s. 16. Reports D'ascuns Cases (qui ont evenus aux tems du Roy Henry le septiéme de tres-heu∣reuse memoire, & du tres-illustre Roy Henry le huitiesme, & ne sont comprises deins les livres
des termes, & Ans de mesmes les Roys) seliges hors des papieres de Robert Keisiway Esq; par J. Croke Sergeant al Ley, Jades Recorder del City de Londres & prolocuteur del meason des Communes, &c. Ovesque les Reports d'ascuns Cases prises per le Reverend Juge G. Dallison, &c. & per G. Bendlo Serjeant al Ley, &c. La tierce Edition un bellie de pluis que deux milles Reference aux autres livres Cy bien Antient que Modern de la Ley, Folio, price bound 14 s. 17. An Exact Abridgment of all the Statutes in Force and Use, from the beginning of Magna Charta down to the Year 1689. com∣prised Alphabetically under their proper Heads and Titles. In this Impression, the year of the King, and the Chapter of every Act of Parliament have been compared with the Sta∣tute Book at large, wherein many hundreds of false References are corrected with great ex∣ctness and care, to prevent the Reader's be∣ing mis-led as he hath been in former Edi∣tions, 8vo. price bound 7 s. 18. All the 4 parts reprinted of Leonard's Reports, Fol. together. 19. The 3 parts of Bulstrodes Reports reprinted, in Fol. in one Volume. 20. The Register of Writs, new Printed, with the Digest of Writs added to it, and several New Writs in Fol. HISTORY, &c. 1. An Institution of General History, or the History of the World in Two Volumes, by
W. Howell, Dr. of Civil Laws, and Chancellour of Lincoln, in Fol. 2. Clelia, the whole Romance, in Five Parts, written in French, now put into English, Fol. 3. Scarron's Comical Romance, being an Hi∣storical Account of a Company of Stage-Players, full of variety of Novels, rare Adventures, A∣morous Intreagues, being Witty, Pleasant and Profitable for all that design Innocent Mirth, Fol. price bound 8 s. 4. The whole Series of all that hath been Transacted in the House of Peers concerning the Popish Plot in 1678, and 1679. wherein is contained the most material passages in both Houses of Parliament, relating to the full disco∣very thereof, in 8vo. 5. A Copy of two Journals of the House of Commons. The first, for the Sessions of Parlia∣ment begun at Westminster the 21st of October 1678. and continued to the 30th of December next following. The Second, of the Parliament begun at Westminster the 6th of March 1678. containing the Transactions from the first day of their Sitting to their Dissolution, in 8vo. 6. Historical Collections, or an exact Account of the Proceedings of the Four last Parlia∣ments of Q. Elizabeth, of Famous Memory; wherein is contained the Compleat Journals both of the Lords and Commons, taken from the Original Records of their Houses; as also, the more particular behaviours of the worthy Members during all the last Notable Sessions, comprehending the Motions and Arguments of the Renowned and Learned Men of that time, as Cecil, Bacon, Rawleigh, Egerton, Bur∣leigh, Buckhurst, Walsingham, Hatton, Coke, Croke,
Spelman, &c. Laboriously and Faithfully Col∣lected, by Heywood Townsend Esq; a Member in those Parliaments, in Fol. 7. Megalopsichy, A particular and exact Ac∣count of the last Seventeen years of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, both Military and Civil; (being the former Journal of Queen Elizabeth's Four last Parliaments) with Sir W. Monson's Account of the Wars between England and Spain, with the Number of Ships and Com∣manders at that time; to which, at the end is added Dr. Parrey's Trial and Execution for Treason against Queen Elizabeth, in Fol. 8. The Connexion being choice Collections of some principal matters in King James the First hi Reign, which may serve to supply the vacancy betwixt Mr. Townsend's and Mr. Rushworth's Historical Collections, in 8vo. price 1 s. 6 d. 9. The Historian's Guide, or Brittain's Re∣membrancer, being a Summary of all the Acti∣ons, Exploits, Sieges, Battels, Designs, At∣tempts, Preferments, Honours, Changes, &c. and whatever else is worthy Notice, that hath happened in his Maesties Dominions, from the year 1600 to 1688 shewing the Year, Month, and Day of the Month in which each Action was done, price bound 1 s. 6 d. 10. The Bucaniers of America, or an Ac∣count of the most Remarkable Assaults com∣mitted of late years upon the Coasts of the West Indies, by the Bucaniers of the English, Dutch, and French in Jamaica; to which is added the Second Volume, containing the dangerous Voyages, and bold Attempts of
Captain Bartholomew Sharp, and others, in 4to. 11. Mr. Tho. Hobs of Malmsbury, his Tran∣slation of Homer's Illiads and Oddisses into English, with the Life of Homer, and a large Preface of the Virtues of Heroick Poesie. 12. Mr. Hobs, &c. his Poem in Latine and English, of the Wonders of the Peak in Darby∣shire, commonly called the Devils Arse of Peak. 13. Mr. Hobs, &c. His Four Tracts. First Behemoth, the History of the Causes of the Civil Wars in England, from the year 1640, to 1660, Printed from the Author's own Copy, never Print∣ed (but with a thousand faults) before, with a defence of his Leviathan, against Bishop A. Bramhall, and a Narration of Heresy, &c. 8vo. price bound 5 s. 14 Compendium Geographicum, or a more ex∣act, plain, and easie introduction into all Geogra∣phy, than any yet extant, after the latest Disco∣veries or Alterations; very useful, especially to young Noblemen and Gentlemen, the like not printed before, with 2 Alphabets of the Names of Towns and Places, the one Antient, the other Modern, in 12o. price bound 1 s. 15. Moral Instructions of a Father to a Son, upon his long Voyage, being an easie way to guide a young man to vertue, 12o. price bound 1s. 16. The Court of Curiosity being the most exact and Curious Book of Dreams and Fortune-teller that is extant, being much enlarged and ex∣plained in this new Edition, in 12o. price bound 1s. 6d. 17. The Flower-Garden, and compleat Vine∣yard, being an exact Flower-Garden, and a true manner of planting all sorts of Vineyards, in 12o. price bound 1s. 6d.
18. A Modern view of such Parts of Europe that hath lately been, and still are the places of great Transactions, viz. Italy with all is Prin∣ces, France with all its Provinces, &c. Germany with the Dukedom of Lorrain and all the Electo∣rates, Spain with all its Dominions, &c. with Curious Remarks of Antiquiry, 8vo. price bound 2s. 6d. Printed, 1689. 19. The Present State of the Jews, 12o. price 1s. 6d. 20. The first Estate of Malandison, in 8vo, by the same Author. 21. The Translation into English of all Homer's Illiads and Odisses, by Tho. Hobs, in 12o. price bound 5s. 22. Brittains Glory, and Englands Bravery, wherein is shewn the degrees of Honour from the Prince to the Pesant, with the honour of the Nobles, and Priviledge of the Commons, and he proper places and precedency of all Persons, from the Throne to the Bondman, more parti∣cularly in Coronations, Feasts, Funerals, &c. To which is added a Continuation of the Historians Guide, to June 1689. in 12o.
